Hotel Workers Agree to Keep On Negotiating
At the urging of Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani, New York City hotel owners and their union workers agreed yesterday to continue negotiating into the holiday weekend and to put off a strike or lockout, at least until midnight on Tuesday.
The collective bargaining agreement between the Hotel Association of New York City, which is representing 79 of its member hotels in the talks, and the 22,000-member New York Hotel and Motel Trades Council, expired last night.
Union members -- bellhops, waiters, bartenders, room attendants and others -- voted earlier this week in favor of a strike called by union leaders against any or all of the association's hotels.


Celebrating the Holiday Weekend


Bachauer Competition Announces Winners
The Juilliard School has named the winners of its 1995 Gina Bachauer International Piano Competition.
They are Sean Botkin, a 1993 master's graduate of the Juilliard School, and Min-Kyung Kwon, a Korean-born graduate of the Curtis Institute of Music.


F.B.I. Checks Bomber Credo For New Clues
Experts at the Federal Bureau of Investigation spent today poring over the lengthy manifesto written by the self-described anarchist who has engaged in a 17-year campaign of mail bombings, but agents offered no new theories in the case.
The man, suspected of having mailed 16 bombs that killed three people and injured 23, disrupted airline flights and mail delivery in California this week by threatening to blow up an airplane.
He later said the threat was a prank intended to draw attention to his credo, expressed in a lengthy manuscript mailed to The New York Times and The Washington Post.


Not Conventional, but Well Received
No one would confuse the free production of Verdi's "Lombardi" by the New York Grand Opera in Central Park on Wednesday with a fully realized, strongly cast production.
But in some ways it was a chastisement to concert and opera producers who claim audiences demand conventional programming.
"I Lombardi," the fourth installment of a project to present all 28 Verdi operas in order over seven summers, drew a capacity audience to Rumsey Playfield; for the most part, they listened attentively.


Sports of The Times; There's No Luxury Tax For Coaches
HERE is David Stern's communique to his players, on the morning of the first work stoppage in National Basketball Association history: Don Nelson can negotiate his millions, unfettered by luxury taxes, caps and lockouts, but you can't.
Have a great holiday weekend.
The N.B.A.'s commissioner and benevolent dictator said he tried, really tried, to avoid a summer shutdown that could eventually drag his upscale sport into the gutter baseball now tries to crawl out of.
Michael Jordan and the gang of unholy agents gave him no choice.
They submarined the deal the league agreed to with representatives of the players union.
Not his fault.


How the March of Dimes Got Behind Dr. Salk; A Child's Prayer
To the Editor:
The passing of Dr.
Jonas Salk brought back childhood memories.
In Michigan, in 1954, I was one of the children who participated in the testing of the Salk vaccine.
I remember lining up for the shots and knowing that half of us would receive the real vaccine and half of us the placebo and praying that I would be in the "real" group, so I wouldn't have to go back and get the shots over again.


Man Who Killed Escobar Gets 43 Years
The gunman who killed a soccer star after the player's blunder helped eliminate Colombia from last year's World Cup was sentenced yesterday in Bogota to 43 years in prison.
HUMBERTO MUNOZ CASTRO, a driver for a business executive, was sentenced in a court in Medellin.
He shot Andres Escobar on July 2, 1994, in Medellin, 155 miles northwest of Bogota.
Days earlier, Escobar had accidentally kicked the ball into his own team's net in a match the United States won, 2-1, to eliminate Colombia. (AP)


RESULTS PLUS
ROWING Washington and Princeton Advance
Advancing on the Thames as smoothly as the gaggle of geese that glidingly interrupted yesterday's third-round races at the Henley Royal Regatta, the varsity heavyweight eights from the University of Washington and Princeton made it to the semifinals of the Ladies Challenge Plate, the major test among college eights at the regatta.
Washington outdistanced a Cambridge crew, the Free Press, named after a local Cambridge pub, by three boat lengths in other competition in Henley-on-Thames, England.
Princeton defeated a Leander Club-Oxford University crew by one and one-half boat lengths in a commanding effort.
Harvard's lightweight varsity took an immediate lead on Syracuse's varsity, which was no match for the Crimson finesse, and won by 1 1/4 lengths to become the only United States crew to make it to the quarterfinals of the Thames Challenge Cup; Massachusetts Institute of Technology and Stanford Rowing Club joined Syracuse in the losers column.
CYCLING Armstrong's Tour Goal: To Finish
When he begins his third Tour de France today in Saint-Brieuc, Lance Armstrong of the United States wants to go where he never has been -- to the finish line.
After two planned desertions to protect his young body, Armstrong, the 1993 world champion is convinced he has finally come of cycling age at 23 and hopes to finish when the Tour ends in Paris on July 23.
After a lackluster 1994 season, Armstrong started well this year, winning the Tour DuPont, the biggest United States race.
Overshadowing Armstrong's campaign will be the quest of Miguel Indurain for a record fifth consecutive triumph.
Challenging him over the 2,254 miles will be the Swiss veteran Tony Rominger and the Russian Yevgeny Berzin. (AP)


Canadiens Trade Bellows After Off Season
The Montreal Canadiens yesterday traded BRIAN BELLOWS to the Tampa Bay Lightning for wing MARC BUREAU.
Bellows, 30, a former 50-goal scorer and a member of Montreal's 1993 Stanley Cup champions, is coming off a disappointing season of 8 goals and 8 assists in 41 games. (AP)


Mayor Says Casino Plan Excludes New York
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani vowed yesterday to oppose a ballot referendum that would permit casino gambling in New York State unless legislators change the measure to permit gambling in New York City.
Late Thursday, the State Legislature approved a resolution that would allow casinos in certain areas of the state, including Niagara Falls, Lake George, and the Catskills -- but not in New York City or on Long Island.
To become law, the constitutional amendment must be approved again by the Legislature in 1997 and would then go before voters late that year or in 1998.


Boeing Will Reduce Production of 2 Planes
The Boeing Company said yesterday that it would scale back production of its 737 and 757 commercial jets, but the company said the changes would not result in job losses beyond those announced earlier this year.
Analysts said the announcement was not surprising because the 737 models being cut were soon to be superseded and the 757 had seen its sales cannibalized by larger variants of the 737.


Journal; Newt To the Rescue
My new hero is Newt Gingrich, who has stood up to Bob Dole, Ralph Reed and the rest of our preacher politicians to say no to a Senate computer "decency act" that isn't just cybersilly but plain old-fashioned idiotic.
This bipartisan folly, concocted by the Democrat James Exon and the Republican Dan Coats, purports to protect our computer-fixated kids from pornography but in fact would fail at that even as it maims the Internet, abridges the First Amendment and creates a new bureaucracy to rival the Pentagon.
Why does the Speaker stand tall on this issue?
I hope principle comes first.
He also has the advantage of actually being conversant with computers.
The same cannot be said of his grandstanding colleagues, who, when they aren't condemning movies they haven't seen, will destroy a technology they've apparently never used.


Warehouse Workers Fall Ill
A wave of nausea, dizziness and headaches hit the night shift at the United Parcel Service warehouse in Raritan Center yesterday, forcing the evacuation of 300 workers, 29 of whom were taken to hospitals, where they were treated and released.
There were no serious injuries.
"We did extensive testing and weren't able to locate a source for the problem," said Richard Kozub, chief of the Middlesex County hazardous materials unit, which dispatched eight inspectors to the scene.
"But it's a huge facility with trucks in and out all night." The inspectors tested the air and the conveyor machinery, and no problems were found.
Drums of hazardous material routinely pass through the warehouse, a major U.P.S. shipment point.


Jeffries's Successor at City College Defends Ex-Department Head
The man chosen to succeed Dr.
Leonard Jeffries as head of the department of black studies at City College defended his predecessor yesterday, while steadfastly refusing to comment on Dr.
Jeffries's widely criticized views.
The new leader said the department had to move "in the direction of reconciliation and healing."
Whatever the new chairman, Prof.
Moyibi J. Amoda, really thinks of his colleague's views on Jews or his characterization of blacks as "sun" people and whites as "ice" people, it was clear in a telephone interview from London that the department has a politically cautious man who, by his words or presence, would appear unlikely to polarize the campus.


Taking In the Air Along With the Sights


Roberto De Lamonica, 62, Artist, Dies
Roberto De Lamonica, an artist and teacher of graphics at the Art Students League for nearly 30 years, died on Sunday at Lenox Hill Hospital in Manhattan.
He was 62 and lived in Manhattan.
The cause was emphysema, said Lawrence Campbell, archivist of the Art Students League.


In Stronghold, Serbs Cite Dread of Muslim Rule
War has transformed this remote mountain village from a placid outpost at the foot of a ski slope to the improbable headquarters of a regime that has been condemned around the world for savagery and ethnic chauvinism.
The Bosnian Serbs made Pale their capital three years ago, and from a scattering of chalets on the nearby hillsides their leaders direct a brutal military campaign while wondering why they are so misunderstood.


Hate Messages in the Schools
The prom season has turned mean and teachers, administrators and other students are searching desperately for reasons and responses.
Recently, three seniors at Norman Thomas High School in Manhattan sent an anti-Semitic note to a teacher, and two Jewish students at Midwood High School in Brooklyn were linked to a yearbook advertisement construed as both anti-Semitic and anti-black.
It was also discovered that five seniors at the Greenwich, Conn., high school spread a hateful message directed against blacks under the pictures in their yearbook.
Chancellor Ramon Cortines was going to allow the Norman Thomas students to attend graduation ceremonies until protests from teachers, the Board of Education and several City Council members persuaded him to reverse himself and ban them.
The Midwood students were also banned from graduation ceremonies.
The students involved in both incidents will receive their diplomas.


Governor Signs Budget, Vetoing Many Insertions
Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman signed her budget for the coming fiscal year today, praising Republican legislative leaders for giving her everything she wanted while using her veto power to eliminate most of the things they wanted.
Shortly afterward, hundreds of Motor Vehicles Department employees walked off their jobs when they learned that among the items vetoed were provisions aimed at preventing Mrs.
Whitman from turning almost two dozen agency branch offices over to private management companies.


Venezuela's Working to Reassure Investors
To the Editor:
"Yankees, Phone Home! GTE Role in Venezuela Is Warning on Privatization" (Business Day, June 21) states that the negative experience of GTE, the managing partner of the private consortium that manages and partly owns Venezuela's national telephone company, Cantv, should discourage others from investing in Venezuela.
None of the statements attributed to Cantv, GTE and Salomon Brothers support what your headline asserts.


Hairs Resembling Simpson's Are Identified by an Expert
A prosecution expert testified today that 12 hairs matching those of O. J. Simpson were found on both sides of the blue knit cap found near the bodies of Nicole Brown Simpson and Ronald L. Goldman, and that other hairs resembling Mr.
Simpson's were lifted from Mr.
Goldman's shirt and a crucial leather glove.
In a day devoted to tracing how hair migrated from one person or object to another and what that movement means, the expert, Douglas Deedrick of the Federal Bureau of Investigation, also testified that hairs resembling Mrs.
Simpson's and Mr.
Goldman's were found on the crumpled leather glove retrieved from behind Mr.
Simpson's house on Rockingham Avenue here.


No Easy Victory in the Cocaine Wars
Authorities in Colombia have made some impressive arrests of leaders of the Cali cocaine cartel in recent weeks.
Most notable was the capture of Gilberto Rodriguez Orejuela, one of the cartel's most powerful figures.
His younger brother, Jorge Eliecer Rodriguez Orejuela, was arrested in March.
At about the same time, President Clinton gave Colombia a failing grade on its efforts to stop the drug trade.
Since then Bogota has been trying harder, with the help of the Central Intelligence Agency and the Drug Enforcement Administration, to crack down on the drug lords.
But it is still too early to declare victory.
In March Mr.
Clinton sensibly waived the sanctions that usually accompany a negative assessment on drug interdiction, maintaining it would serve Washington's interests better to continue helping Colombia fight its drug lords.
They are, after all, serving a seemingly endless demand from North America.
The cooperative approach has produced some victories.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
9.00
9.00
7.25
DISCOUNT RATE
5.25
5.25
3.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
6.25
5.96
3.82
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.41
5.47
4.18
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.33
5.39
4.64
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.20
6.23
7.32
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.62
6.64
7.60
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.55
7.60
8.44
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.28
6.27
6.48
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


N.B.A. Locks Out Players in First Work Stoppage
The National Basketball Association, previously untarnished by the labor conflicts that have damaged all of the other major professional sports, said yesterday that it was locking out its players and suspending its operations until a new collective bargaining agreement is reached.
The lockout, which began at 12:01 A.M. today, is the first labor action in N.B.A. history but the third in professional sports in less than a year.
Baseball players struck last Aug. 12, and the National Hockey League locked out its players Oct. 1.


Corrections
An article last Saturday about Waneta E. Hoyt, who is awaiting sentencing for killing her five children over a seven-year span, from 1965 to 1971, misstated the first name of her lawyer.
He is William Sullivan, not Robert.


Legislators Pass Bill to Seize A School District in Nassau
In an action that could lead to the first state takeover of a local school district in New York history, lawmakers in Albany today approved legislation to give state officials broad authority over the troubled Roosevelt school system in Nassau County.
The bill, adopted by both houses of the Legislature just before the end of the legislative session, would not only create a panel of experts to oversee improvements in the district, but would also allow the state to take control of the system if the local school board drags its feet.


INSIDE
Changes at Javits Center
Hundreds of union members lined up to seek jobs at the convention center as the state moved to shake the mob's grip on hiring there.
Page 21.
Restrictions Upheld
A Federal appeals court upheld rules barring "indecent" programming from the air waves except between 10 P.M. and 6 A.M.
Page 7.
Eddie Murray Joins Hit Club
Eddie Murray of the Indians became the 20th player and second switch-hitter with 3,000 hits.
Page 27.


Some Bed-Wetting Is Linked to a Gene
Researchers say a gene somewhere on chromosome 13 is linked to the most problematic form of bed-wetting, primary enuresis, in which children 7 years old or older wet the bed three or more times a week.
Only the general location of the gene has been found, not the exact site, and it may not be the entire explanation or the only gene involved.


Investment Fund for Colleges Says Trader Caused $128 Million Loss
The Common Fund, which oversees almost $20 billion of funds for colleges and other educational institutions, said yesterday that a rogue trader had caused it to lose an estimated $128 million.
The loss resulted from "unauthorized trading" at First Capital Strategists Inc., a securities firm in York, Pa., that manages some of the securities owned by the Common Fund, according to David K. Storrs, the president of the fund.


A Window to the Fourth


Islanders Interview Neilson
The next Islander coach could be a veteran with knowledge of his primary local rivals.
The candidate is Roger Neilson, who coached the Florida Panthers for the past two seasons after leaving the Rangers midway through the 1992-93 season.
Don Maloney, general manager of the Islanders, interviewed Neilson via telephone yesterday and said afterward: "I like Roger Neilson. He's as smart a man as there is in hockey. He's an interesting candidate."


Plenty of Huffing Over Puffs
What's in a name?
Eli M. Feuer, a Lakewood entrepreneur who started marketing a children's toilet-training tissue called Potty-Puffs 10 months ago, found out when Proctor &amp; Gamble, the consumer products giant in Cincinnati, sued over his use of the word "puffs." Potty-Puffs infringed on the company's trademark for Puffs facial tissue and created unfair competition, P &amp; G said yesterday.


Ruling on Condoms
For two years, distribution of free condoms was part of the All Saints Lutheran Parish annual basketball tournament in the South Bronx.
But this year the city's Parks and Recreation Department has forbidden condom distribution in city parks and recreation sites.
In response to the church's request for help, lawyers from the New York Civil Liberties Union filed a lawsuit to try to force the city to allow the condoms to be given out.
Their request was granted, but state law gives the city an automatic stay from adhering to the ruling.
Article, page 23.


Rodman Is Cleared in Herpes Suit
A Federal jury in Atlanta ruled yesterday that there was no evidence that the National Basketball Association star DENNIS RODMAN infected a former Atlanta Hawks cheerleader with herpes.
The United States District Court jury ruled for Rodman in a suit brought by LISA BETH JUDD, who was seeking damages.
Jurors deliberated less than four hours.
Judd charged that Rodman infected her while he was in town with the Detroit Pistons.
Rodman, now with San Antonio, said there was no evidence that he suffered from a transmittable form of herpes. (AP)


Arson Blamed for Pinelands Fire
The roaring blaze that burned 19,000 acres of the Pine Barrens in April was caused by three acts of arson, said Col.
Carl A. Williams, superintendent of the state police.
Authorities would not say whether they have suspects, nor would they discuss their evidence for arson.


After 114 Years, It's Payday; Patience Is Rewarded Meagerly As Inflation Erodes 1881 Bonds
It's been 114 years in coming, but there is good news for those who lent money to the Santa Fe railroad in 1881.
They are about to be paid back.
Checks for part of the loan will go out today.
Lenders will have to be patient a little while longer, though, until October, to get the rest.
The seemingly endless Santa Fe story illustrates almost everything that can go wrong for a lender, short of a complete failure to pay.
Those who lent the money -- or perhaps their great-grandchildren -- are about to get dollars that are each worth less than seven 1881 cents.
Along the way, the lenders have suffered through corporate reorganizations, fraudulent accounting and foolish business plans.
They have been buffeted by volatile interest rates and by worries over credit quality.
And they even lost their protection against inflation when Congress and the Supreme Court teamed up against them in the 1930's.


Sterling Sharpe Withdraws Suit
The former Packers receiver STERLING SHARPE has withdrawn a lawsuit charging that the team, the National Football League and the N.F.L.
Players Association denied him due process.
Sharpe has a July 11 hearing before a Federal judge, DAVID DOTY, in Minneapolis on whether half the $3.2 million salary Sharpe still seeks in an injury grievance applies to the salary cap.
Sharpe was released this year after surgery to fuse two neck vertebrae. (AP)


Local Pro Finds Spotlight Is Too Hot at Senior Open
Larry Ringer, a local club pro who shared the lead after one round of the United States Senior Open, fell abruptly back to earth today as more familiar names vaulted to the top of the leader board.
While sunny skies began to dry out the soggy Congressional Country Club course and with all the other leaders long in the clubhouse, Ringer, a popular local pro, soared to an 80.
That left the way open for 58-year-old Tommy Aaron, who made a late charge with three birdies on the back nine in a round of four-under-par 68.
That put him at 138, six under par, and gave him a share of the lead with Tom Weiskopf.
Aaron lipped out a 6-foot putt at the 17th that would have put him alone in the lead.


Knicks' Signs Are Pointing Toward Nelson
The commotion swirling around Pat Riley angers the Knicks more and more each day.
And their prospective new coach has not signed a contract.
Somewhere between the Riley saga and the courtship of Don Nelson, the Knicks hope to get over the hurt and move on.
Though club officials say no deal is imminent, all signs are pointing toward Nelson to replace Riley.


How the March of Dimes Got Behind Dr. Salk; The John Enders Story
To the Editor:
Jonas Salk, praised in your June 24 obituary for bringing polio under control, was "never, however, elected to the National Academy of Sciences of the United States." The Nobel Prize "eluded" him.
The person responsible for one of the most significant discoveries of the 20th century, you imply, should have received a Nobel.


Knudsen Gets Debt Accord With Banks
Just hours away from a bankruptcy-law filing, the Morrison Knudsen Corporation said yesterday that it had reached a preliminary agreement with its banks for financing to get it through most of 1995.
The big engineering company's banks agreed to provide $30 million in new loans and to extend the maturity on another $99 million in loans until late in the year, Robert S. Miller, the company's chairman, said.


L'Amour and Can-Cans In the Nether World
In the 1980's, small opera companies in this city dropped like flies.
Money was harder to come by; unions wanted terms for their musicians that could not or would not be met.
A lot of honorable people went out of business.
So what are we to make of L'Opera Francais de New York, from whose jerry-built beginnings seven years ago have come sold-out houses in major venues, ardent corporate and philanthropic support and first-class performances?
The choice of Offenbach's "Orphee aux Enfers" partly explains Wednesday's night's happy house at Alice Tully Hall.
The period-piece burlesqueries may creak, but the high energy, the bright light of piccolo-driven sonorities and Offenbach's overflowing songfulness all make good summer entertainment.


Art Finds Its Buyers At Sales In London
The sales of Impressionist, modern and contemporary art, which ended here on Thursday, were the most successful that Christie's and Sotheby's had seen in London in five years.
While neither auction house was selling material from big-name estates, each offered a handful of top-quality paintings, which buyers from both sides of the Atlantic fought hard to own.
The week's most exciting moment was at Christie's on Monday evening when Monet's "Rouen Cathedral, Afternoon Effect (Full Sunlight on the Front Entrance)," a sun-dappled view of the building's facade, one of a series of 30 variations the artist painted of the cathedral from 1892 to 1894, sold for $12.1 million, more than twice Christie's estimate of $5.5 million.
The painting went to an unidentified collector who bid by telephone.


Facing Threat in Parliament, Yeltsin Removes 3 Ministers
Moving decisively to reshape his Government before an important parliamentary challenge on Saturday, President Boris N. Yeltsin announced tonight that he was dismissing the ministers of Security, the Interior, and Nationalities for their failures in responding to a hostage-taking by Chechen rebels in southern Russia.
It was the most serious Government shake-up since the Soviet Union collapsed at the end of 1991, and it represents something of a gamble for Mr.
Yeltsin.
He is removing most of the so-called power ministers, whose ministries were involved in the failed August 1991 coup against President Mikhail S. Gorbachev of the Soviet Union.


Zhuzhou Journal; On China's Overburdened Highway System, It's the Big Stall
New York commuters who get steamed over traffic snarls might consider the plight of 24-year-old Zhou Hui and his two companions, who have been in traffic jams that last as long as three days.
Hanging out of the cab of his 10-ton truck, which was straining under the 14 tons of lumber draped over its backside, Mr.
Zhou gazed up the line of traffic that stretched to the horizon in front of him and shook his head.


Court Upholds a Ban on 'Indecent' Broadcast Programming
Rebuffing broadcasters and civil liberties groups, a sharply divided Federal appeals court today upheld regulations that prohibit radio and television stations from carrying sexually oriented "indecent" programs between 6 A.M. and 10 P.M.
The 7-to-4 decision by the United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit essentially preserves restrictions that Congress imposed in 1993.
The court emphatically rejected arguments by broadcasters that the restrictions were too broad and said the Government had a "compelling interest" in shielding children from steamy programs beamed over the airwaves.


After Brief Respite, Central Virginia Gets Soaked Again
Rain that had fallen on central and southern Virginia for a week subsided for a time today but then returned with fury tonight, when a thunderstorm lashed the heart of the region and threatened more flash flooding.
It was the last thing Virginia needed.
The earlier rains, the product of a stagnant storm system that refused to blow over, had already killed at least six people, destroyed scores of homes and forced thousands of residents to evacuate.
Creeks were turned into rivers, rivers into lakes and cornfields into muddy flats.


Clinton Proposes Complete Ban On Armor-Piercing Ammunition
Wrapped in the mantle of law and order in a city whose Democratic dynasty made that notion its political shield, President Clinton today proposed a new Federal ban on all armor-piercing bullets, whatever they are made of.
"If a bullet can rip through a bulletproof vest like a knife through hot butter, then it ought to be history," Mr.
Clinton said in accepting an award from the Illinois Council Against Handgun Violence at a police station house accompanied by Chicago's mayor, Richard M. Daley.


President Weighing Risks of Rejecting Base-Closings List
Facing outrage in California, the White House and Pentagon are weighing the political costs of rejecting, for the first time, the recommendations of an independent commission on the closing of military bases.
A tug-of-war centered on McClellan Air Force Base near Sacramento has developed between White House political operatives, who view California's 54 electoral votes as crucial to President Clinton's 1996 campaign hopes, and commission members, who are vowing to stick to their guns to close it and eliminate nearly 11,000 military and civilian jobs.


Victory on Religion Rulings Was Limited, Groups Say
Conservative religious groups counted as victories the two Supreme Court decisions this week allowing religious symbols like crosses and creches in public parks and some government support for religious organizations.
But despite these successes, the groups said they would continue to press for a constitutional amendment giving protection to student-led prayer.
"It's going to take a long time to implement these decisions, and an amendment is a lot faster," said Jay Sekulow, who is chief counsel for one of the conservative groups, the American Center for Law and Justice.


Let Our Schools Hire and Fire Teachers
The New York City school system, staggering under an accumulation of crises, needs a radical overhaul.
Tinkering is not enough.
The system is partly centralized and partly decentralized -- with the defects of both centralization and decentralization and the virtues of neither.


Corrections
A listing of Fourth of July events in Weekend yesterday misstated the day for a concert by the Goldman Band at Damrosch Park in Lincoln Center.
The concert is at 7 P.M. tomorrow, not tonight.


The Extra-Special Olympics
More than 7,000 athletes from 140 nations have come to New Haven to compete in the largest sports event taking place anywhere in the world this year -- the Special Olympics World Games.
These contestants, young and old, are all mentally retarded, and every one of them is a winner just for trying so hard.
It is an inspiring event, likely to put a big lump in the throat of every spectator.
"Leave your tears at home," says Lowell Weicker, former Governor of Connecticut, father of a teen-ager with Down syndrome and chairman of the New Haven games, which begin today.
"This event speaks about gifts and competence, not disability." Credit Eunice Kennedy Shriver with the idea.
She founded the Special Olympics in the 1960's, having first started a summer day camp for mentally retarded children.


Murray Switches Over to the Esteemed 3,000-Hit Club
It was a ground ball to the right side of the infield, and the Minnesota Twins' second baseman, Chuck Knoblauch, dived to get it but it was just out of his reach.
Eddie Murray, Cleveland's designated hitter tonight, had his hit.
It was only a single, but one would never know it from the sound of the crowd of 27,412 in the Metrodome, or from the stream of Murray's Indians teammates spewing from the dugout and the bullpen to congratulate him.


Business Digest
Fund for Colleges Loses $128 Million  The Common Fund, which oversees almost $20 billion for colleges and other educational institutions, said it lost about $128 million after a rogue trader at First Capital Strategists, which manages securities owned by the fund, failed to hedge investments.
The loss was discovered late on Thursday, and it was still not clear which of the fund's investors would suffer.
But factory orders rebounded in May, rising 1.4 percent.  [ 35. ] Profit Taking Slows Stocks  Stocks rose modestly, giving up bigger gains in the last hour of trading as portfolio managers booked profits in the best performing issues before the end of the second quarter.
The Dow industrials closed up 5.54, at 4,556.10, after a late afternoon sell-off pared gains of more than 30 points.
The average fell 29.74 for the week.  [ 37. ] BellSouth to Take a Charge  BellSouth said it was altering accounting methods because of regulatory change and would take a $2.7 billion noncash charge.  [ 35. ] N.B.A.
Locks Out Players  The National Basketball Association said it was locking out its players and suspending its operations until a new collective bargaining agreement was reached.
It was the first labor action in N.B.A. history.  [ 27. ] Taiwanese Trade Ban Lifted  President Clinton announced that the United States was lifting trade sanctions on imports of Taiwanese sea and wildlife products like coral jewelry and lizard boots, a move that may further provoke China.  [ 4. ] GTE Shuffles Management  GTE announced sweeping changes in its management.
Funds to Mexico  The International Monetary Fund released the second half of its Mexican aid package, saying that the Government's emergency stabilization effort had significantly improved the country's economic condition.
About $2 billion of the remaining $10.7 billion in assistance will be immediately available to Mexico.  [ 34. ] Plan for Hong Kong Airport  Ending a four-year dispute, Britain and China agreed on a financing plan for Hong Kong's new airport, clearing the last major hurdle for the $20.3 billion project.  [ 34. ]


A Year After Its Leader's Death, Lubavitch Proclaims Itself Strong
A year ago the Lubavitch Hasidim were deep in mourning over the death of Rabbi Menachem Mendel Schneerson.
For 44 years Rabbi Schneerson, the seventh Grand Rabbi of the influential Lubavitch movement, had presided over its worldwide expansion and developed a bond with members so profound that some Lubavitchers considered him the Moshiach, or Messiah.
As a result, some outside the movement had wondered whether without him or a designated successor, Lubavitch would fray, descending into factionalism.


How the March of Dimes Got Behind Dr. Salk
To the Editor:
The obituary of Dr.
Jonas Salk (front page, June 24) omitted mention of a major figure in his career.


Trial in Boys' Drowning Won't Be Broadcast


New York Suspends Its Financial Adviser
A financial advisory company was suspended from its city contract yesterday after officials determined that it had not paid city taxes for the last five years.
The company, P. G. Corbin of Philadelphia, is one of two financial advisers that help market New York City's bonds.
Last July, the Giuliani administration objected to Comptroller Alan G. Hevesi's decision to retain the company, saying one adviser was sufficient and suggesting that the black-owned company had been hired because of racial preferences.


Lana Turner Is Dead at 75; 'Sweater Girl' and Sultry Star
Lana Turner, who built a successful movie career on her first screen appearance as a teen-age "sweater girl," died on Thursday.
She was 75 and lived in Los Angeles.
"She just took a breath and she was gone," her daughter, Cheryl Crane, was quoted as saying in Daily Variety, a trade newspaper.
Miss Turner, who had been treated for throat cancer, apparently died of natural causes, a police spokeswoman, Ramona Baety, confirmed to The Associated Press.


7 Found Not Guilty in Plot Tied to a Mob Family Feud
In a case that hinged on the connection between an F.B.I. agent and a mob captain acting as an informer, all seven suspected members of a faction of the Colombo crime family were found not guilty yesterday of conspiring to murder members of another faction.
There was virtually rapt silence in Judge Edward R. Korman's courtroom in the Federal courthouse in downtown Brooklyn as the first six names were read and followed by, "Not guilty," and then an eruption of glee as up to 100 friends and relatives, the defendants and their lawyers punched the air, shouted, hugged, wept and slapped one another's backs at the final finding.
The jury deliberated 12 hours in the seven-week trial.


Junior Senators Prevent a Vote On Budget Cuts
A Senate vote on a new package of midyear budget cuts negotiated by the White House and Congressional leaders from both parties was unexpectedly derailed today when two of the most junior Democratic Senators refused to go along with the deal.
Against the wishes of Democratic leaders who seemed helpless to stop them, Senators Paul Wellstone of Minnesota and Carol Moseley-Braun of Illinois began a bumbling filibuster in an effort to restore about $600 million to the $16 billion bill, for youth job training programs and assistance for the elderly.


Astronauts Have a Day Of Work And Play
Ten Russian and American astronauts today exchanged gifts, talked to political leaders and got down to their first full day of joint investigations as they sped around the globe once every 92 minutes in history's largest spacecraft, an American space shuttle linked to a Russian space station to form a sprawling, half-million-pound complex.
"You've set a great example and created a symbol for progress that we can make in the future," Vice President Al Gore told the astronauts today in a congratulatory phone call from Moscow, where he is meeting with the Russian Prime Minister, Viktor Chernomyrdin, to hammer out new East-West accords.


Corrections
An article on Thursday about the Congressional Ethics Committee's investigation of allegations against House Speaker Newt Gingrich referred incorrectly to a comment in The Washington Post last January by the president of Doubleday, about the auction of Mr.
Gingrich's manuscript.
The Doubleday executive, Stephen Rubin, never told The Post that the manuscript auction was rigged.
According to The Post, he did call the auction "murky," saying that the rules used by Mr.
Gingrich's agent for the sale were acceptable "if she tells us those are the rules." "She never did that," Mr.
Rubin said, according to The Post.


Perez's Outing Troubles Pitching-Poor Yanks
Jimmy Key never even made it to the mound today during his rehabilitation session because of a painful left shoulder.
Melido Perez sauntered off the mound after two and one-third sloppy innings tonight against the Brewers because of a stiff right shoulder.
One of the next voices the Yankees hear will be Toronto General Manager Gord Ash raising the price for David Cone.
After losing Key for probably the rest of the season and perhaps beyond when he struggled while throwing off flat ground in Tampa, Fla., Manager Buck Showalter could not have envisioned that another Yankee starter in another time zone would wiggle his arm after 47 pitches and leave the game.
But Perez did and his shoulder had been iced when the Brewers finished steaming to a 12-6 victory and squashed their seven-game losing streak.


Beatrix T. Gardner Dies at 61; Taught Signs to a Chimpanzee
Dr.
Beatrix T. Gardner, a psychologist who with her husband, Dr.
R.
Allen Gardner, taught a chimpanzee sign language in the 1960's and the 1970's, died while traveling with her husband in Padua, Italy, on June 5.
She was 61 and lived in Reno.
Reached yesterday at the University of Nevada in Reno, where he and his wife had worked as a team, her husband said the cause of death was a central nervous infection.
He reported her death this week.


COMPANY BRIEFS
ALEXANDER &amp; BALDWIN INC., Honolulu, , a shipping and real estate company, said it had completed the sale of its Matson Leasing Co. subsidiary to Xtra Corp.
Boston, a leasing holding company, for $360 million.
TENNECO INC., Houston, an oil and gas holding company, said its gas unit had completed the acquisition of the Pipelines Authority of South Australia for about $200 million.
VALLEY NATIONAL BANCORP, Wayne, N.J., a state commercial bank, said it had completed the purchase of Lakeland First Financial Group Inc.
New Jersey.
Lakeland shareholders received 1.286 shares of Valley National common stock for every Lakeland share held.


Restored, Old Beach Reopens To Public
With his boogie board tucked under his arm, Michael DeMonaco, 12, checked out the waves at Cupsogue Beach Park.
"The last time I was here I was only 3 years old, but I can still remember building sand castles," Michael said before plunging into the 64-degree surf.


Church Tests A Parks Ban On Condoms
A tiny South Bronx church's annual basketball tournament has become the unlikely catalyst for a court test of the Giuliani administration's position that condoms should not be handed out in city parks.
For two years, distribution of free condoms was part of tournament of the All Saints Lutheran Parish in the borough's Mott Haven section.


U.S. Lifting Trade Penalties On Taiwan
President Clinton announced today that the United States was lifting trade sanctions imposed against Taiwan last year for refusing to stop the sale of tiger bones and rhinoceros parts.
The move, which ends a ban on imports of Taiwanese sea and wildlife products like coral jewelry and lizard boots, was in response to Taiwan's recent actions to raise penalties for trafficking in tiger and rhino parts and to increase police efforts to crack down on such sales.


T. A. Brennan, 92, Archdiocese Lawyer
Thomas Augustine Brennan, a retired lawyer and labor counsel for the Hearst Corporation and the Roman Catholic Archdiocese of New York, died on Tuesday at St.
Patrick's Home in the Bronx, where he had lived for the last two years.
He was 92 and had homes in Bronxville, N.Y., Wellfleet, Mass., and Longboat Key, Fla.
Mr.
Brennan, a Bronx native, graduated from the College of the Holy Cross in Worcester, Mass., and Fordham Law School.
He was admitted to the bar in 1929 and went into private practice in New York City.


Dance Photo Exhibition
"Frame by Frame," an exhibition of photographs published in Dance Ink magazine, opens on Monday at the Frieda and Roy Furman Gallery at the Walter Reade Theater, 165 West 65th Street, at Lincoln Center.
The show runs through Aug. 31 Gallery hours are 1:30 to 9 P.M. daily.
Information: (212) 228-0540.


Pennsylvania Legislature Enters Dispute At Temple U.
Fanning the flames in a controversial development project proposed for northeast Philadelphia, Gov.
Tom Ridge of Pennsylvania yesterday signed legislation to exempt Temple University from city zoning ordinances.
But Philadelphia officials still contend that the university's planned project, an $85 million sports arena and community resource center, cannot be built without the city's approval.


Transactions
Baseball  American League KANSAS CITY ROYALS -- Acvitated Chris James, outfielder, from the 60-day disabled list.
Optioned Les Norman, outfielder, to Omaha of the American Association.
Moved Tom Browning, pitcher, from the 15-to the 60-day disabled list.
MILWAUKEE BREWERS -- Signed Mike Pasqualicchio, pitcher, and assigned him to Helena of the Pioneer League.
Signed Jared Camp and Jason Dawsey, pitchers; Sam Singleton and Mickey Lopez, infielders; and Gerald Parent, outfielder.
Sent Mark Kiefer, pitcher, to New Orleans of the American Association.
Transferred the contract of Wes Weger, infielder, from El Paso of the Texas League to New Orleans.
Transferred the contract of Gabby Martinez, infielder, from Stockton of the California League to El Paso.
OAKLAND ATHLETICS -- Placed Jim Corsi, pitcher, on the 15-day disabled list.
Moved Steve Karsay, pitcher, from the 15- to the 60-day disabled list.
Placed Ariel Prieto, pitcher, on the 40-man roster.
TEXAS RANGERS -- Sent Hector Fajardo, pitcher, outright to Oklahoma City of the American Association.
TORONTO BLUE JAYS -- Signed Roy Halladay, pitcher, and assigned him to Dunedin of the Florida State League.
National League HOUSTON ASTROS -- Recalled James Mouton, outfielder, from Tucson of the Pacific Coast League and activated him from the 15-day disabled list.
PITTSBURGH PIRATES -- Named Gene Lamont to the baseball operations staff, effective July 1.
Placed Jim Gott, pitcher, on the 15-day disabled list, retroactive to June 27.


Toll Takers On Parkway Authorize A Walkout
Toll takers on the Garden State Parkway voted yesterday to authorize a strike, as officials of the parkway and the New Jersey Turnpike braced for possible job actions that could disrupt traffic over the long Fourth of July weekend.
Any strike would be illegal, state officials said, adding that they were prepared to seek back-to-work court orders as soon as a strike began.
They also said that temporary summer workers and supervisors would work in toll booths.


In John Major's London, Lots of Tea and Treachery
Under the daggerlike Gothic spires and within the nicotine-yellow walls of Westminster, connected by a single hidden door to the House of Commons, lies a warren of corridors, three bars, an open-air terrace and a two-chambered cafeteria of plush seats and quiet corners.
Off limits to all but Members of Parliament, it is generically called the "tearoom" and even in the best of times it is a center of political gossip and horse-trading.
But these days, in the frenzy of a race for the leadership of the Conservative Party that could go exploding off in any direction, the tearoom is a veritable pit of intrigue, alliance and betrayal.
It is to John Major's Britain what the Borgias' palace was to early 16th-century Italy.


Willy Eisenhart, 48, Art Writer, Is Dead
Willy Eisenhart, a writer on art, died on Sunday in a fall from the roof of the building in which he lived on Spring Street in Little Italy.
He was 48.
Mr.
Eisenhart was born in York, Pa., and attended Princeton University before moving to Manhattan in 1970.
He was active at first in the performing arts, assisting with productions for the Louis Falco Dance Company and Jennifer Muller and the Works.
He was also affiliated with the Netherlands Dance Theater and the Opera Theater of St.
Louis.


Beliefs
The meeting had an academic title, "Symposium on Political Islam and Women in Algeria," and for long stretches it had an academic air.
It was easy to forget that several participants were living under the threat of death.
Even Prof.
Marnia Lazreg, who organized the symposium, admitted that when the day finally came, "I was scared of retaliation." Algeria, after all, is gripped in a civil war between a military government and armed Islamic militants whose political party, the Islamic Salvation Front, was suppressed after its election victories in 1990 and 1991.


GIULIANI IN ACCORD WITH LABOR CHIEFS OVER CONCESSIONS
On the eve of New York City's new fiscal year, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani and leaders of the municipal unions announced last night that they had reached tentative agreement on $440 million in labor concessions for the coming year, and on unspecified commitments for $160 million in added savings.
The agreement fell short of spelling out the full $600 million that the Mayor had included in the budget for the new year, which begins today.
The Mayor's top labor negotiator said the unspecified savings would be announced by October at the latest, as the city negotiates with individual unions in collective bargaining.


To Prevent Skin Cancer, Stay Out of the Sun
To the Editor:
Re the June 14 and 21 Personal Health columns on the A B C D's of melanoma: There was one piece of incorrect data that should jolt your readers -- instead of one in six, it is now one in five Americans who will develop some kind of skin cancer during their lifetime, according to the best information we have.


With Leads Fading, Son Presses Search for U.S. Relief Worker in Chechnya
Early in the search for Frederick C. Cuny, the disaster relief expert who disappeared in Chechnya in April, there were two Cuny family members, three interpreters, a Chechen guide, a Cossack private investigator, two cars with four drivers and several American diplomats and international aid experts working feverishly to track him down.
Now the pace of the search has slowed, and the cramped, rented house known as Cuny headquarters in this small village near the Chechen border is almost empty.
Time is running out, and so is hope of finding Mr.
Cuny and his three-person team.


Holiday on Tuesday
The Fourth of July falls on Tuesday.
On Monday, government offices, banks, post offices and transportation will operate on normal weekday schedules.
Financial markets will close at 1 P.M.
Following is Tuesday's schedule.
NEW YORK  FIREWORKS Two shows: downtown, 9:15 P.M., south of the Brooklyn Bridge; midtown, 9:30, 25th to 42d Streets in the East River.
Franklin D. Roosevelt Drive closed from the Battery to 96th Street from 6 P.M. to 1 A.M.
GOVERNMENT OFFICES All Federal, state and city government offices closed.
POST OFFICE Express Mail and special delivery only.
Main post office open at 33d Street and Eighth Avenue.
BANKS Closed.
PARKING Sunday rules in effect.
SANITATION No collection and no street sweeping.
FINANCIAL MARKETS Closed.
TRANSPORTATION Buses, subways, L.I.R.R. and Metro-North on holiday schedule.
NEW JERSEY  GOVERNMENT OFFICES All Federal, state and municipal government offices closed.
POST OFFICES Express Mail and special delivery only.
BANKS Closed.
TRANSPORTATION N.J.
Transit trains on Sunday schedule.
Buses on holiday schedule.
CONNECTICUT  GOVERNMENT OFFICES All Federal, state and municipal government offices closed.
POST OFFICES Express Mail and special delivery only.
BANKS Closed.
TRANSPORTATION Metro-North on holiday schedule.


I.B.F. Tells Botha and Shulz to Set the Date
The International Boxing Federation yesterday told promoters for FRANS BOTHA of South Africa and AXEL SHULZ of Germany that they had 30 days to arrange a fight for the heavyweight title just vacated by GEORGE FOREMAN.
The fight must take place in 120 days, said BOB LEE, the I.B.F. president (AP)


Observer; The Amending Toot
Well, it looks like Congress is going to stop this flag desecration that's been going on.
Going on somewhere.
Not sure where anymore.
Went on all the time everywhere, though, back in Vietnam War days.
At least everywhere a television camera caught an anti-war demonstrator in its view finder.


Javits Center Is Hiring, and Crowds Turn Up
For Anthony Martinez, a union carpenter from Brooklyn who has worked only sporadically at the Jacob K. Javits Convention Center for the last eight years, the prospect of getting a more permanent job there has always been "kind of like the Holy Grail."
"It's security and a good wage," said Mr.
Martinez, a member of the United Brotherhood of Carpenters and Joiners of America.
"That's always what this place has meant.


Op-Ed Columnists
The days on which Op-Ed columnists appear are customarily rotated every six months.
Here is the schedule through Dec. 31:


Devils Go To Court But Keep Talking
On a day when the New Jersey Devils filed court papers laying out their legal right to relocate, officials of the team and the New Jersey Sports and Exposition Authority met yesterday for a second consecutive day in an effort to keep the Stanley Cup champions from taking a sweetheart deal offered by the city of Nashville.
Officials from both sides, including John McMullen, the Devils' owner; Bob Mulcahy, the authority's president, and Gary Bettman, the National Hockey League commissioner, met for four hours before breaking up at 7 P.M.


CHRONICLE
From "Rhapsody in Blue" to "Jumping at the Woodside." A changing of the guard is taking place in the Count Basie Orchestra.
The saxophonist FRANK FOSTER is stepping down as the band leader after nine years on the podium.
He will lead his last concert tomorrow when the band appears with the singer HELEN SCHNEIDER as part of the JVC Jazz Festival.
The band issued a statement saying that Mr.
Foster was leaving on friendly terms.
Mr.
Foster said that he wanted to do other things but would continue to prepare arrangements for the orchestra.


Promised New Stadium, Bengals to Stay
The Cincinnati Bengals got what they wanted to keep the team in the city, commitments from Cincinnati and Hamilton County to build a new football stadium.
The City Council debated for three hours Thursday night before voting by 5-4 to work with the county on a $540 million plan to build stadiums for the Bengals and the Reds by 2000.


Philip W. Bonsal, 92, Last U.S. Envoy to Cuba
Philip W. Bonsal, a career diplomat and the last United States Ambassador to Cuba, died Wednesday in his home here.
He was 92.
He had been under treatment for pneumonia.


Mexico to Get 2d Half of Its I.M.F. Aid Package
The International Monetary Fund released the second half of its Mexican aid package today, saying that the Government's emergency stabilization effort had significantly improved the country's economic condition.
About $2 billion of the remaining $10.7 billion in the international organization's assistance will be immediately available to Mexico.
The rest will be set aside in five equal installments of about $1.7 billion from this August through August 1996.
Mexico's situation will be under continuous review as the future payments are made.


Wimbledon Competitors And Grass Wilt in Heat
The umbrellas were raised today at Wimbledon to perform a very untraditional function: They were used as shields against a burning sun that heated Center Court to a record 110 degrees and fried the lawns of the overused and underprotected outer courts.
The players who couldn't stand the smolder -- like Britain's Shirli-Ann Siddall, who was carried from her mixed doubles match on a stretcher after fainting -- didn't advance.
The players who survived complained of being drained.
And the grass, pampered for 50 weeks but subjected to cruel and unusual punishment for these two, continued to die quietly.


National Editor Named by The Times
Dean Baquet, a deputy metropolitan editor of The New York Times, has been promoted to national editor of the paper.
His appointment, effective later this month, was announced by Joseph Lelyveld, executive editor.
Mr.
Baquet, 38, will oversee a staff of some 45 editors and correspondents around the nation.
In 1988 he won the Pulitzer Prize for investigative reporting while at The Chicago Tribune.
He moved to The Times in April 1990 as an investigative reporter on the metropolitan staff.


CHRONICLE
If it's Saturday, this must be Spain.
With only three days' notice, the pianist JOSHUA PIERCE agreed to play Gershwin's "Rhapsody in Blue" at the Los Vernos de la Villa Festival on Majorca tonight, and again on Tuesday.
Mr.
Pierce's publicity manager, ALYCE FINELL, said he had been called in after Jorge Ramiriz, the scheduled soloist with the American Festival Orchestra, died earlier in the week.


No Headline
"From 12 o'clock last night until 8 o'clock this morning, we have not moved. Look at us, our shirts are filthy, and we have no opportunity to wash. This is the pits." -- ZHOU HUI, a truck driver, describing traffic on a major roadway in China.  [ 4:1. ]


Holtzman Robbed at ATM
Elizabeth Holtzman, the former City Comptroller and Congresswoman, was robbed by two armed teen-agers last night after depositing money into an automatic teller machine in midtown Manhattan, she and the police said.
She was not injured.
The police caught one of the suspects two blocks east of the ATM after Ms.
Holtzman flagged down two firefighters who chased the suspects.


AIDS Adviser Quits After a Sex Charge
A member of the Board of Education's AIDS advisory council who has been a vocal supporter of AIDS education in the schools has resigned after being arrested for having sex with another man under a Staten Island boardwalk.
The council member, Dr.
Edward McCabe, resigned on Thursday, a day after his arrest.
Last year, Mr.
McCabe criticized a student AIDS awareness guide for not discussing homosexuality with candor, arguing that students often engage in homosexual behavior and are at risk for H.I.V. infection.


Dole Takes Fund-Raising Lead In G.O.P. Presidential Contest
Senator Bob Dole of Kansas has moved ahead of Senator Phil Gramm of Texas in the race to raise money for the Republican Presidential primaries in 1996, according to figures provided by the campaigns today.
Mr.
Dole, the Senate majority leader, has raised $13.9 million since the beginning of the year, including $9 million in the last three months.
Mr.
Gramm, who had a substantial early lead in raising money, raised $3.4 million in the last three months, bringing his total for the year to $12.1 million.
The other Republican candidates had raised significantly less.


METRO DIGEST
MAYOR REACHES ACCORD WITH UNIONS Mayor Giuliani and leaders of the municipal unions announced that they had reached tentative agreement on $440 million in labor concessions for the coming year, and on unspecified commitments for $160 million in added savings.
The agreement fell short of spelling out the full $600 million that the Mayor had included in the budget for the new year.  [ Page 1. ] NEW YORK CITY  HOTEL WORKERS TALKING ON At the urging of Mayor Giuliani, New York City hotel owners and their union workers agreed to negotiate into the holiday weekend and to put off a strike or a lockout.  [ 23. ] JEFFRIES'S SUCCESSOR CALLS FOR HEALING Prof.
Moyibi J. Amoda, the man chosen to replace Leonard Jeffries as head of City College's black studies department, defended Dr.
Jeffries while steadfastly refusing to comment on his widely criticized views, and said the department must move "in the direction of reconciliation and healing."  [ 23. ] Seven suspected members of a faction of the Colombo crime family were found not guilty of conspiring to murder members of another faction.  [ 25. ] REGION  WHITMAN SIGNS HER BUDGET Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman signed her $16 million budget for the coming fiscal year, praising Republican legislative leaders for giving her everything she wanted while using her veto power to eliminate most of the things they wanted.  [ 24. ] THE RAGING SEA RELENTS, FOR NOW A hurricane struck Long Island in 1985 and washed away much of Cupsogue Beach.
Then a winter storm in 1992 wiped out more than 200 homes and split the narrow barrier beach at West Hampton Dunes in two as the surging Atlantic created a half-mile-wide inlet and flooded the mainland.
The beach is open to the public again for the first time in nearly 10 years.


Pakistan and Missiles
To the Editor:
Re "C.I.A Report Says Chinese Sent Iran Arms Components; Pakistan Also Got Parts" (front page, June 22):


Bridge
Eight teams of America's best female players began play here Thursday, with two due to qualify for world championship play in Beijing in October.
The first day of play was dominated by a team captained by Phillip Alder of Manhasset, L.I., that includes a Federal judge, Amalya Kearse, and Jacqui Mitchell, both of Manhattan.
An unheralded squad from Seattle, led by Gene Simpson, played steadily to take second place.
With 10 of 14 qualifying rounds finished, the scores by captain were:


Takeover Foes Resist State In Newark
The Newark Board of Education joined with representatives of civil rights and education groups today for a last-minute attempt at staving off a state takeover of the city's troubled schools.
In addition to a news conference organized by the N.A.A.C.P. to denounce the takeover, which could begin as early as Wednesday, lawyers for the board filed a preliminary motion seeking a stay from a state court to block any attempt to assume control of the Cedar Street headquarters next week.


7 Years in Prison for Embezzler
Maria C. Rodriguez, a former bookkeeper who pleaded guilty to embezzling $1.7 million from two construction companies where she worked between 1987 and 1993, was sentenced yesterday to seven years in prison.
She also has to pay back the money, said Judge Edward J. Turnbach of Superior Court.
JOE SHARKEY


Barney Simon, 63, Producer; Used Art to Fight Apartheid
Barney Simon, a leader in South African theater and an imaginative thorn in the side of the authorities during the apartheid years, died on Friday at Milpark Hospital here.
He was 63.
Mr.
Simon, who had undergone heart bypass surgery two weeks ago, died of a pulmonary embolism, said Hillary Hamburger, a friend who drove him to the hospital on Wednesday.


The Irresponsible Superpower
The United States-Japan trade negotiations: The crisis builds.
The brink is glimpsed.
No, we're headed over the brink!
But within hours of the deadline we're saved!
Trade representative Mickey Kantor exits with an exhausted but satisfied smile.
The Japanese negotiator, Ryutaro Hashimoto, does not smile.


John Walter Stephan, Abstract Expressionist, 88
John Walter Stephan, an early member of the New York School of Abstract Expressionism, died on Sunday at Newport Hospital in Rhode Island.
He was 88 and lived in Newport.
Mr.
Stephan was born in Chicago and studied art at the University of Illinois and the Art Institute of Chicago.
He created mosaics for a number of buildings in the Chicago area under the auspices of the Work Projects Administration.
After World War II, he and his first wife, Ruth Walgreen, moved to New York City, where they founded The Tiger's Eye, a journal devoted to literature and art.


International Briefs; In Brief
*
The Swedish Government yesterday ordered Toys "R" Us Inc. and a union to resume talks next week to seek a resolution in a seven-week strike.
The strike, while affecting only about 150 workers, gained prominence because the company, based in Paramus, N.J., refused to sign a collective agreement, which 25,000 companies have signed and which is at the heart of union influence in Sweden.


Stonewalling for Mr. Gingrich
Predictions that the House ethics committee would be unwilling to address complaints against Speaker Newt Gingrich are turning out to be correct.
Six months into the new Congress -- and coming upon the July 4 deadline its Republican chairwoman, Representative Nancy Johnson of Connecticut, set for disposing of the charges -- the committee is nowhere near resolving the case.
The 10-member committee, equally divided between Republicans and Democrats, has deadlocked along partisan lines on the question of appointing an outside counsel to review the allegations.
They center on the Speaker's book deal and the blurring of lines between his various political and fund-raising organizations and his public office.
Meanwhile, as Adam Clymer of The Times reported this week, the committee's staff has been sluggish about pursuing key testimony.
Many of the most obvious witnesses have not been questioned, and some individuals who have been questioned say they were not put under oath.


GTE Management Shuffle Prompts a Resignation
The GTE Corporation announced sweeping management changes yesterday, prompting the departure of one of its top executives.
Nicholas L. Trivisonno, the executive vice president of strategic planning and group president of GTE's huge cellular division, resigned from the company, effective immediately.


China Shifts Central Bank Leadership
China announced today that Deputy Prime Minister Zhu Rongji had stepped down as governor of the nation's central bank.
While the move is not likely to alter the tight monetary policy he has led, it may be a further indication that he is gradually losing ground in guiding the nation's economic policy.
Mr.
Zhu, who is 66, will be succeeded at the People's Bank of China by Dai Xianglong, 50, a deputy governor.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 2-4  TEMPEST IN A TEAROOM
In the frenzy of the race for the leadership of Britain's Conservative Party, the House of Commons tearoom is a veritable pit of intrigue, alliance and betrayal. 1  YELTSIN DISMISSES MINISTERS
President Boris N. Yeltsin announced that he was dismissing three Cabinet ministers for their response to the hostage crisis in Southern Russia last month. 1  WAR REMAKES BOSNIAN TOWN
The war in Bosnia has transformed Pale from a placid ski village to the seat of a regime condemned around the world for savagery and ethnic chauvinism. 3  U.S.
TO DROP TAIWAN SANCTIONS
President Clinton announced that the United States is lifting trade sanctions imposed against Taiwan for refusing to stop the sale of tiger and rhinoceros parts. 4  SEARCH IN CHECHNYA SLOWS
The pace of the search for Frederick C. Cuny, the American missing in Chechnya, has slowed and hope of finding him and his three-person team is diminishing. 4  Zhuzhou Journal: On China's highways, a long crawl. 4  National 5-8  INDEPENDENT SENATORS
Two junior Democratic Senators, hoping to preserve $600 million in programs for youths and the elderly, derailed a bipartisan compromise on midyear budget cuts.  1  BIG LOSS IN COLLEGE FUNDS
The Common Fund, which oversees almost $20 billion in investments for 1,421 educational institutions, including the University of Michigan, Vanderbilt University and the University of Southern California, said that a rogue trader at First Capital Strategists Inc. in York, Pa., had caused it to lose $128 million. 1  CLINTON'S NEW STRATEGIST
President Clinton's new political adviser began as a liberal from Manhattan, but more recently has counseled conservatives like Jesse Helms of North Carolina.  1  CALCULATING THE RISKS
The White House and the Pentagon weighed the political costs of rejecting, for the first time, the recommendations of an independent panel on the closing of military bases.  1  HAIR OFFERED AS EVIDENCE
A prosecution witness said that hair matching O. J. Simpson's was on a cap found near the bodies of his former wife and her friend, and that hair resembling his was on the friend's shirt and a bloody glove.  5  GETTING TO BUSINESS IN ORBIT
Ten Russian and American astronauts exchanged gifts, talked to political leaders and got down to their first full day of joint investigations aboard their docked spacecraft.  5  AFTER THE STORM
Virginia was spared more rain, and the long task of cleaning up began after a week of heavy rain.  5  MOVING TO BAN A BULLET
In his latest effort to seize the crime issue from Republicans, President Clinton proposed a ban on all armor-piercing bullets.  7  STUDYING BOMBER'S MANIFESTO
F.B.I. analysts examined the latest communication from the person they are seeking in the Unabom case, but they offered no new theories.  6  RESTRICTIONS UPHELD
A divided Federal appeals court upheld regulations that prohibit radio and television stations from carrying "indecent" programs between 6 A.M. and 10 P.M.  7  A BED-WETTING GENE
Danish researchers said they had found the general site of a gene linked to persistent bed-wetting in children, a finding that could challenge the idea that the problem is primarily emotional.  8  Beliefs: In Algeria, women in the crossfire of a men's war.  10  The Lubavitcher movement, a year after the Rebbe's death.  10  Metro Digest 21  CITY PACT WITH LABOR UNIONS
Gingrich.
No easy victory in cocaine wars.
The extra-special Olympics.
Hate messages in the schools.
Letters  Frank Rich: Newt to the rescue.
Russell Baker: The amending toot.
Patrick Smith: The irresponsible superpower.
Diane Ravitch: Let our schools hire and fire teachers.
Chronicle 20  Bridge 14  Crossword 16


A Genetic Clue to Bed-Wetting Is Located
Danish researchers say they have found the general site of a gene linked to persistent bed-wetting in children, and the experts said their report should lay to rest the idea that the problem is primarily emotional.
For 10 years the experts have suspected that a gene was a factor in bed-wetting but this is the first proof.


Hitting and the Bullpen Hike Green's I.Q. Again
Dallas Green and Davey Johnson, present and past Mets managers, met at Rusty Staub's restaurant in Manhattan on Thursday night to talk about the vagaries of managing.
Now here was Johnson, his Reds coming into Shea Stadium tied for the league's best record.
And here was Green, his Mets opening a seven-game homestand with the second-worst record in the league.


The Stealth Strategist Refocusing Clinton
First the President threw out prepared speeches and replaced them with more pugnacious ones.
Then, he surprised his own party and submitted a balanced budget plan.
Finally, he decided to defy precedent and broadcast campaign commercials a year and a half before the election.
With each of these disconcerting developments, Democrats demanded to know why.
The answer that came back was a name.
The name was Dick Morris.
And to those who know Mr.
Morris, an eminently flexible 47-year-old political consultant who began his career as an Upper West Side liberal and has worked more recently for conservatives like Senator Jesse Helms, the name said more than any substantive explanations ever could have.


Corrections
An article yesterday about employees who will take Monday off as part of the Fourth of July weekend misstated the day on which Independence Day falls next year.
It is Thursday, not Wednesday.


Comeback for the World's Fastest Birds


Students Who Want Extra Help; One-Year Limit on Remedial Work at CUNY Dismays Many
Rebecca Van did not tell a soul that she was taking remedial English 100 at John Jay College of Criminal Justice in Manhattan.
Two times a week she slipped into her seat in a packed classroom and struggled to organize her thoughts on paper.
She labored through essay tests on topics like sex education and abortion in the 50 minutes that were allowed.
She took the same class three times before she passed.
Ms. Van, 22, felt a bitter shame.


Mayor Loses Political Fray In Legislature
The 1995 legislative session ended shortly before dawn today after several demonstrations of the kind of hardball politics that have come to typify the arm-twisting, back-scratching and retaliation of Albany's annual race to recess.
And the primary victim of this year's last-minute wrangling may be the Giuliani administration.
In the final hours of the session, the Legislature passed bills, which Mr.
Giuliani opposed, that would tie the city's hands in managing its Police Department while killing legislation coveted by the Mayor that would have provided property tax incentives for development in lower Manhattan.


Phyllis Hyman Jazz Singer, 45
Phyllis Hyman, a New York jazz singer whose most recent hits included "When You Get Right Down To It" and "Living in Confusion," died yesterday afternoon in Manhattan, a possible suicide, the police said.
She was 45.
An assistant to Ms.
Hyman found the singer unconscious in her bedroom at 211 West 56th Street around 2 P.M., said Det.
Dwight Cunningham, a police spokesman.
She died at Roosevelt Hospital at 3:50 P.M.


By Mozart, Chopin, Debussy And Coral Messina When 9
Coral Messina, a Mexican pianist and composer, played some of her own works as well as a broad selection of standard repertory works in her New York debut recital on Wednesday evening at Weill Recital Hall.
Ms.
Messina has a utilitarian technique, and she tends to prize muscularity over subtlety, an unwise choice in Weill Recital Hall, where very little effort is required to produce a big piano sound.


Silence and Light Are Partners In a Solo for Baryshnikov
Literalists would call Dana Reitz's "Unspoken Territory" a 20-minute solo for Mikhail Baryshnikov.
But the work, which received its world premiere at the Jacob's Pillow Dance Festival here on Thursday night, is better although more fancifully described as a pas de trois for Mr.
Baryshnikov, silence and light.
Since the 1970's, Ms.
Reitz has filled dances with intricate movements that look like calligraphic messages written on the air.
She has often dispensed with accompaniments and in recent years has collaborated with Jennifer Tipton, who designed the lighting for "Unspoken Territory."


CHRONICLE
While growing up in Jacksonville, Fla., in the 1960's, NAT GLOVER was attacked by white men with ax handles who mistook him for a customer in the segregated cafeteria where he had an after-school job.
Mr.
Glover, who is black, managed to break away and run to safety.
He says a police officer nearby did not intervene.
"I cried that day, because I had run away from a fight," he told The Associated Press.
"I also knew that was no way for a police officer to act."


Man Is Held in Bomb Threats
Jonathon Gill, who officials say was so unhappy about some traffic tickets that he threatened, twice, to blow up the police station, was held on $90,000 bail yesterday after being indicted on the threat charges.
Officers who raided his home said they found three powerful dynamite bombs.


Just 17, a New Father And Knocking on Doors
RAY ALPONTE, who is 17 years old, was running behind schedule as he prepared to look for a job.
For four months, he had worked pushing a handcart in the garment district but he quit in a fit of pride on June 16, which was also the day his girlfriend, Jaylene, gave birth to their baby, a girl named Ashley.
Jaylene, who is 18, lives in Brooklyn with her family.
Ray, who is paying for the milk and Pampers, lives with his family on Stanton Street on the Lower East Side.
"I hope Ray gets something soon," said Isobel Lopez, his mother, as Ray was dressing.
"He wants to do things right."


Strawberry's Line: 5 IBB
Darryl Strawberry walked into a new and unusual form of controversy today when pitchers from Detroit's rookie league Lakeland team in Florida's Gulf Coast League walked the 33-year-old slugger intentionally five straight times, under orders from the Tiger organization.
Strawberry, who was signed by the Yankees 10 days ago and is attempting to play his way into shape for a return to the major leagues by the middle of July, never saw a pitch he could hit in an obvious protest of his presence at the lowest minor league level, one filled predominately with teen-agers.


CUNY Education Means More Than a Degree
To the Editor:
Re your two June 27 news articles on the City University of New York's stricter admissions policy:


For Greece, Olympic Aspiration Is a Reality
Ancient Greeks built the Parthenon, wrote the Iliad and put an indelible stamp on everything from philosophy to battlefield tactics to the city-state.
But the modern Greeks do have at least one edge on their ancestors.
They play basketball.
In fact, they play it very well, and tonight in the quarterfinals of the European championships, they finally earned a spot for Greece in the Olympic Games that their forefathers invented.
They earned it with a 66-64 victory over Spain, and they earned it in a sport that packs in this era's Greek public like Sophocles and Aeschylus used to pack in the ancient one.
"I think the whole country has tears in their eyes right now," Greece Coach Makis Dendrinos said.
There were tears for a different reason six years ago when Atlanta was chosen over Athens to play host to the 1996 Summer Games.
At least now, the Greek basketball stars will not miss out on the Olympic festivities.
Greece will be in fine European company.
The other three teams to qualify for Atlanta tonight were Lithuania, Croatia and Yugoslavia.
The Lithuanians beat the Russians, 82-71, in the first quarterfinal, getting 33 points and 14 rebounds from their imposing center, Arvidas Sabonis, soon to be a Portland Trail Blazer.
The Croatians struggled, but survived to beat the Italians, 71-61, getting 24 points and 10 rebounds from their forward Toni Kukoc of the Chicago Bulls.
Last and most convincingly, the Yugoslavs, who were barred from qualifying for the 1992 Summer Olympics, qualified for Atlanta by dominating a good French team, 104-86, behind 24 points from guard Predrag Danilovic, a future member of the Miami Heat.
In Saturday's semifinals, Lithuania will meet Croatia and Yugoslavia will play Greece.
But it is doubtful that those matchups will generate the emotion of the quarterfinals.
"These were no-tomorrow games," said Croatia Coach Aleksandr Petrovic.
"If you lose the semis, you can play for the bronze. If you lose in the quarters, there is no medal here and no chance for a medal in Atlanta."
The biggest name missing from the Atlanta field will be Russia, which finished second to the United States at last year's world championships with much the same cast and the same coach, Sergei Belov.
But after being upset by Spain in group play, the Russians were unable to lift their game against their former teammates from the Soviet Union.
Although they pulled within 1 point early in the first half, Sabonis and Seattle Supersonics guard Sarunas Marciulionis were too good down the stretch.
"A couple of guys were thinking about new contracts and new clubs instead of the tournament," Belov said.
"This game was a matter of life and death. I'm surprised my players didn't feel this way, and that they don't feel it's a tragedy that a Russian team is not in the Olympics."
For a while, Croatia appeared in danger of experiencing a similar fate.
The team led by only 2 points at halftime and it was hardly encouraging when the left-handed Kukoc had to leave the game midway through the second half after cutting his right hand in a scramble for a loose ball.
But after receiving three stitches, Kukoc returned with two fingers bandaged together and helped Croatia pull away down the stretch.
A surprising fourth in the last world championships, these modern Greeks are now Olympians.
"For us veterans, this is a dream," said the 32-year-old center Panayiotis Fassoulas, who scored a game-high 20 points for Greece.


Citicorp Announces High-Level Personnel Shifts
In a step that rearranges the highest executive ranks of Citicorp, John S. Reed, its chairman, has named top executives to oversee the business areas that the company expects to be most critical for growth.
In a memo distributed in the bank on Thursday, Mr.
Reed named David E. Gibson to supervise the bank's activities in emerging markets.
An executive vice president, Mr.
Gibson, 55, has been directing the bank's activities in Eastern Europe, the Middle East and Africa.


Beaches All Set for Holidays
Even with recent thunderstorms, which can send street runoff water into the sea and create spot pollution problems, the ocean off New Jersey beaches is in good shape for the Fourth of July weekend, said David Rosenblatt, a supervisor with the Department of Environmental Protection.
But the water is still cold, in the low 60's.
So far this summer, a one-block section of beach in Atlantic City has been closed twice because of pollution from storm water runoff, Mr.
Rosenblatt said.


U.S. Has Supported Arts From the Start
To the Editor:
Bruce Ellis Fein (letter, June 25), in his rush to rebut Hillary Rodham Clinton's "Arts for Our Sake" (Op-Ed, June 21), forgot -- or was oblivious to -- the long history of United States Government support for art and artists, beginning nearly two centuries before the establishment of the National Endowment for the Arts.


Bolivia Sells Utility to U.S. Companies
Bolivia announced the sale of a controlling interest in its state electricity company to three American companies for $139.8 million, the first step of an ambitious program to transfer ownership of key industries to private hands.
The Government agreed to sell a 50 percent stake in Empresa Nacional de Electricidad to Dominion Energy Inc., a unit of Dominion Resources Inc. of Richmond; Energy Initiative Inc. of Parsippany, N.J., and Constellation Energy, a unit of the Baltimore Gas and Electric Company.


Superintendent Is Indicted
As Superintendent of Bergen County's special services school district, James B. Lederer flew extensively around the country, ostensibly to enrich his knowledge of special education.
A county grand jury grounded him yesterday with a five-count indictment, charging him with theft by deception.
Charles R. Buckley, acting Bergen County prosecutor, said Mr.
Lederer, 50, improperly billed the district for more than $21,000 in airline and hotel charges for himself and traveling companions.
Mr.
Lederer -- appointed last September to a state task force to study how schools can reduce costs -- was suspended from his $116,500-a-year district post in December after an investigation by the district.
Mr.
Lederer's lawyer, Paul Brickfield, said yesterday that his client is a scapegoat for a district that never established a policy for expenses.


Financial Services Plan Advances Without U.S.
Leaving the United States isolated after it rejected a global plan for liberalizing trade in financial services, a large group of industrial and developing nations said today that it favored pressing ahead with the plan on its own.
The effort won support from all 15 nations in the European Union, which endorsed it at a hastily convened meeting of ministers here tonight.
It was supported by a number of other nations, including Canada, Switzerland, Hong Kong, India, Pakistan, Morocco and Uruguay.


Mignon E. Nixon, Gregory D. Smith
Mignon Elizabeth Nixon, the managing editor of October, a New York arts journal, and Gregory Douglas Smith, an editor at Warren, Gorham &amp; Lamont, a professional publisher in New York, were married on Friday at the Municipal Building in New York.
Paula Pagan, a clerk of the City of New York, officiated.
Ms.
Nixon, who is 33 and is keeping her name, is also an art critic.
She graduated magna cum laude from Harvard University and is a candidate for a doctorate in art history at the City University of New York.
She is a daughter of Judge John T. Nixon and Betty C. Nixon, both of Nashville.
Her father is the Chief Judge of the United States Middle District Court of Tennessee, in Nashville.
Her mother, who was a Nashville councilwoman from 1975 to 1987, is the special assistant for university relations at Vanderbilt University there.


Neuberger Show Reviews Trends in Mexican Photography
To the question, "What's new in Mexican photography?" the American Federation of Arts reponds with "A Shadow Born of Earth," a touring show making its final appearance, through Aug. 6, at the Neuberger Museum at Purchase College.
Elizabeth Ferrer, who serves the Asia Society in Manhattan as both the curator of its gallery and the head of its visual arts department, organized the spectacle, choosing 16 photographers aged 31 to 55.
She also wrote the bilingual catalogue.
Americans expecting poverty, devout catholicism, obsession with death, evidence of oppression but no sign of the oppressors will not be disappointed: Social Realism lives on in Mexican art, though in diluted form.
Still, viewers may be surprised to see signs of the narcissism that, coupled with undue emphasis on technique, bespeaks the condition of entropy known as Post-Modernism.
Though the malaise transcends national boundaries, its progress may well be accelerated by personal contacts with the industrialized countries.
Most of these photographers completed their studies in the United States or Europe.


Ideas &amp; Trends; 'Don't Bother Me: I'm Catching Some Rays'
KELLY MERCEIN knew what she was getting into.
She had heard the horror stories, read the warnings, learned of the possible side effects.
She had even been subjected to daily lectures by her worried mother, who cut out articles from local newspapers and left them in her room.
But if Ms.
Mercein, a 20-year-old college student from East Meadow, L.I., grasped the risks, she was not about to begin living her life in the shadows.
So on a clear day last week, she spread her blanket on the sand, turned her face to the sun and threw caution to the wind, all in pursuit of her guilty little summer pleasure:


Extra Services Give Realtors an Edge
SUCH dismal occurrences as declining numbers of first-time home buyers and a recent drop in house sales would hardly seem the stuff of successful residential real-estate ventures.
Yet, two real-estate-related concerns -- Siderow Associates in Chappaqua and More Than a Mortgage in Katonah -- have been able to increase business substantially by adding special services.
To wit: Last November, when Sheila Siderow started Siderow Associates in Chappaqua, the question she was most often asked was, "Why does Chappaqua need yet another real-estate firm?"


Meet Me at the Fair
1939 The Lost World of the Fair.
By David Gelernter.
Illustrated. 418 pp.
New York: The Free Press. $23.


MARKET TIMING
Monday The Commerce Department reports personal income and spending for May.
Forecast: income up 0.1 percent and spending up 0.5 percent.
In April, both reports rose 0.3 percent.
The Commerce Department also reports May construction spending.
Forecast: down 0.6 percent, after rising 0.4 percent in April.
The New York, American and Nasdaq stock exchanges will close at 1:00 P.M. eastern time.
Tuesday John Major faces a Conservative Party vote that will determine whether he will remain Prime Minister of Britain.
Mr.
Major faces John Redwood, former Secretary of Wales, in an election to pick a party leader.
Whoever wins will be Prime Minister by virtue of heading the majority party.
Mr.
Major needs the backing of 165 of the 329 Tory M.P.'s and a margin of 50 votes over Redwood to win outright.
The Fourth of July holiday.
All markets, banks and government offices are closed.
Wednesday The Federal Reserve's Open Market Committee meets today and Thursday.
Analysts say recent strong reports on durable goods, initial jobless claims and new home sales make it unlikely the Fed will lower interest rates.
Thursday The Commerce Department releases leading economic indicators for May.
Forecast: down 0.2 percent.
The index has not risen since December and, after remaining unchanged in January, has fallen every month since.
In the past, three straight declines have often signaled a recession.
The Commerce Department also reports May housing completions.
They fell 7 percent in May, but rose 10.5 percent in March.
Friday The Labor Department releases unemployment figures for June.
Forecast: the jobless rate is expected to inch up to 5.8 percent, from 5.7 percent in April.
But it is estimated the economy will have added 95,000 nonfarm jobs, after losing 101,000 in May.
Few analysts think the report will influence a Fed move on interest rates.


Special Athletes Play Up the True Olympic Ideals
About this time next year, the 1996 Olympians will march into the new Olympic Stadium in Atlanta to mark the centennial of the modern Games.
That group could learn a great deal from the thousands of athletes who paraded into the Yale Bowl last night in New Haven for the opening ceremonies of the ninth Special Olympics World Games.
The Special Olympics are infinitely truer to the ideals of the ancient Greeks than are the regular Olympics.
From that first 200-yard sprint on a sunny afternoon in 776 B.C., athletes and reportedly some 50,000 spectators gathered every four years on the grassy plains of Olympia, Greece, for nearly 1,200 years without interruption by either war or politics.


June 25 - July 1; A Terrorist's Creed
"Take us for example, if we had never done anything violent and had submitted the present writings to a publisher, they probably would not have been accepted. If they had been accepted and published, they probably would not have attracted many readers. Even if these writings had had many readers, most of those readers would soon have forgotten.


If You're Thinking of Living In/Franklin Township, N.J.; Busy Streets and Quiet Country Lanes
MORE than two-thirds open space with vast tracts of farmland and state park land, Franklin Township is one of the largest and most diverse municipalities in New Jersey.
Some streets of the 46-square-mile township are busy thoroughfares that sprawl from the neighboring city of New Brunswick, while others are narrow, winding, wooded, country lanes where deer are often more plentiful than cars.
Single-family housing varies from small, two-bedroom turn-of-the-century colonials on 30-foot-wide lots, all the way up to majestic, 14,000-square-foot mansions set back hundreds of yards from the road.
The least expensive house listed in the township is a three-bedroom, bank-owned, 50-year-old ranch on Millstone Road near the New Brunswick line, offered at $34,900.
Many other homes can be had for under $100,000.


Phyllis Hyman; Jazz Singer, 45
Phyllis Hyman, a New York jazz singer whose most recent hits included "When You Get Right Down to It" and "Living in Confusion," died yesterday afternoon in Manhattan, a possible suicide, the police said.
She was 45.
An assistant to Ms.
Hyman found the singer unconscious in her bedroom at 211 West 56th Street around 2 P.M., said Detective Dwight Cunningham, a police spokesman.
She died at St.
Luke's-Roosevelt Hospital Center at 3:50 P.M., hours before she was scheduled to perform at the Apollo Theater in Harlem.


Elizabeth Hinckley, Robert Foregger
Elizabeth Rodman Hinckley, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert L. Hinckley of Southwest Harbor, Me., is to be married today to Robert Cornelius Foregger, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Russell F. Foregger of Waterbury Center, Vt.
The Rev.
Samuel S. Rodman 3d, an Episcopal priest who is a cousin of the bride, is to officiate at the Pot and Kettle Club in Bar Harbor, Me.
The bride, 26, is an environmental geologist for the Johnson Company, an environmental engineering company in Montpelier, Vt.
She graduated cum laude from Middlebury College.
Her father is the president of Hinckley Yachts, a yacht-building company in Southwest Harbor that was founded by the bride's paternal grandfather, the late Henry R. Hinckley.
Her mother, Bettina B. Hinckley, is a yacht charter broker at Hinckley Yachts.


Crossing Safeguards
The city is planning new safety measures for Mulry Square, the treacherous intersection of West 11th Street, Greenwich Avenue and Seventh Avenue.
Under a nine month experiment to begin by the end of the year, corners will be extended by about five feet into curbside lanes.
Crosstown traffic on West 11th Street between the Avenue of the Americas and Seventh Avenue will be reversed from westbound to eastbound.


June 25 - July 1; I'll Take Manhattan . . . Or Maybe Not
WHAT'S in a name?
When the name is New York, apparently not too much.
Here is the Big Apple, pretty well convinced it is the center of everything, the capital of the world.
But does anyone out there buy it?
Not if you measure its fame by the frequency with which its name is invoked outside its borders.


Denied Play, They Sue The Coach
MANY high school coaches endure complaints from players and their parents, from students and fans, and from sports commentators.
But until recently, it is believed, matters did not wind up in court.
That is, not until John Ceneri, the former girls varsity basketball coach at Hamden High School, was hit with a lawsuit alleging that he caused "severe emotional distress" to three players.
In what is believed to have been an unprecedented action, the three players recently were awarded $13,500 in an out-of-court settlement.
"What this means is that if you cut a kid from now on, they have a way of getting back at you," said Jim Bombaci, a girls basketball coach at Daniel Hand High School in Madison.
The case, in Superior Court in New Haven, never went to trial; a lawyer for the insurance company that represents the Board of Education in Hamden agreed to the settlement.
Mr.
Ceneri, a 37-year-old gym teacher at the Hamden Middle School, says he is unhappy with the settlement, and that he feels it reflects unfavorably on him as a coach.
And many coaches in the state believe that the settlement, along with the lawsuit itself, sets a dangerous precedent.
"It's kind of scary," said Michael Savage, the executive director of the Connecticut Interscholastic Athletic Conference, the governing body for high school sports in the state.
"It could encourage other situations of a similar nature in the future."


Heather Rosbe, William Vrattos
Heather Westlund Rosbe, a daughter of Judith and Robert Rosbe Jr. of Marion, Mass., was married there yesterday to William Charles Vrattos, a son of Luanne and George Vrattos of New York.
The Rev.
Robert W. Woodroofe 3d performed the ceremony at St.
Gabriel's Episcopal Church.
The couple, both 25, graduated from Dartmouth College.
Mrs.
Vrattos received an M.B.A. from New York University and is a consultant with the valuation services group at Price Waterhouse, the accounting firm in New York.
Her father retired as a partner in Morgan Holland Partners, a venture capital firm in Boston.
Her mother is a lawyer in Hartford for the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation.


Hurdles to College Remain; Competitors Have Changed
Dear Editor:
In "Read My Lips," (June 18), Greg Donaldson exemplifies the best and most candid of all the members of academe.
But he is not a pragmatist.
The comparisons relating to the City University student body of the 30's to the 60's are relevant and, for the most part, true.
These young adults from immigrant families worked hard, studied hard and sacrificed everything for the immediate goal of a college education.
The "me generation" had not yet evolved, and all life's niceties were postponed for a chance to attend City College, from which I graduated in 1947.





Creative Seasoning In Midtown West
CHINA GRILL * (212) 333-7788; 60 West 53d Street; $$$$; all major credit cards


Let the Mountain Bikers Crash on Their Own Trails
To the Editor:
In his June 18 Soapbox, "The Zen of Mountain Biking," J. P. Partland says he's addicted to mountain biking.
That's great, but does he have to destroy the hiking trails?
He thinks it's O.K. because only a "handful" of hikers are bitterly complaining.
A few thousand is quite a handful.
He compares the soles of hiking shoes to the tires of mountain bikes, but the destructiveness of the latter is far, far greater.
As for Mr.
Partand's contention that "crashing is frequent, but injuries are rare," that statement is not consistent with my professional experience.


Effort to Oust Yeltsin Team Falls Short
The Russian Government averted a political showdown today when Parliament failed to gather the 226 votes needed to pass a vote of no confidence.
Had the measure passed, President Boris N. Yeltsin would have been forced either to dismiss his Cabinet or to dissolve the legislature and hold early elections.
Seconds after the voting ended, Prime Minister Viktor S. Chernomyrdin strode to the podium in what looked a little like a victory lap.
Speaking ingratiatingly, though, he said the vote "has drawn a line through the crisis."


Take a Long Time to Admire Gehrig's Lengthy Feat
The emotion-choked voice of Lou Gehrig echoed throughout Yankee Stadium 56 years ago this Tuesday.
His measured words provided the world of sport with one of its most poignant moments.
They have taken their place with Franklin D. Roosevelt's "Day of Infamy" speech and the broadcast of the Hindenburg disaster.


One Blot on Nelson's Impressive Resume
The game was going back and forth, with the Golden State Warriors holding on to a slim lead at the Charlotte Coliseum.
It was Feb. 9, 1994, and the Hornets were threatening when the marvelous Michigan rookie Chris Webber threw a circus pass away, a pass for which even a schoolyard legend might take criticism.
Don Nelson had had enough.
He tossed aside the gray thatch of hair hanging over his forehead and began firing on all cylinders.
He walked onto the court as timeout was called and yelled at Webber, berating him all the way back to the bench.
Finally, Webber retaliated.


Kim L. Berman, Robert M. Galler
Kim Leslie Berman, the daughter of Marilyn and Irving Berman of Oceanside, L.I., was married last evening to Robert Michael Galler, the son of Eileen and Richard Galler of Port Richie, Fla.
Rabbi Joseph Potasnik performed the ceremony at Temple Israel in Lawrence, L.I.
Mrs.
Galler, 27, teaches special education at Public School 29 in Brooklyn.
She and her husband graduated from Hofstra University, from which she also received her master's degree in special education.


Selective Sympathy
To the Sports Editor:
In "Darryl's Latest Message" (The Times, July 24), Ira Berkow tells us that Darryl Strawberry is pitiable, stupid, arrogant, weak, going to the dogs, drug addicted, guilty of spousal abuse and only knowing how to play baseball and get himself in hot water.


Toll Takers on the Job, for Now
Drivers on the Garden State Parkway were given a temporary reprieve yesterday, as toll takers who voted on Friday to authorize a strike stayed on the job.
But bargaining between the workers, whose contract expired at 11:59 P.M.
Friday, and the New Jersey Highway Authority, which operates the parkway, remained stalled, as it has been since Thursday night.


Dog Owners Should Follow The Lead of the Leashers
To the Editor:
I fully agree concur with Sandy Berger's complaints about some dog owners' irresponsible and often rude behavior (Letters, June 11).
In the East Village, where I have lived with a dog since 1979, we have more than our share of people whose dogs (usually large) are walked off the leash.


Now Playing, 30,000 Feet Up, Some Variety
IT'S WELL INTO THE FLIGHT, and the meal trays have been cleared.
Perhaps it's time for a movie.
The choice used to be either/or -- either you watched the family film that was offered, or you slept.
But today, some airlines are offering a menu of films to satisfy every taste.
Among the choices on individual video screens are classics like "Psycho," foreign films like "La Cage aux Folles" and new movies like "Pulp Fiction" (which shows violence and drug use), "Clerks" (which almost got an NC-17 for language) and "Priest" (the controversial film in which the title character is gay).


Leslie Holsinger, Steven Sanders
Dr.
Leslie Jean Holsinger, a postdoctoral fellow in molecular immunology at Stanford University, was married yesterday to Dr.
Steven Sanders, a research scientist at SDL, a laser research company in San Jose, Calif.
The Rev.
Richard G. Kief, a Unitarian Universalist minister, performed the ceremony at the Mission Inn in Riverside, Calif.
The bride, 30, is the daughter of William and Jean Holsinger of Riverside.
She graduated from Occidental College and received a Ph.D. in molecular biology from Northwestern University.
Her father retired as the property services manager for the City of Riverside.
Her mother, also retired, was an administrative assistant for the Jurupa Unified School District in Riverside.


China Has World's Best Reason to Limit Births
To the Editor:
That the tone of your June 25 front-page article on birth control in China appears to condemn coercion by the Chinese Government to limit births greatly surprises me.
Every society creates laws to limit individual actions that adversely affect the community.
For a country bursting with people, am I to sympathize with the family that chooses six children?


TAKING AFFIRMATIVE ACTION APART
Opponents of affirmative action need a reality check ("Taking Affirmative Action Apart," by Nicholas Lemann, June 11).


'This Sunny Day, This Deserted House'
To the Editor:
Re "If Poet's Room Could Speak, It Would Tell of Grief," your June 28 St.
Petersburg Journal about Anna Akhmatova, the poet who lived through Stalin's purges:


Bananas


An Overnight Briefcase
Being called a stuffed shirt is one thing; owning a Stuffed-Shirt, a new packing aid for business travelers, is quite another.
The Magellan's catalogue of travel accessories now offers the Stuffed-Shirt, which its makers say allows a traveler to pack a shirt or blouse along with socks, stockings, tie or scarf and carry them in a briefcase.
The product, which is 11 inches by 9 inches and no more than 2 1/2 inches deep, has an internal frame that holds a shirt or blouse snugly.
A separate compartment holds accessories.
Stuffed-Shirt costs $79 with a canvas cover or $129 in leather, plus $6.95 shipping and handling. (800) 962-4943.
JOSEPH SIANO


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article and a picture caption last Sunday about a contemporary showhouse named Seascape, which was moved to Madison from Westport, misstated the association of the retailer W. T. Grant with the house.
He did not live in the house in Westport; his estate was in Madison.


When It's Skintight And All Right
People interested in fashion with an edge are wearing mesh T-shirts or muscle shirts that fit like a second skin and dresses that stretch over the body like panty hose.
Many of the clothes are printed in designs that suggest tattooing.
The fabric, a blend of nylon and Lycra, made an eye-catching appearance on the runway at Jean-Paul Gaultier's Paris show two years ago.
On this year's tattoo T-shirts, he printed his portrait and his name (left), as well as images from famous Renaissance paintings (right).


14 Spots to Avoid This Week
A look at trouble spots you may encounter in the next week -- or month, or months -- courtesy of Transcom, an interstate transportation agency.


Dr. Drullinsky, Dr. Gladshteyn
Dr.
Pamela R. Drullinsky, the daughter of Raquel and Dr.
Rafael Drullinsky of Tenafly, N.J., is to be married today to Dr.
Mark Gladshteyn, the son of Margarita and David Gladshteyn of Hartsdale, N.Y.
Rabbi Bruce Block is to officiate at the Clinton Inn Hotel in Tenafly.
Dr.
Drullinsky-Gladshteyn, 29, graduated from the University of Pennsylvania and received her M.D. from Tel Aviv University in Israel.
She is a fellow in the hematology and oncology division at the Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center in New York.


Weiskopf Leads at a Soggy Senior Open
Tom Weiskopf began the third round of the United States Senior Open today at six under par, tied for the lead with Tommy Aaron.
But as he lined up a short par putt at No. 1, loud thunder echoed through the Congressional Country Club and he stepped away.
He had 3 hours 45 minutes to contemplate that putt, while heavy rains soaked the course.


Making A Buyer Aware
STARTING this weekend, potential customers who walk into real estate offices in New Jersey are being asked to select the terms of the relationship they will share with their broker.
Effective yesterday, New Jersey joined 44 other states -- including New York and Connecticut -- that have adopted "agency disclosure" laws for real estate brokers.


All the Comforts of Manhattan; Why Rough It in the Hamptons? Goodies Are Delivered
The Lexington Avenue butcher shop's missive to its Upper East Side clientele was as pointed as its knives.
Can summer in the Hamptons be savored without hung pheasant or designer chicken, liberated from cages and nurtured in the sweet air of Pennsylvania Dutch country?
"We have been informed by many of our valued customers on how 'difficult' it is to purchase quality meats and poultry at the East End while away from Albert &amp; Sons during the summer months," wrote the proprietors, Robert and James Moffa.


Dust Off the Disco Ball: The Fever Rises
Anybody here from New Jersey?" the WPLJ disk jockey Scott Shannon inquired disingenuously. It was a balmy evening in late June, and a few thousand fans had assembled for a concert sponsored by the station and featuring Irene Cara, Vicki Sue Robinson, Tavares, Rose Royce and Alicia Bridges. "Long Island?" he asked. "Westchester?
How about Connecticut?" The Paramount Theater at Madison Square Garden fairly quaked with each bellowed-and-whooped response.
But the decibel level rose for real, and the crowd rose to its feet when a disembodied voice like that of God or Charlton Heston introduced the headliners: "Ladies and gentlemen, the Vil-lage PEOPLE!"


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
Sniffing and Puffing
STOGIES are not just for old fogies anymore," Kate Paxton of East Hampton said. Miss Paxton, daughter of Tom, the folksinger, is a cigar smoker. "It feels mighty powerful to smoke a cigar," she said.
Last Sunday, Ms.
Paxton, along with 8 other women and 12 men, lighted up at the first Maidstone Arms Cigar Dinner Under the Stars.
Because the stars were not shining -- it was yet another rainy night -- the Dinner Under the Stars was held under fluorescents.
That was not a problem, said Christophe, manager of the Maidstone Arms.
The restaurant-inn in East Hampton is "a cigar-friendly establishment," he said.


Melissa J. Lee, Scott J. Wortman
Melissa J. Lee, a daughter of Madelyn and Stephen Lee of Matawan, N.J., was married last evening to Scott J. Wortman, the son of Gloria Levine of Old Bridge, N.J., and Ronald Wortman of Upper Saddle River, N.J.
Rabbi Henry Weiner performed the ceremony at the Livingston Country Club in Livingston, N.J.
Mrs.
Wortman, 25, graduated from the University of Wisconsin and received a master's degree in education from Rutgers University.
She is a mathematics teacher at the Carl Sandburg Middle School in Old Bridge.


Enduring the Year of the Dust
City construction projects are ubiquitous, necessary and often a nuisance for those stuck living or working nearby.
But neighbors of the Metropolitan Life complex say that their nuisance -- a $300 million renovation meant to prepare the Metlife building at 11 Madison Avenue for tenants -- has reached Stygian proportions


For Newark Teachers, New Man and New Era
Joseph Del Grosso has been president of the Newark Teachers Union for less than two weeks, but the photos in his new office document his history as a labor activist.
In black and white, they show a young man with long hair and defiant eyes, picketing in a teachers' strike that lasted three months in 1971.
"They are there to remind me which side I am on," Mr. Del Grosso said.


Elisabeth Silver, Scott A. Kratka
Elisabeth Ann Silver, a daughter of Charles and Adela Silver of Aberdeen, N.J., was married yesterday to Scott Alan Kratka, the son of Joseph and Patricia Kratka of Mebane, N.C.
The Rev.
Charles Weiser, a Roman Catholic priest, performed the ceremony at St.
Michael's Church in West End, N.J.
Mrs.
Kratka, 28, is a vice president in the compliance department of Smith Barney, the securities brokerage in New York.
She graduated from Rutgers University and received an M.B.A. from New York University.
Her father, a psychologist, retired from the Kessler Institute for Rehabilitation in West Orange, N.J.
Her mother is the coordinator of the English as a Second Language program for the public schools in Red Bank, N.J.


Sweet Sweetback's World Revisited
GORE, PROFANITY AND SEX ARE splattered over the screen so routinely today that no movie from the 1970's could possibly match the contemporary Hollywood action film in visceral nastiness, right?
Before agreeing, check out Melvin Van Peebles's 1971 film "Sweet Sweetback's Baadasssss Song," which will play at Film Forum from July 14 through July 16.
This sulphurous nightmare of racial paranoia and revenge eclipses even "Reservoir Dogs" in evoking a world of infinite seaminess, injustice and cruelty.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League  CALIFORNIA ANGELS -- Purchased the contract of Orlando Palmeiro, outfielder, from Vancouver of the Pacific Coast League.
Optioned Mark Dalesandro, catcher, to Vancouver.
SEATTLE MARINERS -- Recalled Darren Bragg, outfielder, from Tacoma of the Pacific Coast League.
Optioned Ron Villone, pitcher, to Tacoma.
National League  COLORADO ROCKIES -- Signed Todd Helton, first baseman, and assigned him to Asheville of the South Atlantic League.
NEW YORK METS -- Signed Jeffrey Parsons, shortstop, and assigned him to Pittsfield of the New York-Penn League.
ST.
LOUIS CARDINALS -- Placed Bernard Gilkey, outfielder, on the 15-day disabled list, retroactive to June 28.
Activated Geronimo Pena, second baseman, from the 15-day disabled list.
Carolina League  WILMINGTON BLUE ROCKS -- Promoted Nevin Brewer and Kevin Rawitzer, pitchers, to Wichita of the Texas League.
Midwest League  BELOIT SNAPPERS -- Released Will Fitzpatrick, infielder-designated hitter.
Announced Toby Kominek, third baseman, has been promoted from Helena of the Pioneer League.
Mid-American League  ANDERSON LAWMEN -- Signed Robert Harmon, infielder.
Hockey  Ontario Hockey League  DETROIT JR.
RED WINGS -- Announced they will change their name to the Jr.
Whalers.


INSIDE
NEWS AND TOPICS  Atlantic City takes its public health program private.7 GOVERNMENT  New Jersey gets rid of the accumulated debris of bureaucracy.8 THEATER  From the silly to the serious, summer theater is in full swing.14 SOAPBOX  A proposal to make drunken driving socially unacceptable.15


The Predictably Unpredictable Neil Young
IT WAS A SUNNY BUT CHILLY afternoon, and Neil Young was twisting up and down the hilly roads of this rural retreat an hour south of San Francisco in his pristine 1960 Lincoln Continental.
One hand on the wheel, the other near his aching back, he was on his way to his chiropractor's office in San Jose when suddenly the convertible screeched off the side of the road.
Mr.
Young gave the wheel a mighty turn to the left, and within seconds he was on the road again, heading back in the direction he came from.
"There's no way I'm going to make it to San Jose and back here again, especially during rush hour," he said as he accelerated back up the pine-lined mountain road.
"No matter how much you need to do something, sometimes you just have to change your mind. And it's O.K. to change your mind."


Jessica A. Lerner, Daniel H. Pink
Jessica Anne Lerner, a lawyer for the civil division of the United States Department of Justice in Washington, is to be married today to Daniel H. Pink, the speechwriter for Labor Secretary Robert B. Reich.
Judge Lynn Pickard of the New Mexico Court of Appeals in Santa Fe is to perform the ceremony at the bride's parents' house in Santa Fe.
Ms.
Lerner, who is 29 and will keep her name, is a daughter of Alan B. Lerner and Elisabeth W. Lerner of Dallas.
She graduated summa cum laude from Amherst College, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa, and she and the bridegroom received law degrees from Yale University.


The Plebeian Beet Gets the Royal Treatment
BEETS are one of my favorite root vegetables, especially in the summertime.
They add a dash of color as well as flavor to salads and are especially good with game, duck, beef and other dark meats and things cooked on the grill. (They contain a crimson dye called betanin, which stains other ingredients, so I usually toss them in the dressing separately.)
Roasting beets in the oven in their skins is one of the best ways to bring out their flavor.
They can also be wrapped in foil and baked slowly on a grill if they are not put directly on the heat.


QUICK BITE/Point Pleasant Beach; O, for a Draught of Root Beer? Get Thee to Stewart's
Be thirsty, not hungry, when you drive (and drive you must, for the full effect) over to Stewart's Drive-In at the Jersey Shore.
This stand, like most of the 51 other Stewart's stands in the United States (including 36 in New Jersey), harks back to the 1950's, with carhop service and car trays.
Stewart's serves food, but that's not what you're here for.
You're here for the icy, creamy, espresso-brown root beer.
Stick to that, and you'll do no wrong: this bliss in a frosted mug comes plain -- if you can call root beer this good "plain" -- or adorned, as a black cow, gussied up with a scoop of vanilla ice cream.


Rogue Trader Is Named In Investment Fund Loss
A 39-year-old trader at First Capital Strategists, a small York, Pa., securities firm, managed for three years to hide millions of dollars in mounting losses in the account of the Common Fund, according to the fund, which holds $20 billion in investments for colleges and other schools.
David K. Storrs, president of the Common Fund, confirmed accounts that Kent Ahrens of York, Pa., a 12-year employee of First Capital, bet that stock prices would decline and then let his losses go unsettled for three years.


Liberties; The 'Dump Me' Strategy
With incumbency a curse, it has become the fashion for politicians to run against the government they are running.
But Bill Clinton, always precocious, is leaping ahead of the pack.
He is running against himself.


Corrections
An article in the Neighborhood Report last Sunday about reconstruction plans for Metro-North's 125th Street station in Harlem misidentified the hometown of a regular user of the station, Mary Kelley.
She is from Scarsdale, N.Y.; there is no Scarsdale, Conn.


Wimbledon Is Overtaken By a Tempest Amid the Tea
Never your average tennis Joe, he pulled down his shorts in Tokyo as a showy act of surrender while being drummed into defeat by Michael Chang.
He grabbed a camera from a bystander in Portugal to take an incriminating snapshot of the imprint left by a ball that sealed a match point against him.
And this afternoon he stunned Wimbledon by throwing a temper tantrum that culminated in his walking off the court.
With this bit of tennis theater, Jeff Tarango, the former Stanford standout, became the first player in Grand Slam history to demand and receive his own deportation midmatch.


Capoeria: Baptism By Back Flip, To a Drumbeat
The room was dark and Gothic; 25 people dressed in white sat on the floor, nervous amid the pounding rhythms of a drum, tambourines and cowbells.
One, Dewane Woodley, a 31-year-old computer consultant for Bell Labs, blew air into his hands, then wiped his sweaty palms, waiting for his turn to be baptized into capoeira, a Brazilian blend of religion, dance and martial art.
Like t'ai chi, capoeira is a martial art that is easily mistaken for a dance form, a confusion enhanced by the musical training involved.
And that was practical; the form originated in the grueling slave world of 17th- and 18th-century Brazil, where it could be taught without alarming anyone.


Doc Pomus, a Poet in Song
WHEN Doc Pomus died of lung cancer in 1991, the music world lost one of its greatest songwriters and one of its most loved citizens.
Pomus, the composer of "This Magic Moment," "Save the Last Dance for Me" and too many more of the best tunes of the past 45 years to list, was a familiar figure in New York nightclubs.
Wheelchair-bound from a childhood case of polio, he was a one-man receiving line for countless admirers and hangers-on.
Born Jerome Felder in Brooklyn in 1925, Doc Pomus wrote lyrics that at their best were tough, wise and sometimes heartbreaking poetry.
An intimate of some of the greatest rhythm-and-blues and pop artists of his time, including Ray Charles and Big Joe Turner, he was larger than life in every sense.


Iris, Lily, William: Flowers Are People Too
SINCE the Fourth of July weekend is meant to be a relaxing sort of time, let's abandon the subjects of pulling weeds and mowing lawns and concentrate on some other activities that are just as important.
Have gardeners ever paused to consider how many of the plants growing in their plots have feminine names?
Take Lily, for example.
There are all sorts of lilies, and they come in all sorts of shapes and sizes -- from lily of the valley to lily turf to Easter lily.
In fact, this clan is one of plantdom's largest.


A Mandala Plan Incites Zulu Rivals
For T. D. Ntombela, one of 300 or so chiefs of the Zulus in South Africa, word that the Government of President Nelson Mandela wants to take over the care and feeding of this country's traditional leaders, or Amakhosi, comes not as welcome news but as a grave affront.
To hear Mr.
Ntombela, who doubles as a member of the legislature in the predominantly Zulu province of KwaZulu/Natal, a chief enjoys both the mandate of heaven and the confidence of his tribesmen, who alone are empowered to remove him.
For all of the seeming generosity of the Government's offer to provide housing and salaries for chiefs, he said Mr.
Mandela should stick his nose elsewhere.


Coloring History Our Way
A FEW MONTHS AGO, IT SEEMED THAT JAPAN AND AMERICA had finally figured out how to finesse the politics of this summer's anniversaries.
For years, officials in Washington and Tokyo had puzzled over how to mark the atom bombing of Hiroshima and end of World War II without stirring the wrath of veterans in Nebraska or nationalists in Nagoya.
After endless meetings, Japanese and American diplomats agreed on a strategy: No big V-J Day events, just an acknowledgment of the sacrifices on both sides.
Then the focus should turn to the "global partnership" that diplomats like to talk about as a counterpoint to the constant bickering between the world's two largest economies.
Like most agreements between Japan and America these days, the details were left a little hazy.
And, like most accords, this one is failing.


Lauren S. Kopans, David Goldstein
Lauren Sue Kopans, a daughter of the late Drs.
Sondra and Albert Kopans, is to be married today to David Brandt Goldstein, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Allan Goldstein of Battle Creek, Mich.
Rabbi Bob Gluck is to officiate at the Seven Hills Inn in Lenox, Mass.
The couple, who graduated from Brown University, will be known as Lauren and David Kopans.


Places, Everyone
THE plan for the state's new arts center is to get people -- from the suburbs, from the cities -- off their couches and into the theater and the concert hall.
Bring a center of their own, like Lincoln Center in scope, to people who don't want to schlep to New York City for culture.
And in Newark, a city that more readily conjures up images of carjackings than concertos.
Backers of the $165 million New Jersey Performing Arts Center point out that the brownstone-and-cafe-lined neighborhood around Lincoln Center was once considered one of Manhattan's most dangerous.


An Unjust Report
To the Editor:
"Employee Leasing: The Risks Of Swimming in a Big Pool" (Earning It, June 11) spends far too much time sensationalizing and far too little time on why more than 70,000 small businesses have embraced this rapidly growing industry.


Of Capitalism and its Discontents
APPROPRIATELY enough this Fourth of July weekend, an upbeat blueprint for a business-led reconstruction of American civilization appears for the first time on the business best-seller list.
The book, "Rethinking America" (Random House, $25) by Hedrick Smith, slips in at No. 10.
It shares that spot with a classic in the celebrity book genre, "Everyone's a Coach" (Zondervan/HarperBusiness, $22), in which Don Shula, with the grammatical assistance of Ken Blanchard, reveals the secrets of his winning ways at the Miami Dolphins since he began coaching way back in the Kennedy Administration.
Well, if we can watch ice hockey at the end of June -- and could you ask for a better example of what's wrong with America and capitalism than the owner of the New Jersey Devils? -- we can learn from the cheery Don Shula.
Neither cheery nor American is John Wareham, a headhunter who makes much of his antipodal roots in "The New Secrets of a Corporate Headhunter" (HarperBusiness, $13), the sequel to "Secrets of a Corporate Headhunter." Do not be surprised if you are struck inexplicably by a desire to listen to the cast recording of "How to Succeed in Business Without Really Trying" while reading Secrets II, or Secrets With a Vengeance, as I like to think of it.
Mr.
Wareham has the cool, clear eyes of a seeker of wisdom and truth, if not the upturned chin and grin of impetuous youth.


Q and A
Making Tracks for Siena
Q.
If I were to fly from New York City to Milan, how would I get from there to Siena, by train or bus?
And are there any chauffeur services that could make the trip? -- Marie Wilhelm, Hastings-on-Hudson, N.Y.


Lillian Vernon Staying After Sale of Company
WE'RE staying, and that's the real story," said David C. Hochberg, a spokesman for the Lillian Vernon Corporation. "Really, nothing is going to change that much."
Lillian Vernon, a publicly traded specialty retail catalogue business here, agreed on June 14 to be acquired for $19 a share in cash, or $190 million by Freeman Spogli &amp; Company, a private investment firm with offices in Los Angeles and New York.


POP BRIEF
Bjork: 'Post'  Elektra; CD and cassette.


F.Y.I.
Skillet Street  Q.  How hot can New York City streets really get during the summer?
Hot enough, for instance, to actually fry an egg?


'I May Not Be a Victor, But Let Me Try Bravely'
There was a 1,000-voice choir, seemingly every pompon girl and drill team in the State of Connecticut, and seven Army skydivers gliding smoothly onto the footballl field.
Then came an intricate card show as spectators raised large letters spelling the names of each of 140 participating countries.
The athletes paraded around the Yale Bowl, smiling and waving and occasionally blowing kisses to 60,000 strangers.


Monumental Toil to Restore the Magnificent
SHE SPENDS HER DAYS ON HER feet, hunched over an enormous magnifying glass.
She works with a carefully developed selection of cleaning solvents that she applies to paint scales the size of a grain of rice, then removes the congealed grime and dirt with a scalpel.
On a good morning, she may clean an area the size of a half dollar, perhaps uncovering a revealing original detail, perhaps finding nothing.
After 16 years, her eyesight is permanently altered, and a chronic pain pulses through her neck and shoulders.
She has to deal with a constant stream of visiting scholars and critics, some of whom strongly oppose the project.
There are days, even weeks, when Pinin Brambilla Barcilon would prefer to stay home from her job at the Santa Maria delle Grazie convent in Milan, a job she hopes will end in 1997.


A Dash of the Modern Amid Mediocrities
WHERE BETTER TO COME to grips with the struggle between modernism and history than Kyoto?
This city's new concert hall by Arata Isozaki might conceivably exist in Tokyo, or Osaka, or even Frankfurt or Barcelona: it is good enough to hold its own amid the architecture of any of these cities.
But it has particular resonance in Kyoto, where Mr.
Isozaki's implicit theme -- the difficult synthesis between traditional architecture and the modernist style -- is the stuff of daily life.
People who have not been to Kyoto often imagine it as some kind of theme park of traditional Japanese architecture, where the landscape of ancient temples and Zen gardens is broken only by a few elegant hotels and ryokans, or Japanese inns.
In fact, Kyoto is Japan's fifth largest city, and its heart is as full of traffic and noise and garish signs and wretched new buildings as any other place in Japan.
Kyoto also has the most extraordinary array of Buddhist temples and gardens to be seen anywhere in the world, but they must be sought out and are mostly to be found on the city's perimeter.
In the center, the real world of today holds sway.


Corrections
Because of a computer coding error, the paperback best-seller list on page 16 of The Times Book Review today omits a book.
"Apollo 13," by Jim Lovell and Jeffrey Kluger (Pocket Books, $6.50), an account of the 1970 moon mission frustrated by an explosion on the spacecraft, should be No. 2 on the nonfiction list.
"Reviving Ophelia" should be No. 3, and each further book should be one position lower; "The Kennedy Women" should be 15th and last.


3 Areas Unite on Planning
THE Byzantine planning process that often exists in the county, with municipalities guarding their borders with a Balkan-like intensity, is about to be challenged.
With the former Ciba corporate campus on Route 9A available for development, an unusual venture in planning is about to be undertaken by the town of Greenburgh in conjunction with the villages of Hastings-on-Hudson and Ardsley.


Consider Lily, Veronica and Creeping Jenny
SINCE this, the July 4 weekend, is meant to be a relaxing sort of time, let's abandon the subjects of pulling weeds and mowing lawns and concentrate on some other activities that are just as important.
Have gardeners ever paused to consider how many of the plants growing in their plots have feminine names?
Take Lily, for example.
There are all sorts of them and they come in all sorts of shapes and sizes -- from lily of the valley to lily turf to Easter lily.
In fact, this clan is one of plantdom's largest.


June 25 - July 1: Athletes Only; Testing the Usefulness Of School Drug Testing
The Supreme Court's ruling last week that schools can conduct random drug tests on student athletes left many schools wondering where to get the money for testing, what kind of drugs to look for -- and why athletes should be the ones to look at.
School officials acknowledge that the high court had good reasons for making a legal distinction between athletes, who volunteer for a team, and other students.
They agree that athletes serve as role models and may have special safety needs.
But as a practical matter, they said, it would probably make more sense to test students not involved in sports.
"Most of our statistics indicate that there probably would be a lesser percentage of people participating in extra-curricular activities who were involved in recreational use of drugs," said Ralph Swearngin, associate director of the Georgia High School Association.
Many coaches say their athletes are far more likely to use steroids than street drugs.
But while a marijuana test costs $20 or less, a steroid test runs $70 and up.
Even some school officials who support testing say that without enormous parental pressure, they would never choose to spend their tight budgets on urine tests.
TAMAR LEWIN


Deborah E. Proner, David J. Brand
Deborah Ellen Proner, a daughter of A. Stanley and Viola Proner of Purchase, N.Y., is to be married today to David Jay Brand, a son of Maurice and Miryam Brand of Littleton, Colo.
Rabbi Chaim Seiger is to perform the ceremony at the Ritz-Carlton Hotel in Aspen, Colo.
Mrs.
Brand, 29, is a real estate associate at Paul, Weiss, Rifkind, Wharton &amp; Garrison, the New York law firm.
She graduated from the University of Pennsylvania and received her law degree from New York University.
Her father is the founding partner of A. Stanley Proner, a law firm in New York.
Her mother teaches the third grade at Public School 7 in the Bronx.


The Thin Line Between Mole And Manager
Thirteen years ago, the careers of R. Lindley DeVecchio, an F.B.I. agent, and Gregory Scarpa, a Mafia gangster, became secretly entwined.
Mr.
Scarpa was a prized mole for the Federal Bureau of Investigation inside the Colombo crime family; Mr.
DeVecchio was his contact agent, or handler.
But that relationship has now backfired for the Government, wrecking a major case because of charges by other agents that Mr.
DeVecchio, too, was a mole, providing confidential information to Mr.
Scarpa that helped him to evade arrests and to track down rivals in a mob war.


F.A.A. Rule to Ban Some Children's Seats
A Federal Aviation Administration rule banning two types of child safety seats aboard planes is scheduled to take effect July 9.
The agency, citing recent research, said the devices, backless booster seats and torso harnesses, were ineffective.
The agency did not mandate that children too small for adult lap belts ride in other safety devices -- a rule sought by the National Transportation Safety Board and the flight attendants' union.


ANGRY FATHERS
Lazarus's article was touching.
But I wish his dad had handed him a hammer and told him to pitch in.
FLORETTE SCHNEIDER Chicago


Streetscapes/22 West 34th Street; A Startling Modern Work Camouflaged by Retail
THE 34th Street Midtown Chamber of Commerce has been victorious in having the huge County Seat store sign painted over on the old Spear &amp; Company building at 22 West 34th Street.
But although the group has achieved its goal of improving the street, what this unusual early modern building really needs is not paint, but paint remover.
Lewis Mumford, writing in The New Yorker in April 1938, called West 34th "the one really comic street" in New York.
"Here," he wrote, "you will find all the latest fashions promptly embodied and caricatured."


STATES SHELVING AMBITIOUS PLANS ON HEALTH CARE
After Congress killed the Clinton Administration's proposals to revamp America's health care system, ambitious state plans to extend health insurance to more people took on importance as possible models for the nation.
But nearly a year later, most of those plans are dead or stalled as the states turn their attention to cutting budget deficits.
Meanwhile, the number of uninsured people is growing fast.
In Florida, for example, Gov.
Lawton Chiles, a Democrat, had proposed in 1992 that employers be required to provide health insurance for their workers.
Under pressure from large self-insured employers, he quickly withdrew that plan.
Since then, Republicans, who now have a majority in the Florida Senate, have blocked another of the Governor's plans: to transfer $3.2 billion in Federal Medicaid money over five years to a managed health care program that Mr.
Chiles said would cover 40 percent of the state's 2.8 million uninsured residents.


POSTINGS: Exhibition at Equitable Gallery; Impressionists' New York
A turn-of-the-century skyline rises in golden hues in Colin Campbell Cooper's "Cliffs of Manhattan"(1903).
Flags stand out along a hazy-blue Fifth Avenue in Childe Hassam's "Lincoln's Birthday, 1918" (1918).
And a Monet feeling is evoked by a snowy scene in Ernest Lawson's "Stuyvesant Square in Winter" (c. 1907).
These are among 46 paintings that depict the new thoroughfares, skyscrapers, lights, bridges, squares and parks of turn-of-the-century New York and that comprise "The Impressionists' New York," an exhibition of American artists at The Equitable Gallery, 787 Seventh Avenue at 51st Street, through July 15.


Advocates Turn Tactics On Leader
For years, the community group Acorn taught its members how to rally, demonstrate and hold sit-ins to get what they wanted.
The group gained wide attention in 1987, when it occupied 30 vacant buildings in East New York and forced the city to turn them over to squatters.
Now, after learning the art of confrontation, some Acorn members are using confrontational tactics against one of their own -- Acorn's head organizer.


Nancy Langdon, M. L. Hickerson
Nancy Anne Langdon, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Edward K. Langdon of Locust Valley, L.I., was married there yesterday to Matthew Leonard Hickerson, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Leonard R. Hickerson of Centerport, L.I.
The Rev.
Richard O. Harig performed the Episcopal ceremony at St.
John's of Lattingtown Church.
Mrs.
Langdon-Hickerson, 28, is a candidate for a Ph.D. in clinical psychology at the State University at Stony Brook, L.I.
She graduated from Johns Hopkins University.


Some On-Line Discoveries Give Gay Youths a Path to Themselves
One night not long ago, Ryan Matsuno, 17, turned on his father's new computer, dialed America Online and typed out a plaint of loneliness: "Does anyone else feel like you're the only gay guy on the planet, or at least in Arlington, Tex.?"
Mr.
Matsuno had never before told his secret, and when he came out of the closet by posting his message on a computer bulletin board for gay teen-agers, the response was overwhelming.


Brooklyn Churchgoers Protest Pastor's Arrest in Ticket Dispute
About 300 people protested outside a police station house in Bedford-Stuyvesant, Brooklyn, early yesterday, demanding the release of a minister arrested after a fight with police officers who were ticketing double-parked cars outside his church.
Some of the protesters crowded into the precinct house's tiny lobby, while others milled about on the sidewalk, chanting, praying and clapping.


A Revival in the Spirit Of Original 'Fair Lady'
SINCE when does the reaction of an audience matter when one is seeing "My Fair Lady" for the umpteenth time?
Since last Sunday night at the Gateway Playhouse in Bellport.


Mexico's Question: Who's in Charge, Anyway?
Since he abandoned index cards and started using a Teleprompter last month to give important speeches, Ernesto Zedillo has started to look less like a timid schoolteacher thrust into the spotlight and more like the President of the 11th largest country in the world.
But after seven difficult months in which his leadership has been constantly doubted, and Mexico has at times seemed on the verge of chaos, the Teleprompter may be the only way Mr.
Zedillo has lately appeared to be in control.


The 'Plaza' At Pershing Sq.: Hot Lunch Spot
Inspired by the hundreds of office workers flocking to the renovated Bryant Park to eat lunch on the lawn, a small-scale version of open-air dining has sprouted on a strip of pavement in the congested Grand Central district.
Every weekday -- weather permitting -- vehicles are barred from part of Park Avenue between 41st and 42d Streets from 11 A.M. to 3 P.M.
Green tables and chairs are set up, a food cart offers sandwiches, salads and soft drinks, and musicians provide entertainment ranging from jazz to polka.


Barbara L. Zinn and Jay Moore
Barbara Lynne Zinn, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Sidney Genser of Boca Raton, Fla., is to be married today to James O. Moore, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
James Moore of Smithstown, L.I.
The Rev.
Lawrence Buskirk, a United Methodist minister, is to officiate at the Litchfield Plantation in Pawleys Island, S.C.


How Adding One Comma Can Subvert 'Richard III'
To the Editor:
Your article on a junior high school's sequels to "Henry VI" ("The Bards of Brooklyn Bring You Blood, Guts and Wargret," June 11), by wrongly inserting a comma following the word "discontent," completely misinterprets, as many others have done before, the opening lines of "Richard III."
You wrote: "Now is the winter of our discontent, made glorious summer by this son of York."


Abortion Foes Eager to Flex '96 Muscle
Only two years ago, they were defeated and discouraged.
But abortion opponents who gathered here this week expressed such eagerness to press their agenda that more than once their leaders cautioned them not to overreach.
Emboldened by electoral victories last year, by the death of Dr.
Henry W. Foster Jr.'s nomination for Surgeon General and by the bright prospects of several Congressional bills to curb abortion, participants at the annual convention of the National Right to Life Committee, the nation's largest anti-abortion group, said their next targets were President Clinton and political candidates at all levels who favor abortion rights.


On Sunday; Your Party Isn't There; Neither Is She
LAST night was the first in a long time that Carolyn E. Dolan could sleep straight through, eight whole hours of shut-eye if she wanted it, without the bullfrog sound interrupting things.
In her studio apartment on the East Side, with the leather-bound National Geographics on the windowsill and the battleship-gray filing cabinets that serve as a room divider, the telephone does not ring, it snorts, like a lily pad-dweller letting loose a "ribbit."
Until yesterday, when she retired, there were a lot of ribbits at Miss Dolan's: she ran a one-person answering service.
Lately she had about 50 clients -- doctors, restaurateurs, ballet dancers.
At her peak some years ago, she had 300, and somehow squeezed five employees into her apartment.
A Volkswagen Beetle had more leg room.


The World: Electoral Confusion; So Far at Least, Inept Is the Kindest Word For Haitian Democracy
LOOKING at the long lines of Haitians who waited patiently and peacefully for hours under a broiling sun to cast their ballots last week, President Jean-Bertrand Aristide saw "a clear sign of political maturity." Looking at the disorganization that reigned at polling places and in vote counting centers afterward, American election observers from the International Republican Institute saw a complete "national breakdown of the electoral process."
By all accounts, Haiti's first attempt in nearly five years to carry out a democratic vote turned out to be a seriously flawed exercise.
On voting day, hundreds of polling places opened hours late or did not open at all because ballots were not received, while others got ballots with the names of some candidates missing.
Then the count quickly deteriorated, with ballots and tally sheets being scattered about, mixed together, replaced entirely or reportedly altered, and even thrown away as garbage.


Small Pleasures That Cool the City's Big Heat; Experts Pick: The Ways (And Wheres) To Picnic
RUTH REICHL
When I lived in California my idea of a great picnic was to climb into the car, all by myself, with something wonderful to eat.
There is nothing like the guilty pleasure of roaring down the freeway with the radio blasting, the wheel in one hand and a leg of chicken in the other while the juice from a single ripe peach drips slowly down your cheek.


Stalking the World's Elusive Emerging Markets
AS one of the first mutual fund managers to dive into emerging markets like Turkey and Argentina nearly a decade ago, J. Mark Mobius is used to being ahead of the crowd.
But now that the crowd has overrun many of his favorite haunts, Mr.
Mobius seems to be hanging back.
The 58-year-old stock picker, who runs two well-regarded funds in the Franklin Templeton Group and endlessly circles the globe stalking bargains, is sitting on a mound of cash.


Camelot


Ms. Shvakman, Mr. Gonzalez-Seoane
Irene Shvakman, the daughter of Lidia Shan of Philadelphia and the late Mikhail Shvakman, was marrried yesterday to Jose Carlos Gonzalez-Seoane, the son of Jose Ramon Gonzalez Ponte and Clemen Seoane Barral of La Coruna, Spain.
Mayor Gerardo Estevez of Santiago de Compostela, Spain, performed the ceremony in the city hall there.
Ms.
Shvakman, 27, is keeping her name.
She is a consultant in the Moscow office of McKinsey &amp; Company, the management consultants.
She graduated cum laude from Brown University and received her M.B.A. from Harvard University.
Her mother is a research chemist for Webcraft Technologies in New Brunswick, N.J.
Mr.
Gonzalez-Seoane, 33, is a founder and the president of Fontenla &amp; Seoane, architects in New York and La Coruna.
He graduated from the University of Santiago and received his master's degree in architecture from Columbia University.
His father retired as a civil engineer at the Bilbao office of Rense, the Spanish railroad company.


The China Problem
China's Prime Minister, Li Peng, was in Moscow last week, urging that Russia and China stand together against alleged American bullying.
Twenty-five years after Richard Nixon courted China to help contain the Soviet Union, China is playing its own version of triangular diplomacy to exert leverage on the United States.
The gambit was further evidence that relations between Washington and Beijing, once the pride of American diplomacy, are profoundly troubled.
It will take a combination of patience and firmness by President Clinton to stabilize the relationship while not sacrificing American interests.
The United States has a clear interest in maintaining good relations with Beijing.
China is a nuclear power, one of the world's fastest-growing economies and home to one-fifth of the world's population.
American companies have invested more than $7 billion there since 1979 and export about $9 billion worth of goods to China annually.
The United States also imports nearly $40 billion worth of Chinese goods, making China America's sixth-largest trading partner.


90's Campers Rough It in a Fiberglass Cocoon
On the ragged coast of one of America's wildest, most remote national parks, Susan Lybarger poked her head out her tent this morning, surrounded by a forest of fiberglass.
Among the last old-fashioned campers, she and her family had bravely staked out two nylon domes in a dusty lot full of three-ton motor homes, converted buses and 40-foot-long vehicles with names like Kountry Comfort.
In the campground of 1995, where an occasional eagle can be seen flying over satellite dishes mounted on trailer roofs, Kampers rule.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
INCREDIBLE ELFEGO BACA  Good Man, Bad Man of the Old West.
By Howard Bryan.
Clear Light, cloth, $22.95; paper, $14.95.


A Guide to Researching the History of a Building
IT'S like the weather: Everybody talks about the history of their buildings, but nobody does anything about it.
And why should they?
While historic preservation has become an industry, there is no manual, guidebook or even a list of the commonest sources for local-history research in New York City.
The blind alleys and travel time between archives can discourage even the most dedicated researchers; novices often give up, not knowing how close they may be to their goal.
And so New York's history usually remains a remote, inaccessible idea.
No wonder walking-tour guides get by with outlandish tales.


Bookshelf
HERSTORY: Women Who Changed the World.
Edited by Ruth Ashby and Deborah Gore Ohrn.
Viking. $19.95. (Ages 10 and up) Here are 120 biographical sketches of women from around the world, from ancient times to the present, ranging from Queen Hatshepsut to Rigoberta Menchu.
Helpful introductory material, bibliography and indexes.
A great book for browsing.


Rezoning Worries Gay Residents
Mayor Giuliani's proposal to rezone sex businesses in the city is generally associated with closing down the pornographic movie houses and peep shows that clutter Times Square.
But many of the city's gay and lesbian residents are concerned that it will also force the closing of sex-related establishments that they say are key to the identity and vitality of their community.
On Wednesday night, at the Lesbian and Gay Community Center on West 13th Street, nearly 100 people gathered for a forum about the new zoning proposal, which limits sex businesses to manufacturing areas and commercial zones and is expected to initially reduce the number of such businesses to 15 from 177.


Christy A. Ottaviano, Kevin P. Ohe
Christy Ann Ottaviano, a daughter of Marilyn and Mario Ottaviano of Westport, Conn., is to be married today to Kevin Patrick Ohe, a son of Jacqueline and Paul Ohe of Cincinnati.
The Rev.
Terrence Baum is to officiate at the Roman Catholic Church of St.
Agnes in Brooklyn.
The couple, both 28, work at Henry Holt &amp; Company in New York, a publishing company where the bride is an assistant children's book editor and the bridegroom is an assistant reference book editor.
They received master's degrees in English literature from Boston College.
She graduated from St.
Michael's College and is a candidate for a master's degree in education at Columbia University.
He graduated from Miami University in Oxford, Ohio.


London Living, Under a Camera's Icy Gaze
MIKE IS HAVING A HARD time adjusting to life in London.
Wearing a baseball cap that seems glued to his head, he slouches into a snack bar and peers suspiciously at the food behind the glass.
"What's a tom?" he demands, jabbing at one of the sandwich signs.
"It's a tomato," responds the clerk, who by now must heartily hate Mike, and possibly all Americans.


Susan Webb and Robert K. McCabe
Susan Meek Stocker Webb and Robert Karr McCabe were married yesterday in the American Cathedral of Paris.
The Very Rev.
Ernest E. Hunt, the Dean of the cathedral, performed the Episcopal ceremony.
Mrs.
McCabe is a daughter of Mrs.
Samuel W. Meek of Greenwich, Conn., and the late Mr.
Meek, who was a vice chairman and director of international operations for J. Walter Thompson, the advertising agency in New York.
The bride attended Vassar College.
She was a widow.


The Park Bench Is Leaving the Park Behind
BE THEY EXTRAVAGANZAS IN wrought iron or ever so humble conceptions in wood and cement, park benches offer more than places to sit.
Thanks in part to a gardening boom and the 1994 film "Forrest Gump," they are being appreciated far from public parks -- on suburban lawns, patios and even in the parlor.
Vintage benches -- from parks, gardens and stadiums -- look great anywhere, says Martha Stewart, today's Emily Post of home style.
Ms.
Stewart was in the vanguard of decorating with benches in the 1980's, using them both outdoors and inside her homes in Connecticut and on Long Island.
Nothing spiffy, mind you; the more rustic, the better.
"They can be chipped and worn," she says, "but they must never feel like that. Old benches must be waxed and buffed so there are no rough edges unfriendly to sitters."


Hilary J. Binda and Cary S. Honig
Hilary Janine Binda, the daughter of Margaret Smith Churchill Binda of Washington and H. Jeffrey Binda of Chevy Chase, Md., is to be married today to Cary S. Honig, the son of Dorothy and Dr.
Arnold Honig of Little Neck, Queens.
Rabbi Emily Matthis is to perform the ceremony at the Casino in Roger Williams Park in Providence, R.I.
The bride, 29, was until recently the English coordinator at School One, an alternative high school in Providence, where the bridegroom, 37, is a teacher of English and physical education.
In the fall, she is to begin studying for her Ph.D. in English at Tufts University.
The couple graduated from Brown University.
The bridegroom received a law degree from Harvard University and a master's degree in teaching from Brown.


Britain's Future (and Major's) at Stake
The Conservative Party's leadership election on Tuesday, in which Prime Minister John Major has staked his future, is not just about who will lead the party.
It is also about which direction the party should take -- toward or away from further integration into Europe.
The vote will turn on many other questions, including the length of Mr.
Major's coattails in a general election, but the subtheme is a debate that has bedeviled political parties here since Britain joined the European Economic Community in 1973.


SUNDAY, July 2, 1995; A QUESTION FOR: Schuyler Chapin
Q: If you were going to be stuck on a desert island with your three favorite pieces of music, which would they be?


Reach Out and Subsidize Your Favorite Cause
SEVERAL months ago, Rich Ciacelli Sr. received yet another plea to switch long-distance services.
The only difference was that this one came not from MCI or Sprint, but from a conservation group of which he was a member.
The mailed solicitation said that he would get lower phone rates and that his group, the Michigan United Conservation Corps, would get a contribution if he began using Frontier Communications International, a fast-growing long-distance carrier in Rochester.
Mr.
Ciacelli, a retired Ford Motor worker and an avid duck hunter in Monroe, Mich., said he liked the idea that by telephoning his daughter in Tennessee, he could help his local conservation group.
So he abandoned AT&amp;T.


Monitoring the North Brooklyn Muck: Watchdog Steps In
Deborah Masters has her work cut out for her.
In her new role as a local environmental monitor for the city, she will be responsible for keeping tabs on Greenpoint and Williamsburg, two areas that have long had more than their share of toxic woes.
It is an area where industry abuts residences, companies work with hazardous chemicals, a massive oil spill has seeped under the streets, and a project to clean the Williamsburg Bridge spewed lead dust into homes.
And there is proliferation of waste-transfer stations, temporary dumps where trash is held before being sent to landfills.


Union Stops Work at a Breakaway Hotel
More than 200 waiters, bellhops, clerks and other unionized employees struck a luxury hotel on the East Side of Manhattan yesterday in a bitter contract dispute that forced guests to run a gantlet of screaming pickets and left managers scrambling to carry luggage, serve food and make beds.
As visitors poured into New York City for the long Fourth of July weekend, the walkout at the 550-room Drake Swissotel at Park Avenue and 56th Street was an annoying inconvenience for 330 guests, who hurried past whistle-blowing, placard-toting pickets into the relative serenity of the wood-paneled, marble-and-mirror lobby.


A Prep School of Their Own
The Upper East Side is home to many of the city's best known private schools, like Brearley and Dalton.
But not all parents in the neighborhood can afford to send children to them -- nor are they satisfied with the choice of public high schools.
While school is out for the summer, a group of residents will spend the vacation months pressuring city school officials to create a small local high school offering college-preparatory courses with high academic standards.


Where Rusticity and Elegance Mingle
BURKE'S ROADHOUSE in Southampton has become Take Five.
The rustic camaraderie of its past and the elegant promise of its future now mingle.
At the bar, locals in baseball hats watch sporting events on the two large overhead television sets.
A few feet away diners are enjoying captivating French-inspired food in a flower-filled room to the strains of standards played on a grand piano.


Mechants of Debt
ON Wall Street, a small army of computer jockeys keeps busy culling mounds of market data in search of hidden treasure.
Using complicated statistical models, these quantitative analysts, or quants, try to sniff out undervalued securities, profitable currency plays and the like.
Here, on Kearny Street, the quants at Providian Bancorp are busy, too.
Their computer screens are sifting a different kind of data, about the borrowing habits of credit card users.
But their quarry is just as rich a trove as Wall Street's: middle- and lower-income consumers who want, or need, to borrow a lot of money and are the least inclined to shop for the best terms.


Christina Haage, David Rowntree
Christina Mary Haage, a daughter of Joseph and Phyllis Haage of Reading, Pa., is to be married today to Dr.
David Cedric Rowntree, the son of Peter and Dr.
Ellen Rowntree of Scarsdale, N.Y.
The Rev.
Erika Simone Jefferson, a United Methodist minister, is to perform the ceremony at the Houghton Memorial Chapel at Wellesley College in Wellesley, Mass.
Ms.
Haage is a vice president of the Boston Company, an investment services firm, in Boston.
She graduated from Northeastern University.
Her father retired as the director of guidance counselors at Reading High School in Reading.
Her mother retired as a legal secretary for Ryan, Russell &amp; McConaghy in Reading.


Susanne Edmundson, Eric Odelfelt
Susanne Elisabeth Edmundson, a daughter of Maria and Lennart Edmundson of Linkoping, Sweden, was married yesterday in Stockholm to Eric Andreas Odelfelt, the son of Mrs.
Thomas L. Pulling of Oyster Bay, L.I., and Lars Andreas Odelfelt of Stockholm.
The Rev.
Goran Beijier performed the Lutheran ceremony at St.
Jacob's Church.
Mrs.
Odelfelt, 32, is a nurse at the Karolinska Hospital in Stockholm.
She graduated from Sodertalje Vardskola in Sodertalje, Sweden.
Her father is the director of operations for Stangataden, a real estate company in Linkoping.


NEW YORKERS &amp; CO.
Chefs Stalking Exotic Game Will Find Targets in TriBeCa
New Yorkers will soon be able to buy 800 types of exotic farm-raised game like ostrich and kangaroo, along with the more common deer and pheasant, at a retail store, Polarica, scheduled to open in the fall at 73 Hudson Street in TriBeCa.


Manager Shot in Robbery at Supermarket
A manager at a crowded Upper West Side supermarket was shot twice in the chest yesterday as he struggled with an armed robber who had taken two bundles of money from a cash register, the police and store officials said.
The gunman, armed with a .380-caliber automatic, walked into the Sloan's supermarket at 88th Street and Broadway at about 4 P.M., as three cashiers were working their way through long lines of customers.
He demanded money from the manager, Cesar Pellerano, 32.
Mr.
Pellerano handed over an unknown amount of cash, Officer Robert Samuel, a spokesman for the Police Department, said.
But as the robber was leaving the store, Mr.
Pellerano chased him and the two fought, Officer Samuel said.


Miss Goldstein, Rabbi Fogelman
Ahuva Goldstein, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Jacob Z. Goldstein of Brooklyn, was married on Thursday to Rabbi Mordechai Fogelman, a son of Rabbi and Mrs.
Hershel Fogelman of Worcester, Mass.
Rabbi Yehuda K. Marlow performed the ceremony at Lubavitch World Headquarters in Brooklyn.
Mrs.
Fogelman, 22, teaches the seventh and eighth grades at the Yeshiva R'tzahd, a boys' school in Brooklyn.
She graduated from Beth Rivkah Teachers College in Kfar Chabad, Israel, and in the fall will resume her studies at Brooklyn College.


Orange County's Threat to Us All
A great many local governments are going through fiscal crises this year, but only one -- Orange County, California -- has actually filed for bankruptcy.
The latest blow to the county came when voters in this very wealthy area rejected a modest sales-tax increase that was essential to averting insolvency.
Orange County is not broke, however.
It is simply refusing to pay its debts because voters remain in the thrall of their anti-tax ideology.
Their arrogance is roiling the bond markets and threatening to raise interest rates for governments everywhere.
Certainly Orange County voters have a right to be incensed at the failure and incompetence of their leadership over many years.
But when the county treasurer, Robert Citron, invested county funds in high-risk derivatives that yielded rich dividends and avoided the need for a tax increase in the county, nobody was complaining very much.


TAKING AFFIRMATIVE ACTION APART
We regret that Lemann's interesting article did not identify Ira Ellman, the law clerk who worked with Justice Douglas on the DeFunis opinion.
Professor Ellman is a tenured member of the faculty of the Arizona State University College of Law and, currently, the principal reporter for the American Law Institute Family Law Project.
HANNAH ARTERIAN Associate Dean and Professor of Law Arizona State University Tempe, Ariz.


IN BRIEF
Lawyers May Be Fined For Filing Frivolous Suits
The State Supreme Court took a serious view of frivolous law suits last week.
It called upon the court system's Civil Practice Committee to come up with a new rule that could levy fines or other kinds of monetary penalties on lawyers found guilty of filing such suits.


Politics and Friendship
HISTORY ON A PERSONAL NOTE By Binnie Kirshenbaum. 178 pp.
New York: Fromm International.
Paper, $10.


Reporter's Notebook; With Skepticism and Tax Cuts for All
As they pushed their budget plan through the House and Senate on Thursday, Republicans insisted that they could cut taxes by $245 billion over the next seven years and still balance the budget by 2002.
One Republican after another pointed to the agreement that none of the tax cuts would go into effect unless the Congressional Budget Office certified this fall that the overall plan, including the lower taxes, would lead to a balanced budget in seven years.


NEWS OF A LIFETIME
I'm 42, and grew up listening to my father read interesting obits to us at the kitchen table. (He's 83 and still reading them; we often call long distance to share our reactions to "worthy" lives.)


Corrections
An article on June 4 about hotels in Stockholm incorrectly characterized the Malardrottningen, a yacht that is now a hotel.
When it was built in 1924 as the Vanadis, the yacht was not the biggest private yacht in the world.
There were at least eight larger yachts at the time.


Neighbors Black and White: A Householder's Experience
To the Editor:
Re your June 11 article "School Colors," in which a Bergenfield said, "I'm not prejudiced, but blacks moving in will hurt property values":


CHILDREN'S BOOKS
TRUPP  A Fuzzhead Tale.
Written and illustrated by Janell Cannon.
Unpaged.
New York: Harcourt Brace &amp; Company.


Food Takes a Cafe Beyond Fun and Games
NIGHTCLUBS are for fun, not food.
Serious diners steer clear of them.
It is not unusual to find mediocre or inferior fare and exorbitant prices at restaurants that emphasize entertainment.
The Borderline Cafe in Brookhaven is best known as a weekend comedy club, not for its cuisine.
The rest of the time this roadhouse at 2647 Montauk Highway (286-8077) promotes everything but its cooking, including karaoke, backyard volleyball games, a piano player and jazz.


The Nation: Gavel Rousers; Farewell to the Old Order in the Court
THE birth struggle of a new era is not a pretty sight.
It is messy, it is unstable, it is riveting.
It was the Supreme Court during the 1994-95 term that ended on Thursday.
An ascendant bloc of three conservative Justices with an appetite for fundamental, even radical change drove the Court on a re-examination of basic Constitutional principles.
Long-held assumptions about the authority of the national government, the relationship between Washington and the states, and the ability of the Federal Government to take race into account in making public policy were all placed on the table for dissection.
Some precedents were overruled, others sharply limited in a gaudy show of zero-based jurisprudence.


Residential Resales
In the following reports, the "listed at" price is the asking price when negotiations began that ended in the sale.
Time on market is from most recent listing to contract.
MANHATTAN
CHELSEA  $275,000
249 West 29th Street  2-bedroom, 1-bath, 1,865-sq.-ft. co-op in a loft building; elevator, renovated kitchen, 11-ft.-high ceilings, 3 exposures; maintenance $1,024, 70% tax-deductible, listed at $285,000, 2 weeks on market (Brokers: Bascom &amp; Sears; Big City Management)  GREENWICH VILLAGE  $360,000
79 Washington Place  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,200-sq.-ft. co-op in a prewar building; elevator, fireplace, washer/dryer; maintenance $1,527, 65% tax-deductible, listed at $385,000, 17 weeks on market (Broker: J.I. Sopher)  SOHO  $970,000
134 Greene Street  1-bedroom, 2-bath, 3,200-sq.-ft. co-op in a loft building; private elevator, brick walls, 14-ft.-high tin ceilings, columns, terrace, 2 exposures; maintenance $1,000, 50% tax-deductible, listed at $1.1 million, 3 weeks on market (Broker: Ambrose Mar-Elia)  WEST MIDTOWN  $465,000
150 West 56th Street  (CitySpire)  2-bedrooom, 2 1/2-bath, 1,200-sq.-ft. condo in a 7-year-old building; 24-hr. doormen, concierge, pool, 2 exposures; common charge $671, taxes $7,248, listed at $490,000, 4 weeks on market (Broker: Corcoran Group)  BRONX
RIVERDALE  $130,000
750 Kappock Street  (Glen Brier)  2-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath postwar co-op; 24-hr. doormen, dining ell, renovated kitchen, terrace, Hudson River view; maintenance $836, including parking space; 58% tax-deductible, listed at $140,000, 3 weeks on market (Broker: Susan E. Goldy)  WAKEFIELD  $140,000
4335 Byron Avenue  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 70-year-old detached frame house; dining room, enclosed porch, playroom, 1-car garage; taxes $840, listed at $155,000, 3 weeks on market (Broker: J.A.V.)
BROOKLYN
BROOKLYN HEIGHTS  $335,000
104 Pierrepont Street  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,450-sq.-ft. co-op in a brownstone; 2 fireplaces, private roof deck; maintenance $825, 60% tax-deductible, listed at $335,000, 1 week on market (Broker: Brooklyn Landmark Realty)  KENSINGTON  $185,000
412 East 4th Street  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath detached wood-frame house; dining room, eat-in kitchen, fireplace, finished basement, 1-car garage; taxes $1,300, listed at $205,000, 26 weeks on market (Broker: Homes 'R' Beautiful)  PARK SLOPE  $265,000
35 Prospect Park West  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,100-sq.-ft. co-op in a prewar building; 24-hr. doormen, elevator, dining area, fireplace, hardwood floors; maintenance $684, 48% tax-deductible, listed at $285,000, 17 weeks on market (Broker: F.J. Kazeroid)  QUEENS
FOREST HILLS  $315,000
89-29 69th Road  3-family, 53-year-old semi-attached brick house; 2 bedrooms, dining room in primary unit; 1 bedroom, eat-in kitchen in others; finished basement, 2-car garage; taxes $2,500, listed at $349,000, 14 weeks on market (Broker: Dix)  STATEN ISLAND
HUGUENOT  $348,500
924 Edgegrove Avenue  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 11-year-old detached Tudor; dining room, eat-in kitchen, family room; taxes $2,800, listed at $359,900, 12 weeks on market (Broker: Linda Nasta Realtors)  NEW SPRINGVILLE  $85,000
18 Kathy Place  2-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 1,086-sq.-ft. condo; fenced patio, pool, tennis court; common charge $139; taxes $900, listed at $92,000, 26 weeks on market (Broker: Kingsley)  NEW JERSEY
CAPE MAY  $166,000
2 Solar Way  3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 9-year-old colonial; eat-in-kitchen, family room, 1-car garage, deck; taxes $3,167, listed at $174,900, 30 weeks on market (Broker: DeMusz)  FORKED RIVER  $114,500
558 Vaughn Avenue  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 9-year-old ranch; large country kitchen, fenced rear yard w/above-ground pool, master bedroom with bath; taxes $1,738, listed at $117,007, 9 weeks on market (Broker: Weichert)  MILLSTONE  $355,000  11 Groen Dyke Circle  5-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, 3-year-old colonial; 2-car garage, eat-in kitchen, walk-in closets; taxes $6,500, listed at $369,900, 11 weeks on market (Broker: Prudential New Jersey)  OCEAN CITY  $176,000
2932 Simpson Avenue  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 7-year-old Cape Cod; c/a, deck, eat-in kitchen, 1-car garage; taxes $1,800, listed at $179,000, 21 weeks on market (Broker: The Richards Agency)  CONNECTICUT
FAIRFIELD  $442,000
341 Orchard Hill Lane  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 10-year-old colonial; cathedral ceilings, family room, rear deck, 2-car garage, .53-acre lot; taxes $6,475, listed at $439,900, 9 weeks on market (Broker: William Pitt Real Estate)  NEW CANAAN  $480,000
26 Kelley Green  3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 65-year-old cape cod; new baths, dormers, family room addition, 2-car garage, .33-acre lot; taxes $4,529, listed at $515,000, 35 weeks on market (Brokers: Realty Guild; William Pitt)  WALLINGFORD  $150,000
9 Laurel Ridge Court  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 1-year-old raised-ranch; h/w floors, fireplace, 2-car garage, 1/2-acre lot on cul-de-sac; taxes $1,800, listed at $154,900, 8 weeks on market (Brokers: Beazley; Coldwell Banker)  WESTPORT  $334,000
126 Steephill Road  3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 40-year-old wood-frame ranch; dining room, eat-in kitchen, 2 fireplaces, finished basement, 2-car garage, 2 acres; taxes $4,535, listed at $355,000, 8 weeks on market (Brokers: Preferred Properties; Riverside)  WESTCHESTER
CHAPPAQUA  $205,000
800 King Street  4-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 183-year-old colonial; greenhouse window, garden room, patio, French doors, .50 acre; taxes $3,994, listed at $250,000, 50 weeks on market (Brokers: North Castle; The Prudential Rita Cohen)  GREENBURGH  $215,000
5 Thorncliff Lane  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 45-year-old cape cod; sleeping loft, den, dining room, eat-in kitchen, fireplace, 1-car garage, attic, .33 acre; taxes $4,983, listed at $219,000, 19 weeks on market (Broker: Century 21 Wolff)  LARCHMONT  $285,000
26 Lester Place
Multifamily, 69-year-old detached stucco house; 3-bedroom, 2-bath unit; two 1-bedroom units, 2 efficiency units; taxes $6,581, listed at $299,000, 69 weeks on market (Broker: Houghton &amp; Banks)  WHITE PLAINS  $620,000  258 Soundview Avenue  6-bedroom, 4 1/2-bath, 73-year-old Mediterranean; ballroom, Florentine fireplace, Palladian doors, patio, pool, tennis court, 1.6 acres; listed at $650,000, 20 weeks on market (Brokers: Century 21 Wolff; The Foxes)  LONG ISLAND
FARMINGDALE  $240,000
15 Hallock Street  6-bedroom, 3-bath, 35-year-old 2-family colonial; two 3-bedroom units each with dining room and eat-in kitchen; finished basement, 2-car garage; taxes $7,700, listed at $244,000, 4 weeks on market (Brokers: A-1 Realty, Network of Homes)  GLEN HEAD  $500,000
20 Knoll Lane  6-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, 8-year-old contemporary; dining room, eat-in kitchen, finished basement, maid's room, pool, deck, 2-car attached garage; taxes $8,800, listed at $529,000, 12 weeks on market (Brokers: Daniel Gale MacCrate; Coldwell Banker Sammis)  ISLIP  $610,000
195 East Bayberry Road  4-bedroom, 4-bath, 50-year-old colonial; dining room, new eat-in kitchen, family room, fireplace, 2-car garage, 1.2 acres, 243-foot waterfront with boat slip; taxes $13,658, listed at $695,000, 18 weeks on market (Broker: Eric G. Ramsay Jr. Associates)  WILLISTON PARK  $217,500
19 Winthrop Street  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 55-year-old colonial; dining room, new eat-in kitchen, attic, finished basement, 1-car garage, deck; taxes $4,100, listed at $229,000, 1 week on market (Broker: Atanas)


Books to Refer to for Problem Plants
Which plants are thriving in your garden and which are not?
The origin of a plant is the key to its needs, so look up a problem plant in some good reference work like "Herbaceous Perennial Plants" by Allan M. Armitage (Varsity Press, 1989) or "Perennials for American Gardens" by Ruth Rogers Clausen and Nicolas H. Ekstrom (Random House, 1989).
"Annuals for Connoisseurs," by Wayne Winterrowd (Prentice Hall, 1992), is a great guide for interesting annuals.
Plant seeds of perennials like yarrow, coneflowers and butterfly weed, and biennials like hollyhocks and foxglove now, so the seedlings will have time to grow into sturdy plants by fall.
Choose a seedbed protected from the blazing sun, and keep it moist, to help seeds germinate.


NEWS OF A LIFETIME
Your article inspired me to write.
I'll bet obituary (I prefer the full word) writers do not realize they have fans.
I even have two of of Alden Whitman's books.
WILLIAM STOCKDALE Putnam, Conn.


Tessa Hanover, Kenneth Boorom
Theresa Mary Hanover, the daughter of Joyce Mae Hanover of Yachats, Ore., and the late Lawrence H. Hanover, was married yesterday to Kenneth Fiske Boorom, a son of Virginia and Warren Boorom of Riverside, Conn.
The Rev.
Ken Hiner, a Roman Catholic deacon, performed the ceremony at St.
John's Cathedral in Boise, Idaho.
Mrs.
Hanover-Boorom, who is known as Tessa, is an environmental technician for the Idaho Power Company, a utility in Boise.
Until recently she was an archeological assistant at the Oregon Museum of Anthropology in Eugene.
She graduated from the University of Oregon.
Her father retired as a foreman of experimental assembly for Pratt &amp; Whitney, the jet engine maker in East Hartford, Conn.


Jennifer Hof, Samuel Gomez Garces
Jennifer Marsh Hof, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert M. Hof of Forest Hills Gardens, Queens, was married yesterday to Samuel Dario Gomez Garces, a son of Hortensia Gomez Garces of New York and Gonzalo Gomez of Medellin, Colombia.
The Rev.
David E. Rowe, a Congregational minister, officiated at the Church in the Gardens in Forest Hills Gardens.
Mrs.
Gomez, 26, is an associate equity analyst in New York at Alex.
Brown &amp; Sons, the investment firm.
She graduated from Smith College.
Her father and her mother, Susanna L. Hof, own Terrace Realty, a real estate business in Forest Hills Gardens that was founded by the bride's maternal grandparents, Virginia and David MacInnes of Forest Hills Gardens.


Neuberger Show Reviews Trends in Mexican Photography
To the question, "What's new in Mexican photography?" the American Federation of Arts reponds with "A Shadow Born of Earth," a touring show making its final appearance, through Aug. 6, at the Neuberger Museum at Purchase College.
Elizabeth Ferrer, who serves the Asia Society in Manhattan as both the curator of its gallery and the head of its visual arts department, organized the spectacle, choosing 16 photographers aged 31 to 55.
She also wrote the bilingual catalogue.
Americans expecting poverty, devout catholicism, obsession with death, evidence of oppression but no sign of the oppressors will not be disappointed: Social Realism lives on in Mexican art, though in diluted form.
Still, viewers may be surprised to see signs of the narcissism that, coupled with undue emphasis on technique, bespeaks the condition of entropy known as Post-Modernism.
Though the malaise transcends national boundaries, its progress may well be accelerated by personal contacts with the industrialized countries.
Most of these photographers completed their studies in the United States or Europe.


BEST SELLERS: July 2, 1995
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
2
10
THE RAINMAKER, by John Grisham. (Doubleday, $25.95.) A young man barely out of law school tries to expose a corporation's multibillion-dollar scam.
2
1
151
THE BRIDGES OF MADISON COUNTY, by Robert James Waller. (Warner, $17.95.) A photographer and a farmer's lonely wife in Iowa.
3
1
ROSE MADDER, by Stephen King. (Viking, $25.95.) Fleeing an abusive husband, a woman seeks happiness in a strange city by creating her own myth.
4
3
5
THE APOCALYPSE WATCH, by Robert Ludlum. (Bantam, $24.95.) Tracking a neo-Nazi movement with designs on American and European officials.
5
6
70
THE CELESTINE PROPHECY, by James Redfield. (Warner, $17.95.) An ancient manuscript, found in Peru, provides insights into achieving a fulfilling life.
6
5
8
LET ME CALL YOU SWEETHEART, by Mary Higgins Clark. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $24.) An unusual murder case haunts a prosecutor's career and her private life.
7
8
54
POLITICALLY CORRECT BEDTIME STORIES, by James Finn Garner. (Macmillan, $8.95.) Classic tales respun to avoid offending current sensibilities.
8
4
145
OH, THE PLACES YOU'LL GO! by Dr.
Seuss. (Random House, $15.) The problems of finding your way through life; in verse and pictures.
9
7
7
ONCE UPON A MORE ENLIGHTENED TIME, by James Finn Garner. (Macmillan, $9.95.) Eight more "politically correct bedtime stories."
10
11
4
STRANGE HIGHWAYS, by Dean Koontz. (Tartikoff/Warner, $23.95.) A collection of suspense tales, including novels, novellas and short stories.
11
9
10
LADDER OF YEARS, by Anne Tyler. (Knopf, $24.) At 40, a woman leaves her physician husband and children to start a new life in a strange town.
12*
1
REDEMPTION, by Leon Uris. (HarperCollins, $25.) In a sequel to "Trinity," the Larkin family continues to fight for Irish independence.
13*
10
6
MIND PREY, by John Sandford. (Putnam, $23.95.) Lucas Davenport pursues the kidnapper of a psychiatrist and her two daughters.
14
1
THE WITNESS, by Sandra Brown. (Warner, $21.95.) A seemingly happy public defender and wife is plunged into a morass of bigotry and hate.
15
12
2
MYSTIQUE, by Amanda Quick. (Bantam, $21.95.) A medieval English warrior, on a search for a crystal that will make him the master of new lands, finds love.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Nonfiction
1
11
2
A GOOD WALK SPOILED, by John Feinstein. (Little, Brown, $23.95.) A sportswriter reports on the P.G.A.
Tour in 1993 and 1994.
2
3
5
DAVE BARRY'S COMPLETE GUIDE TO GUYS, by Dave Barry. (Random House, $21.) A humorist explains the strange ways of a species of males called "guys."
3
1
38
THE HOT ZONE, by Richard Preston. (Random House, $23.) The discovery of the deadly Ebola virus in Virginia and the efforts to keep it from spreading.
4
4
5
SPONTANEOUS HEALING, by Andrew Weil. (Knopf, $23.) A physician explains the ways in which the body heals itself.
5*
5
69
MIDNIGHT IN THE GARDEN OF GOOD AND EVIL, by John Berendt. (Random House, $23.) The mysterious death of a young man in Savannah, Ga.
6
2
27
SISTERS, by Carol Saline.
Photographs by Sharon J. Wohlmuth. (Running Press, $27.50.) The relationships of 36 sets of sisters, reported in words and pictures.
7
7
10
IN RETROSPECT, by Robert S. McNamara with Brian VanDeMark. (Times Books/Random House, $27.50.) The author recalls his role in the Vietnam War.
8
6
20
THE DEATH OF COMMON SENSE, by Philip K. Howard. (Random House, $18.) How governmental rules and regulations are fettering the lives of all Americans.
9
8
80
THE BOOK OF VIRTUES, by William J. Bennett. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $30.) Moral stories adapted from the Greeks, the Bible, folklore and elsewhere.
10
10
2
NEW PASSAGES, by Gail Sheehy. (Random House, $25.) How changing social conditions and longer life expectancies are affecting our lives.
11
1
By GEORGE, by George Foreman and Joel Engel. (Villard, $23.) The autobiography of the heavyweight champion.
12
9
4
KATO KAELIN, by Marc Eliot. (Harper Paperbacks, $20.) A friend of O.J.
Simpson's on events surrounding the murders of Nicole Simpson and Ron Goldman.
13*
12
11
FROM BEGINNING TO END, by Robert Fulghum. (Villard, $20.) The rituals we practice and the spiritual journeys we take, from childhood to old age.
14
1
LESLIE NIELSEN'S STUPID LITTLE GOLF BOOK, by Leslie Nielsen and Henry Beard. (Boswell/Doubleday, $17.50.) Reminiscences and tips; humor.
15
27
DON'T STAND TOO CLOSE TO A NAKED MAN, by Tim Allen. (Hyperion, $19.95.) Anecdotes and meditations on life by the star of "Home Improvement."
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous
1
1
110
MEN ARE FROM MARS, WOMEN ARE FROM VENUS, by John Gray. (HarperCollins, $23.) Communicating.
2
2
15
THE SEVEN SPIRITUAL LAWS OF SUCCESS, by Deepak Chopra. (Amber-Allen/New World Library, $12.95.) How to "generate wealth in all its forms."
3
4
7
HOW TO ARGUE AND WIN EVERY TIME, by Gerry Spence. (St. Martin's, $22.95.) A lawyer describes ways to win arguments at home and at work.
4
8
MARS AND VENUS IN THE BEDROOM, by John Gray. (HarperCollins, $22.) Maintaining passion.
Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending June 17, at 3,050 bookstores plus wholesalers serving 28,000 other retailers (gift shops, department stores, newsstands, supermarkets), statistically weighted to represent sales in all such outlets nationwide.
An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
And Bear in Mind (Editor's Choices of other recent books of particular interest)  AND WHEN DID YOU LAST SEE YOUR FATHER? by Blake Morrison. (Picador USA, $21.) An English poet's perfectly convincing memoir of his father, a man both overbearing and engagingly quirky, whose death comes to the reader as a surprise.
THE BEAUTY OF THE BEASTLY: New Views on the Nature of Life, by Natalie Angier. (Peter Davison/Houghton Mifflin, $21.95.) Essays and excursions by a New York Times science reporter who deals gracefully with current ideas about the innerest workings of us organisms.
COLD SNAP: Stories, by Thom Jones. (Little, Brown, $19.95.) A collection that turns a merciless, ironic gaze on the organic trap called life, in which spiritual beings -- humans -- are forever in jeopardy of mere chemical accidents or biological insults.
EMBLEMS OF MIND: The Inner Life of Music and Mathematics, by Edward Rothstein. (Times Books/Random House, $25.) Sure they are alike, as everybody knows; however, they are totally different!
A New York Times critic schooled in both explores paradoxes as old as Pythagoras.
GEORGE ELIOT, VOICE OF A CENTURY: A Biography, by Frederick R. Karl. (Norton, $30.) A civilized, sensible biography of an author who, for all her insight into women's mentality, hoped to see them develop the intellectual and social attributes of the better sort of men.
INDEPENDENCE DAY, by Richard Ford. (Knopf, $24.) Frank Bascombe, angst-ridden hero of Mr.
Ford's 1986 novel, "The Sportswriter," approaches middle age with an unmanageable son, an unrepentant ex-wife and a sense of the "observance of human possibility," which doesn't, he fears, apply to him.
THE LOVE LETTER, by Cathleen Schine. (Houghton Mifflin, $19.95.) Helen is 42, capable and loves Edith Wharton.
Johnny is 20, acne-spotted and -- like, excellent! -- a big Tom Robbins fan.
In this comic novel they fall in love.
A MAN'S WORLD: How Real Is Male Privilege -- And How High Is Its Price? by Ellis Cose. (HarperCollins, $22.) A skilled analyst of gripes finds that most men (including so-called angry whites) are more confused than angry and more subdued than privileged; to his argument he brings persuasive numbers and moderate tones.
THE NEXT AMERICAN NATION: The New Nationalism and the Fourth American Revolution, by Michael Lind. (Free Press, $25.) An intelligent, industrious, not very cheerful look at possible futures.
Balkanization through identity politics?
Stratification, Brazilian style?
THE PRICE OF A CHILD, by Lorene Cary. (Knopf, $23.) A sensual, funny first novel that transposes to pre-Civil War Philadelphia the theme of the author's 1991 memoir, "Black Ice": the duty of an escapee toward the oppressed she leaves behind.
SHELLEY'S HEART, by Charles McCarry. (Random House, $23.) A really smart thriller about the Presidency, by a journalist who well understands how the gears of power are shifted.


You Can Go Home Again. And Again
BEACH MUSIC  By Pat Conroy. 628 pp. New York: Nan A. Talese/ Doubleday. $27.50.


Fielder Pounds the Red Sox
Tigers 11, Red Sox 2
Cecil Fielder hit his 18th and 19th home runs and drove in six runs yesterday to lead the Detroit Tigers to an 11-2 victory over the Boston Red Sox at Fenway Park.


China Has World's Best Reason to Limit Births; Shanghai Real Estate
To the Editor:
"Shanghai's Neo-Capitalists Find Real Estate" (front page, June 24), your analysis of a phenomenon that is gripping many Chinese cities -- not only Shanghai -- is insightful but incomplete.
You neglect the fact that the vast majority of real estate agents promoting and profiting from this property boom are not private, but are intimately connected with the government authorities or are themselves state employees.


Pamela M. Pearce, Barre W. Littel
Pamela Manche Pearce, the director of events and publicity at the PEN American Center, the international writers organization in New York, was married on Thursday evening to Barre W. Littel, a financial executive.
The Rev.
Dr.
Virginia B. Smith performed the ceremony at the First Presbyterian Church in the City of New York.
The bride, 48, graduated from the Tobe-Coburn School for Fashion Careers and Empire State College.
She is the daughter of Lorraine Pearce Friederich of Glen Ridge, N.J., and the late John Stephen Pearce, and the stepdaughter of Albert Friederich.


Corrections
An article on May 21 about kayaking and mountain biking in South Carolina included an outdated reference to the outfitter operating from the property of Middleton Place outside Charleston.
A reader's letter received on June 14 points out that it is the Middleton Outdoor Program, not W3 Outfitters.


In One Hotel, Exception Proves the Rule
David Liederman owns the Broadway Grill, a nonunion restaurant in the Holiday Inn Crowne Plaza, a union hotel.
He pays waiters $3.15 an hour, as opposed to the union wage of $6.70 an hour.
His average kitchen employee makes about $20,000 a year, perhaps $6,000 less than what the equivalent union employee would make at another hotel.
Because he is not bound by union work rules stipulating that certain tasks be performed only by workers in specific classifications, Mr.
Liederman can keep his staff to a minimum and their schedules flexible.
He has 34 employees, mostly part-time workers who do not qualify for overtime.
Labor is about 30 percent of Mr.
Liederman's total operating costs, instead of the average of 72 percent in New York City hotel restaurants.
As a result, he said, he runs a profitable business while saving the hotel the $600,000 or so a year it would spend to pay workers if it ran the restaurant itself.


Holiday on Tuesday
The Fourth of July falls on Tuesday.
Tomorrow, government offices, banks, post offices and transportation will operate on normal weekday schedules.
Financial markets will close at 1 P.M.
Following is Tuesday's schedule.
NEW YORK  FIREWORKS Two shows: downtown, 9:15 P.M., south of the Brooklyn Bridge; midtown, 9:30, 25th to 42d Streets in the East River.
Franklin D. Roosevelt Drive closed from the Battery to 96th Street from 6 P.M. to 1 A.M.


The Nation: Gavel Rousers; On Race, It's Thomas v. an Old Ideal
Of the Supreme Court's paramount decisions this century, one stands out as virtually a sacred American text.
It is Brown v.
Board of Education, which annihilated the moral and legal justification for segregation with the ringing phrase, "Separate educational facilities are inherently unequal."
Now, 41 years later, a Justice of the Supreme Court has voiced misgivings about that central insight of Brown.
That would be remarkable enough, given the decision's stature.
Even more remarkable, that Justice is Clarence Thomas, the Court's second black member.
And in one more surprise, the critique of Brown by the Court's most conservative Justice owes much, whether knowingly or not, to a line of anti-Brown scholarship with respectable intellectual roots in the political left.


Debora A. Morin, Andrew M. Castle
Debora Anne Morin, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Kenneth A. Morin of Montreal, was married last evening to Andrew Macauley Castle, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas Harmon Castle of Darien, Conn.
The Rev.
David Van Sickle, a minister of the Reformed Church of America, officiated at the Country Club of Darien.


Judge Agrees to Restrict Inquiry Into Ex-Secretary of Agriculture
A Federal judge has agreed to a request by lawyers for Mike Espy to limit an independent counsel's investigation into accusations against the former Secretary of Agriculture.
And in a separate action, a company that has become embroiled in the investigation, Tyson Foods of Springdale, Ark., has asked Attorney General Janet Reno to dismiss the independent counsel on the ground that he overstepped his legal authority.


A Spiritual Leader Lives On in Memory
Beneath yesterday's overcast sky, a stream of Jewish boys and men, unable to drive because it was the Sabbath, walked past the brick houses and well-tended lawns of Cambria Heights, Queens, to the grave of Rabbi Menachem Mendel Schneerson, the spiritual leader of the Lubavitch Hasidim.
Onlookers unfamiliar with the sect's Old World traditions stared at the hundreds of men in black overcoats and fedoras as they passed on their way to Montefiore Cemetery.


Sports of The Times; The Slap Heard 'Round The World
MIXED doubles took on a new meaning at Wimbledon yesterday.
The world was treated to the garish spectacle of the Battling Tarangos, Jeff the Angry Californian and Benedicte the French Spitfire.
He specializes in the quick walk-off.
She specializes in the overhead smash.
The Tarangos became instant history on a previously quiet first Saturday at these hallowed grounds.
Never before has a husband walked out of his third-round singles match, alleging a feud with the umpire, leaving behind his wife, a nonplayer who did her very best to slap the man in the chair, Bruno Rebeuh.


Israel and P.L.O. Miss Goal On Finding Self-Rule Accord
Israel and the Palestine Liberation Organization raced the clock on Saturday in a struggle to reach an agreement on expanded Palestinian self-rule, but were unable to settle all their differences to meet a July 1 target they had set.
Yasir Arafat, the P.L.O. chairman, and Shimon Peres, the Israeli Foreign Minister, met through the night in the Gaza Strip, but there was no announcement of a settlement as their talks stretched for hours into early today.


A Land of Tussie-Mussies And Midnight Pumpkins
DOWNTOWN -- Connie Berry, a member of the special events committee of the community garden at Sixth Street and Avenue B, is Martha Stewart with an edge.
She doesn't just plan her events.
She conceives them.
Last year, for example, she organized an anthropology lecture with a "shrunken-head-making workshop" (which ended unfortunately when the apples used as heads were attacked by fruit flies).
This month, a few weeks after a garden "yodelthon," Ms.
Berry will be producing Shakespeare's "Antony and Cleopatra," starring local pets.


June 25 - July 1: Jailed Dissidents; China's Strong Arm Throws A Punch at the U.S.
For Americans, Harry Wu may very well be the Scarlet Pimpernel of China.
The Chinese-born human rights activist spent 19 years in Chinese prison labor camps, then moved to the United States and transformed himself into an undercover human-rights investigator who penetrated the Chinese camps.
He was detained by Chinese border authorities nearly two weeks ago as he crossed into China from Kazakhstan (with a legal American passport and current visa), and has been held without access to American consular officials.
In addition, Chen Ziming, a dissident whose release from prison last year was personally requested by President Clinton, was jailed again last week.
Branded as one of the "black hands of Beijing" for his role in the pro-democracy demonstrations in Tiananmen Square in 1989, he had spent five years in prison before his release for medical treatment.
Although the detention of the two men seems to be motivated primarily by China's preoccupation with internal security, it signals that the United States will continue to pay for its decision to allow President Lee Teng-hui of Taiwan to make a private visit to the United States last month.
The American side has insisted that it wants to embrace Beijing.
But President Clinton's decision last week to lift a ban imposed last year on fish and wildlife imports from Taiwan is bound to be read in China as just another punishment.
ELAINE SCIOLINO


Ellen L. Marx, Christoph Zeyen
Ellen Lisa Marx, a daughter of Andrew and Sheila Marx of Trumbull, Conn., was married yesterday to Christoph Zeyen, a son of Friedrich-Otto and Hildebrund Zeyen of Kiel, Germany.
The Rev.
Yves Nolet, a Roman Catholic priest, performed the ceremony at Notre Dame de la Cambre in Brussels.
The couple are associates at the law firm of Akin, Gump &amp; Strauss in Brussels.
The bride, 33, graduated from Wake Forest University.
She received her law degree from the University of Copenhagen and a Doctor of Laws degree from Duke University.
The bridegroom, 36, graduated from the London School of Economics and received his law degree from the University of Kiel.


Habitats/Sullivan Street; SoHo Home With Remembrances of Owners Past
SARA PRICE perched on the edge of a desk, a weathered black-and-white "sea bass" sign -- with "flounder" on its other side -- hanging from a beam above her head; on the walls on either side were dozens of her vibrant oil-on-paper paintings of nudes.
Ms.
Price was sitting in the ground-floor studio of her three-story house on Sullivan Street in SoHo, a house full of the eccentric touches of its previous owners, who liked to salvage materials and incorporate them in sometimes bizarre ways.


[ APPEARANCES ] ; MADE IN THE SHADE
My friend Sigrid Burton, a painter who lives in SoHo, had a melanoma removed last summer.
A melanoma, of course, can be lethal, but when, as in Sigrid's case, it's caught early (before it spreads), the rate of cure is 93 percent.
Since melanoma is related to sun exposure, Sigrid decided to avoid suntanning as much as possible.
She vowed to cultivate an "interestingly pale" look, which was fine for winter.
But now that summer's come, and she is commuting to the Hamptons on weekends, she's been talking about her "pasty" face and "doughy" thighs.
I was worried that going pale was affecting Sigrid's self-esteem.
Her inner child happens to be a California girl who used to slather herself with baby oil and iodine to achieve the proper bronzed goddess effect.
When I suggested using a sunless tanning lotion, she was dubious.
"You mean that stuff I used when I was 13 and I came out in orange streaks?" I said I thought they'd improved it recently.
I'd heard good things along the beauty grapevine.


Bars Don't Stop Flow of Drugs Into the Prisons
Elliot Crespo Jr. was a small-time heroin hawker in Brooklyn until he was arrested twice in late 1989 on the same block in Williamsburg.
Then he became a small-time heroin hawker in a cell block at the Marcy Correctional Facility in upstate New York.
To feed his new market in prison, Mr.
Crespo relied on the wiles of visitors from home.
His male friends smuggled in drugs hidden in the heels of sneakers, he said.
And his female friends passed small balloons filled with heroin from their mouths to his when they kissed in the visiting room.
He then swallowed the balloons or hid them in body cavities.


Consider Lily, Veronica and Creeping Jenny
SINCE this, the July 4 weekend, is meant to be a relaxing sort of time, let's abandon the subjects of pulling weeds and mowing lawns and concentrate on some other activities that are just as important.
Have gardeners ever paused to consider how many of the plants growing in their plots have feminine names?
Take Lily, for example.
There are all sorts of them and they come in all sorts of shapes and sizes -- from lily of the valley to lily turf to Easter lily.
In fact, this clan is one of plantdom's largest.


New &amp; Noteworthy Paperbacks
WHAT A PIECE OF WORK I AM: (A Confabulation) By Eric Kraft.
Picador USA, $11.
Fiction builds upon fiction as the author's perennial narrator, Peter Leroy, relates the life of Ariane, the make-believe sister of his make-believe childhood friend.
"Eric Kraft's true theme, the awesome power of the low-tech human imagination, has never seemed so timely or so wise," Karen Karbo said here in 1994.
HARRIET BEECHER STOWE: A Life By Joan D. Hedrick.
Oxford University, $15.95.
When Abraham Lincoln was introduced to the author of "Uncle Tom's Cabin," he is said to have remarked, "So you're the little woman who wrote the book that started this great war!" Harriet Beecher Stowe was indeed short -- less than 5 feet -- but she had a moral strength and intellectual talent that went beyond the sentimental piety of her most famous novel.
Last year our reviewer, E. L. Doctorow, called this Pulitzer Prize-winning biography "a classic . . . engrossing, capacious, definitive and never straying too far from its sources." The emancipation of American slaves was a Beecher family cause, explored in THE STRUGGLE FOR EQUALITY: Abolitionists and the Negro in the Civil War and Reconstruction, by James M. McPherson (Princeton University, $14.95).
The author demonstrates that the abolitionists, who supported civil rights for blacks out of conviction rather than expediency (they considered Lincoln too timid), achieved more than is usually thought.
This is an "excellent book," C. Vann Woodward said in these pages in 1965, with "something new and vital and relevant to say." Princeton has also restored to print THE ABOLITIONIST LEGACY: From Reconstruction to the NAACP ($14.95), Mr.
McPherson's study of the movement's descendants.
In 1976 one critic found it "carefully conceived, thoughtfully argued and well written."


CHATTER: Public and Private; Privatize, but Carefully
Privatization of many services like the D.M.V. can be done well if government offers it on a franchising basis, subject to very demanding standards and periodic renewal.
The renewal would be given only if the agency met standards agreed between it and the state.
DEWEY P. CLARK Madison


Spanish Park to Guard Endangered Species
Most of the Cantabrian mountain range known as Picos de Europa, in northern Spain, has been converted into one of Europe's largest national parks in an effort to save endangered species that include the brown bear and a wild bird known as the capercaillie that have already vanished from most of Western Europe.
The Spanish Parliament approved the creation of the 160,500-acre Picos de Europa National Park in May, expanding the existing 40,000-acre Covadonga National Park in Asturias into two bordering provinces, Leon to the south and Cantabria to the west.
A master plan framework will be drawn up within a year to define the type of activities that will be permitted in the park.


EVIL'S BACK
Ron Rosenbaum's "Staring Into the Heart of the Heart of Darkness" (June 4) was superb.
From my Baltimore catechism days, we learned to examine our behavior with three questions: Was the act a grievous matter, was it given sufficient reflection and did it have full consent of the will?
What went into the confessional depended upon the answers.


Votes in Congress
Tally Last Week in Connecticut, New Jersey and New York  Senate
1.
Lawsuits: Vote on a measure to discourage lawsuits by shareholders alleging fraud by stockbrokers, accountants or corporate officials.
Approved 70 to 29, June 28.
2.
Budget: Vote on a House-Senate compromise seven-year plan that is intended to cut taxes, limit spending for Medicare and other social programs and balance the Federal budget by the year 2002.
Approved 54 to 46, June 29.
1
2
Connecticut
Dodd (D)
Yea
Nay
Lieberman (D)
Yea
Nay
New Jersey
Bradley (D)
Yea
Nay
Lautenberg (D)
Nay
Nay
New York
D'Amato (R)
Yea
Yea
Moynihan (D)
Nay
Nay
House
1.
Flag: Vote on a constitutional amendment to allow the states to make desecrating the American flag a crime.
Approved 312 to 120, June 28.
2.
Budget: Vote on a House-Senate compromise seven-year plan that is intended to cut taxes, limit spending in Medicare and other social programs and balance the Federal budget by the year 2002.
Approved 239 to 194, June 29.
3.
Spending Cuts: Vote on a package of $16.5 billion in midyear spending cuts to replace a bill that President Clinton vetoed three weeks ago.
Approved 276 to 151, June 29.
1
2
3
Connecticut
1. Kennelly (D)
Yea
Nay
Nay
2. Gejdenson (D)
Nay
Nay
Nay
3. DeLauro (D)
Nay
Nay
Nay
4. Shays (R)
Nay
Yea
Yea
5. Franks (R)
Yea
Yea
Yea
6. Johnson (R)
Yea
Yea
Yea
New Jersey
1. Andrews (D)
Yea
Nay
Nay
2. LoBiondo (R)
Yea
Yea
Yea
3. Saxton (R)
Yea
Yea
Yea
4. Smith (R)
Yea
Yea
Yea
5. Roukema (R)
Yea
Yea
Yea
6. Pallone (D)
Yea
Nay
Nay
7. Franks (R)
Yea
Yea
Yea
8. Martini (R)
Yea
Yea
Yea
9. Torricelli (D)
Nay
Nay
Nay
10. Payne (D)
Nay
Nay
Nay
11. Frelinghuysen (R)
Yea
Yea
Yea
12. Zimmer (R)
Yea
Yea
Yea
13. Menendez (D)
Yea
Nay
Nay
New York
1. Forbes (R)
Yea
Yea
Yea
2. Lazio (R)
Yea
Yea
Yea
3. King (R)
Yea
Yea
Yea
4. Frisa (R)
Yea
Yea
Yea
5. Ackerman (D)
Nay
Nay
Nay
6. Flake (D)
Nay
Nay
Nay
7. Manton (D)
Yea
Nay
Nay
8. Nadler (D)
Nay
Nay
Nay
9. Schumer (D)
Nay
Nay
Nay
10. Towns (D)
Yea
Nay
Nay
11. Owens (D)
Nay
Nay
Nay
12. Velazquez (D)
Nay
Nay
Nay
13. Molinari (D)
Yea
Yea
Yea
14. Maloney (D)
Nay
Nay
Nay
15. Rangel (D)
Nay
Nay
Nay
16. Serrano (D)
Nay
Nay
Nay
17. Engel (D)
Nay
Nay
A
18. Lowey (D)
Nay
Nay
Nay
19. Kelly (R)
Yea
Yea
Yea
20. Gilman (R)
Yea
Yea
Yea
21. McNulty (D)
Yea
Nay
Nay
22. Solomon (R)
Yea
Yea
Yea
23. Boehlert (R)
Yea
Yea
Yea
24. McHugh (R)
Yea
Yea
Yea
25. Walsh (R)
Yea
Yea
Yea
26. Hinchey (D)
Nay
Nay
Nay
27. Paxon (R)
Yea
Yea
Yea
28. Slaughter (D)
Nay
Nay
Nay
29. LaFalce (D)
Nay
Nay
Nay
30. Quinn (R)
Yea
Yea
Yea
31. Houghton (R)
Yea
Yea
Yea
KEY: (A) Absent or did not vote; (P) Present.


SUNDAY, July 2, 1995; WEATHER: Twister Jargon
Just as weather-watchers got used to terms like the dew point and lake effect snow, here come the "gustnadoes." The word is storm-chaser jargon for whirling winds that come up rapidly, usually without warning.
In form, gustnadoes are similar to tornadoes, but skinnier and slower.
They look a bit like the little twisters that can be seen around the edges of buildings, but they can whirl at 20 to 100 miles per hour and tear the roof off a house.


Small Pleasures That Cool the City's Big Heat; Slow Boats and Fast Boats: Easy Ways to New Worlds
HOW to to explain the city's oven-style summers?
Think of passive solar heating: heat collects in materials like cement, stone, asphalt, brick, then floods back out when the air around it cools.
New York City might as well have been designed for maximum heat retention.
But if the heat is inevitable, it's not inescapable.
Just get near a passive environmental refrigerator, like a river or an ocean, which stays 10, 20, even 30 degrees cooler than, say, an unshaded sidewalk.


Q. &amp; A.
Spraying Against Insects Q Can you please tell me if the concept of "quiet enjoyment" includes the right to refuse to have pest-control people invade and spray poisons in one's apartment without clear prior evidence of significant infestation?


Royal Glassware On View in Copenhagen
An exhibition of nearly 500 pieces of glassware owned by the Danish royal family is on view in the Royal Silver Chambers of the Christiansborg Palace in Copenhagen.
The exhibits, created in Denmark, Norway, the Czech Republic, Germany and France, span four centuries and include a large goblet belonging to Frederick II in the mid-16th century and a glass service presented to Queen Margrethe II and Prince Henrik on their silver wedding anniversary in 1992.
Highlights of the exhibition include 18 vases and goblets, never before displayed, by the 19th-century glass artist Emile Galle in a cabinet that was also designed by Galle.


Yosefa M. Lebeau, Dov A. Nelkin
Yosefa Miriam Lebeau, a daughter of Beverly and Rabbi William Lebeau of New York, is to be married today to Dov Adam Nelkin, a son of Carol and Stuart Nelkin of Houston.
The bride's father is to officiate at the Ramaz School in New York.
The bride, 22, and the bridegroom, 23, graduated magna cum laude in May from Brown University.


INSIDE
INVESTING IT /Page 4  Feeling besieged by cold callers?
You may find a kindred spirit in Richard L. Berman.
Between Wall and Main, by Susan Antilla.
MUTUAL FUNDS /Page 8  J. Mark Mobius was one of the first fund managers to dive into emerging markets.
These days, he's hanging back.
By Reed Abelson.
SPENDING IT /Page 11  Browsing the business best seller list: a legendary football coach and a corporate headhunter sell their secrets.
Off the Shelf, by Barbara Presley Noble.
VOICES /Page 13  The corporate grapevine as a management tool.
Viewpoint, by Robert L. Dilenschneider.


On Britten's Ground, Fresh Generation
THE CANE-BACKED wooden chairs in Snape Maltings, the Aldeburgh Festival's acoustically miraculous concert hall, are exact copies of the seats at the Festspielhaus in Bayreuth, Germany.
In other respects, too, Aldeburgh, founded by Benjamin Britten in 1948, resembles Bayreuth: it is the legacy of a strong-willed composer who wished to insure the authentic presentation of his works.
In Britten's final years, Aldeburgh was notorious for Wagnerian intrigues.
After Britten's death, Michael Tippett spoke witheringly of a "mausoleum atmosphere."
Traces of that atmosphere remain, but Aldeburgh has changed much in recent years.
The buoyant presence of Oliver Knussen, who directs the festival with the Britten specialist Steuart Bedford, has made all the difference: Aldeburgh is now a 20th-century music festival of wide scope and generous spirit.
Last month, the strongest spotlight fell on two living composers, one from Finland and one from England.
They made powerful impressions as separate personalities, and together they told a heartening story of a younger generation's increasing independence from compositional dogma and polemics.


Banking Law Keeps an Industry Down
To the Editor:
Re "Bigger Banks, Bigger Problems" (Op-Ed, June 28): John W. Moscow, in his defense of the Glass-Steagall Act, cites the precarious state of Japanese banks as evidence that the United States regulatory framework is superior.


Cindy L. Cohen, Darren M. Wallis
Cindy Lisa Cohen, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Stanley Cohen of Brooklyn, is to be married today to Darren Marc Wallis, a son of Mrs.
Murray Gottlieb of Forest Hills, Queens, and Noel Wallis of Fort Lauderdale, Fla.
Rabbi Gerald Weider is to perform the ceremony at the Hotel Intercontinental in New York.


Gay Black Men Find Uptown Hangout in Low-Key Berlin
If you didn't know it was there, it would be easy to pass right by a sign that appears on Friday nights at Papa Charles's Dinner Theater, home of wedding receptions and banquets.
And most people along 125th Street do.
But for those in the know, the glowing yellow sign that says "Berlin" is the welcome mat for another, quieter social world.
Berlin is a 9-month-old dance club that has drawn gay black men from around the city.


First Half Will Prove a Tough Act to Follow
SIX months ago, most Wall Street strategists were pretty sure that if good things happened this year -- and back then expectations were decidedly modest -- they would happen in the second half.
So much for that forecast.


Cheats Like Us
AFTER YEARS OF BITTER debate, New York City this week starts fingerprinting people who apply for welfare benefits.
Depending on whom you've been listening to, this is either a long-overdue attack on welfare cheats or one more petty insult to the downtrodden.
I've been following the debate closely, mainly because it's a strange and revealing controversy, but also because, as a former welfare cheat, I feel a small personal connection to it.
I went on the public dole 20 years ago while hanging around New Haven during a semester off from Yale University.
On the theory that full-time employment would interfere with my attempt to find myself, I was scraping by with a part-time job.
Like so many other Americans -- farmers, military contractors, retirees in Palm Beach -- I had no trouble looking myself in the mirror and thinking: You deserve this money from the Government.


Urban Life's an Endless Parade. Stoops Are the Grandstands.
HE'D picked his stoop some time that morning, before the heat got so bad most people had to hurry inside to find a spot of shade.
But even as it blazed, Richard E. didn't mind the sun.
"Don't feel no pain," he said, dapper in black loafers and a striped shirt, "because hell is gonna be hotter than this. This is just a little taste of it. God is good."


For the Sake Of Harmony
In announcing on Friday night that labor leaders had agreed on $600 million in concessions, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani seemed to have secured a large part of the cash he needed to balance New York City's budget -- at least on paper.
But the deal includes assumptions and agreements that could unravel later, putting the budget and the city's already shaky bond rating at risk.
Even as he trumpeted the deal as a landmark of union cooperation, the Mayor did not say how he would come up with the $160 million difference between the total figure and the $440 million in savings, largely from health and pension costs, that he and the unions jointly announced.


Ardsley Country Club Marks 100th Year
THE more things change, the more they remain the same.
That could be the motto of the Ardsley Country Club, which began centennial celebrations on June 10 and 11.
The membership plays tennis and golf, swims and attends social events much as it always has at this impeccably manicured site overlooking the Hudson.


At Rikers, Guards Watch for Weapons but Shrug at Drugs
Rikers Island, the largest jail complex in the country with thousands of inmates, visitors and staff coming and going each day, is a veritable laboratory for drug-smuggling technique.
Last Dec. 9, four glassine envelopes of heroin were discovered in a magazine sent to an inmate.
The next day, 10 marijuana cigarettes were found in a condom hidden in a visitor's ponytail.
On March 24, a small amount of heroin was found behind a postage stamp on a letter sent to an inmate.
The same day, a visitor, while being searched, "took a balloon from his underwear and swallowed it."


BEHIND THE WHEEL/Oscar Mayer Wienermobile; Some New Tricks for an Old Dog
COMPANY cars are often staid, middle-of-the-road family sedans painted an innocuous shade of brown or appliance white.
For 59 years, the Oscar Mayer Food Corporation has given that concept a twist with its Wienermobiles, a fleet of promotional vehicles that are more mobile amusement parks than basic transportation.
The meatpacker, which has been running its Wienermobiles since 1936, has redesigned the curious car for 1995.
Five of the new vehicles are on the road now, and a sixth will go out later this summer.
The new model comes with such up-to-the-minute touches as a video monitor, a 27-inch TV with VCR, a separate air-conditioner for the rear of the vehicle, citizens' band radio and a public address system.


In Jersey Journal Labor Fight, Publishing Giant Has All the Cards
In many ways, the story seems to have all the elements of a major drama: a family business with deep roots in the community, locked in a contract dispute with a labor union.
But when the family business is a $13 billion publishing empire and the union is one of New Jersey's two remaining, and increasingly irrelevant, newsroom unions, the story assumes a grim familiarity.


Trio of String Quartets in Recital
AFICIONADOS of string quartets are in luck this week.
Three top-notch ensembles are performing, starting this afternoon with the St.
Petersburg Quartet at Music Mountain.
The ensemble has an 8 P.M.
Thursday concert at Wesleyan University, then returns to Music Mountain next Sunday afternoon at 3.
Founded 10 years ago by postgraduate students at what was then the Leningrad Conservatory, the quartet changed its name as the city did.
Laureates at the first Shostakovich String Quartet Competition in 1987, the players have chosen that composer's Seventh Quartet as the centerpiece of their Music Mountain program this afternoon, surrounding it with the D minor Mozart (K. 421) and the Schubert "Trout" Quintet, the latter with Alvin Brehm, double-bassist, and Michael Boriskin, pianist.


David M. Monroe, Scarlet A. Anauo
Capt.
Scarlet Antoinette Anauo, a daughter of Adeline Schneiderhan of Grand Blanc, Mich., was married yesterday to Capt.
David MacDonald Monroe, the son of Paula and Roland Gail Monroe of Brooklyn.
The Rev.
Nicholas Yuschak, an Eastern Orthodox minister, performed the ceremony in the Camp Geiger Chapel at Camp Lejeune, N.C.
The bride, 32, and the bridegroom, 30, are both United States Marines, stationed at Camp Geiger, where she is the commander of the headquarters and service company of the School of Infantry and he is the executive officer of the school's training battalion.
The bride is a graduate of the University of Washington.
The bridegroom graduated from St.
Francis College in Brooklyn.


SUNDAY, July 2, 1995; FRONTIERS OF MARKETING: Next Year, a Stove Of a Different Color
Here are some of next year's colors, according to the Color Marketing Group, an association of 1,400 color designers representing businesses as small as Vermont Castings (wood-burning stoves) and as big as the Ford Motor Company.
Since the designers are essentially predicting what they themselves will be doing, the colors they pick do indeed show up on all sorts of consumer products.
Among the colors to expect in 1996 is Highway.
As a designer puts it, "This solid, stable gray stretches across the country from east to west." The selection of which colors will saturate the marketplace is not supposed to be guesswork, but a result of study and discussion.
One result of this study was the conclusion that "the improving economy has sparked a rebirth in consumer optimism." That, of course, is reflected in Red Haute.
The group also noted "a growing interest in all aspects of nature, the garden, vegetable colors and dyes, rocks and minerals, water and sky." Thus, the prediction that a "rich, complex mineral gray" known as Wet Clay will be popular.
And then there's the continuing trend toward "multiculturalism and ethnic diversity" seen in 'Round Midnight.
This jazzy black is supposed to have a blue (did they mean "blues"?) undertone.
Lest anyone get too optimistic about the direction society is taking, one of the commercial colors forecast for 1997 (and not yet available to show here), is Alligator Alley, a blackish green that "reflects the core of society as an urban combat color."


Remember Growing Pains?
This bull market may not be the best ever, but it is one of the most painless.
The exciting news for American stock owners is that in the first half of 1995 share prices advanced across the board, with the Standard &amp; Poor's composite up 18.6 percent, not including dividends.
But the most remarkable aspect of that is the smooth way in which it happened.


CHATTER: Public and Private; No More Patronage Mills
The D.M.V. should absolutely not be privatized.
Until Governor Kean, field offices were in private hands and the division was nothing but a political patronage mill.
That's what Governor Whitman wants to turn it back into.
The Whitman administration has conceded that it has asked Republican county chairmen to nominate candidates to head D.M.V. agencies in their counties.
That's patronage, pure and simple.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-11  COLOMBIAN GUERRILLAS FIGHT ON  Long after guerrillas in nearby countries have given up their guns, Colombia's guerrillas fight on, keeping alive Latin America's longest and largest insurgency. 1  VIETNAMESE EX-MIGRANTS PROSPER  The experiences of the boat people who have already returned to Vietnam suggest that they have little to fear in their homeland; some families are prospering. 3


Baseball Has Double Standard
To the Sports Editor:
Despite Mickey Mantle's drug addiction (alcohol was his drug of choice) for over four decades, the coverage of his illness, a direct result of his addiction, has been entirely sympathetic.
This is as it should be, but it's unusual in a culture that has turned extremely nasty and punitive toward most drug addicts, treating them like criminals and encouraging cops, not doctors, to make home visits.


Bruce Hlibok, 34, A Broadway Actor And a Playwright
Bruce Hlibok, a deaf actor who played on Broadway, died on June 23 at his home in Jersey City.
He was 34.
He died of pneumonia, his family said.


Colombia's Rebels Grow Rich From Banditry
At age 68, Manuel (Sureshot) Marulanda's aim may be getting a little shaky.
But the lifelong guerrilla commander's instinctive answer to the latest peace offer by Colombia's President was bombs and bullets.
When President Ernesto Samper Pizano unveiled a peace plan in May, Mr.
Marulanda and other guerrilla leaders responded with an offensive that killed 157 people and wounded hundreds.
Guerrillas kidnapped 35 people, blew up oil pipelines seven times, exploded a bomb in Colombia's Congress building, and destroyed a peace statue created by Fernando Botero, the father of Colombia's Defense Minister.


Where Nature and Sculpture War for Primacy
AT Grounds for Sculpture here, art that previously lay in wait for visitors now gives the impression of advancing on them.
Mostly, it is a matter of the display's having grown denser, thanks to the present show, culled from the Philip and Muriel Berman collection.
Besides that, there has been a shift in the balance of power: nature, molded into a setting for art six years ago, is beginning to compete with it.
Birds are everywhere, taking the place for granted (I witnessed a plover angrily dispatching a rabbit that had come too close to its progeny), and the vegetation is asserting itself, though not without human aid.


Sports of The Times; Rickeyisms Still True In Baseball and World
HE couldn't hit or throw.
As a catcher for the St.
Louis Browns, he set a major league record for allowing the most stolen bases in a game, 13.
But he could think.
As the front-office brain behind the St.
Louis Cardinals and the Brooklyn Dodgers half a century ago and more, his teams won eight pennants and three World Series.
He died in 1965, but his words endure now between the covers of "Branch Rickey's Little Blue Book: Wit and Strategy from Baseball's Last Wise Man" (Macmillan, $14.95).


Lots of Thrills and Spills And Little In Between
AS if climbing the big hill on a roller-coaster ride, investors in the Oberweis fund may be getting some heart flutters.
The fund is soaring, but only after a few dismal years.
And anyone who has followed its tracks knows just how volatile it can be.


For a Touch of Color and Flavor in Risotto or Salad, Add Beets
BEETS are one of my favorite root vegetables, especially in the summertime.
They add a dash of color as well as flavor to salads and are especially good with game, duck, beef and other dark meats and things cooked on the grill. (They contain a crimson dye called betanin, which stains other ingredients, so I usually toss them in the dressing separately.)


Katherine Glick, Andrew D. Cocks
Katherine Anne Glick, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
John H. Glick of Swarthmore, Pa., was married yesterday to Andrew Douglas Cocks, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Douglas L. Cocks of Indianapolis.
The Rev.
James R. Squire, an Episcopal priest, officiated at the Chapel of the Episcopal Academy in Merion, Pa.
The Rev.
Dr.
A.
Howard Lindquist, a Presbyterian minister, took part in the ceremony.
The bride and the bridegroom are graduates of Vanderbilt University.


June 25 - July 1: Cuba in Flux; An Exiled Castro Foe Asks to Return
The Cuban exile leader Eloy Gutierrez Menoyo told Fidel Castro last week that he would like to take his Miami organization, Cambio Cubano, to Cuba as an opposition political party.
In doing that, experts in Cuban affairs say, Mr.
Gutierrez Menoyo was asking for something that goes against what the Cuban Government has always considered key to its survival -- unity.
Still, Mr.
Gutierrez Monoyo, who was a guerrilla commander in the revolution before turning against Mr.
Castro, insisted that his 10-day visit to Cuba, and a private audience with Mr.
Castro, implied hope for a more open political system.
Many in the exile community were skeptical; some called Mr.
Gutierrez quixotic and others, determined to bring down Mr.
Castro by sanctions or force, labeled him a traitor.
Senior Clinton Administration officials, on the other hand, saw a positive sign.
President Clinton reaffirmed his support for the American trade embargo against Cuba, but said the United States would respond "with our own calibrated response" to real political and economic reform.
MIREYA NAVARRO


Small Pleasures That Cool the City's Big Heat; Reading List: Old, New, Borrowed and Blue-Chip
CHRISTOPHER LEHMANN-HAUPT
Summer is a time for escape.
At least that is the usual thinking on what to read when the days are long and the sun is hot.
But for the reviewer, who can read for escape any day of the year, the leisurely days of summer are a time to sink your teeth into something more substantial: Proust's "Remembrance of Things Past," if you haven't read it lately, or Tolstoy's "War and Peace," if you never finished it.


Off Broadway Prize Winner Ushers in Official Season
SUMMER theatergoers have one more week to ponder a get-together of Henry Ford, Thomas Edison and Warren Harding in "Camping With Henry and Tom" by the playwright Mark St.
Germain.
The prize-winning play, fresh from an Off Broadway run, can be said to kick off the summer since the opening of Westport Country Playhouse traditionally marks the season's beginning.
For sure, Ivoryton and Gateway's Candlewood Playhouse in New Fairfield opened for business earlier in the year.
Still, this is Westport's 65th summer season, so let others get a jump on the calendar.
It takes Westport to make the summer season official.


PHOTOGRAPHER'S JOURNAL


Foreign Affairs; Return Mail
So this letter comes in the mail the other day from Newt Gingrich.
It says: "Dear Thomas L. Friedman, Your name was forwarded to me by one of our Republican field directors. I was told that you have a record of being very supportive of Republican politics. I am writing you personally because, as the new Speaker of the House, I need your help. I need to hear directly from you what you, as a loyal Republican, feel should be the priorities of our new Republican Majority in Congress."
Well, Mr.
Speaker, since you've asked . . .
First of all, whoever that field director was who gave you my name as a loyal Republican definitely should not be appointed head of the C.I.A. when you become President.
I don't think intelligence work is his strong suit.
Court jester, maybe.


PHOTOGRAPHER'S JOURNAL


A Day in the Life of Central Park
JUNE 17 was the first Saturday of city summer, a week early by the calendar, but tell that to the weather -- warm and close, a blue sky going pale by late afternoon -- and its concomitant siren song to human nature, making people antsy and irresistibly beckoning them outdoors in loose (or little) clothing.
It is on days like this, paradoxically, that Manhattan streets seem less congested than usual, and that the city itself has an empty, or at least a manageable feel.
Of course, the summer-house season has kicked in, and the weekend hordes have left their normally swarming thoroughfares to tourist buses and their sidewalks to people in brand new Big Apple T-shirts craning their necks at the skyline.


June 25 - July 1; The Right Stuff Was More Fun in the Movie
It was the antithesis of Apollo 13.
Despite real danger and high stakes, the coupling in orbit of an American space shuttle and a Russian space station came off without a hitch last week.
The union of more than 200 tons of metal hurtling about the earth at nearly five miles a second was so flawless that even old space hands were amazed.
They predicted that the feat would give new momentum to the joint ambitions of the Russian and American space programs.
The failed mission of the Apollo 13 moon probe in 1970 was high drama, so much so that it is now a pulse-quickening movie.
By contrast, the 10 astronauts aboard the space shuttle Atlantis and the Mir space station quickly settled into a pedestrian routine of biomedical research and cargo transfers.


Feet, Not Purple; Message, Cryptic
For the last six months or so, they have been appearing on the streets of the East Village and beyond: two meandering sets of painted footprints, one red and one green.
The footprints, laid out by an anonymous group of four artists, lead to the Bowery Bar, the nine-month-old restaurant currently very popular with New York scene-makers -- and very unpopular with some local residents protective of the area's industrial roots, as is clear once you come across the slogans dotting the red path: "Boycott the Bowery Bar"; "Don't Party on the Poor."


Corrections
Because of a computer malfunction, an illustration appears erroneously on page 8 of the Long Island Weekly today with the Home Clinic column.
Wallboard, the subject of the drawing, will figure in the column next Sunday.


Visitors to Spanish Steps Can Look but Not Sit
LET'S just assume, as millions of tourists do every year, that the Spanish Steps are the heart of Rome, and not just an 18th-century stairwell of spectacular grace and Baroque beauty, leading from the Piazza di Spagna up to the convent at Trinita dei Monti.
And so imagine the general consternation at the announcement one day this spring that the steps would be closed off for repairs from May 16 to Christmas -- in other words for an entire tourist season, this in a year when thanks to the low fortunes of the Italian lira, Italy is expected to be flooded by foreign visitors.


2,000 Seek Jobs at Javits Center


My City Island Years
WHEN I lived on City Island, my next-door neighbor used to confide that even after having lived there for most of his 60-odd years, he never stopped getting a certain satisfaction from crossing the City Island Bridge on his way home from work every day.
I knew exactly what he meant.
For a City Islander returning from the mainland -- or "off island," as the old-timers insist -- the bridge is a welcoming hand that guides you across Eastchester Bay and back to your emphatically un-city-like world of boat yards, antiques shops, seafood restaurants and peaceful residential streets.


Really, How Old Is That House Anyway?
A TRIP around the historic town of Essex with Donald L. Malcarne is a trip back in time, but how much time is sometimes seriously in doubt.
"See the sign on that house?" Mr.
Malcarne said, pointing out a tidy marker noting that the house was built circa 1750.
Now "circa" does mean "about," but by a span of nearly a century?
"That house wasn't built until 1840," Mr.
Malcarne said.


Wolfman Jack, Raspy Voice Of the Radio, Is Dead at 57
Wolfman Jack, the rock-and-roll disk jockey whose unmistakable raspy voice and on-the-air howls brought him something of a cult following as one of America's best-known radio personalities, died yesterday at his home in Belvidere, N.C.
He was 57.
The cause was a heart attack, said his daughter, Joy Renee Smith.


CHILDREN'S BOOKS
IRONMAN  By Chris Crutcher. 181 pp. New York: Greenwillow Books. $15. (Ages 12 and up)


Commercial Property/Toxic Sites; Fears of Future Liability Scuttle Many a Deal
IT started off as an all-too-common 90's story: A machine tool business went under, so its bank foreclosed and put its warehouse up for sale.
The warehouse was in good shape and in an accessible Connecticut location.
But the bank wanted the property off its books, so offered it at a bargain-basement price.
There was, however, a big problem: The warehouse had kept machine oil in vats, some of which had leaked.


ON THE TOWNS
MUSIC ALBERT MUSIC HALL The Pinelands Cultural Society presents "Sounds of the Jersey Pines," a series of Saturday night concerts through the end of the year.
The program features live presentations of bluegrass, country and Pinelands music.
Show time, 8 P.M.
Admission: $4, or $1 for children under 12. 139 Wells Mill Road (Route 532), Waretown. (609) 971-1593.
ALLAN P. KIRBY ARTS CENTER The 1995 Opera Festival of New Jersey continues with Benjamin Britten's "Turn of the Screw." Friday at 8 P.M.
Tickets: $18-$135.
The Lawrenceville School, Route 26 in Lawrenceville. (609) 936-1500.
BRIDGETON'S RIVERFRONT A series of nine free Sunday night concerts begins with Al Raymond's Big Swing Band, today at 7 P.M., followed by Walter Wagner and the Serenaders, next Sunday at 7 P.M.
Routes 49 and 77 in Bridgeton. (609) 451-9208.
GARDEN STATE ARTS CENTER Van Morrison.
Today at 8 P.M.
Tickets: $20-$40.
Legends of Motown with the Four Tops, the Temptations and the Supremes.
Tomorrow at 8 P.M.
Tickets: $18-$38.50.
Mary-Chapin Carpenter with the Mavericks.
Friday at 8 P.M.
Tickets: $20-$37.50.
Exit 116 on the Garden State Parkway, Holmdel. (908) 888-5011.
FAIR LAWN SUMMER MUSIC FESTIVAL The Sunday evening concerts continue.
Enjoy community dancing to the music of Tubby Tubello.
Today at 8:30 P.M.
The Symphony Orchestra, conducted by Murray Colosimo, performs next Sunday at 8:30 P.M.
Free, but bring your own chairs.
Memorial Park and Berdan Avenue, Fair Lawn. (201) 796-6746.
MERCER COUNTY PARK The Greater Trenton Symphony Orchestra presents "A Star Spangled Fourth of July Concert," including Tchaikovsky's "1812 Overture." Tuesday at 8 P.M.
Free, but bring your own blankets and chairs.
Hughes Drive and Edinburgh Road, West Windsor. (609) 394-1338.
NEWARK MUSEUM The "Noontime Jazz in the Garden" series continues with Pam Purvis and Bob Ackerman, a husband-and-wife jazz team.
Thursday at 12:30 P.M.
Free.
Dreyfuss Memorial Garden, 49 Washington Street, Newark. (201) 596-6550.
NEW JERSEY SYMPHONY ORCHESTRA Conducted by Mariusz Smolij, the New Jersey Symphony Orchestra continues its free outdoor summer pops tour.
The orchestra will perform at the Great Auditorium in Ocean Grove on Thursday at 8 P.M. and at Brookdale Park in Bloomfield on Friday at 7:30 P.M. (201) 624-3713.
NORTH BRANCH PARK The Somerset County Park Commission presents an Independence Day Family Festival with live performances by the Nite Owls, the Morgan Valley Road Band, the Tim Gillis Band and the Smokey Warren Band.
Tuesday at 5 P.M.
Free.
Milltown Road, Bridgewater. (908) 722-1200, extension 221.
OCEAN GROVE SUMMER CONCERTS Al Martino, with a full orchestra, presents "Spanish Eyes," "Volare" and many others.
Saturday at 8 P.M.
Tickets: $15.
The Great Auditorium, Pilgrim Pathway, Ocean Grove. (908) 775-0035.
OUR LADY OF BLESSED SACRAMENT, ROSELAND Three of Roseland's houses of worship join together to present an ecumenical concert with the Celebrant Singers.
Saturday at 8 P.M.
Free. 28 Livingston Avenue, Roseland. (201) 226-5970.
RAMAPO COLLEGE The Minolta Summer Music Fest presents three free Thursday night concerts spanning a spectrum of musical tastes.
The West Point Jazz Band.
Thursday at 8 P.M.
The Bandshell, 505 Ramapo Valley Road.
Off Route 17 and 202 in Mahwah. (201) 529-7612.
RIVERSIDE GARDENS PARK, RED BANK Comcast Cablevision and the Borough of Red Bank present "Red Bank Jazz in the Park," a series of eight free outdoor jazz concerts.
First up, Keith Marks.
Thursday at 7:30 P.M.
West Front Street in downtown Red Bank. (908) 851-8849.
RUTGERS ARTS CENTER The Rutgers Summerfest continues with the Newstead Trio.
Wednesday at 8 P.M.
Tickets: $16.
The Music of Gabriel Faure.
Thursday at 8 P.M.
Tickets: $16.
Music From Aston Magna.
Friday at 8 P.M.
Tickets: $22.
The Rutgers Festival Orchestra, conducted by Neal Stulberg.
Saturday at 8 P.M.
Tickets: $22.
The Ted Dunbar Quartet.
Next Sunday at 2 P.M.
Tickets: $16.
George Street at Route 18, New Brunswick. (908) 932-7511.
SUMMERFEST '95 CONCERTS The Morris County Park Commission presents Richard Reiter and Crossing Point.
Tuesday at 6:30 P.M.
Frelinghuysen Arboretum, 53 Hanover Avenue, Morris Township.
The Partners.
Next Sunday at 3 P.M.
Schooleys Mountain Park.
West Springtown Road, Washington Township. (201) 326-7600.
WATCHUNG ARTS CENTER Phoenix Rising, a jazz sextet, opens the Emerging Artists Festival on Friday at 8 P.M.
Tickets: $10. 18 Stirling Road, Watchung. (908) 753-0190.
THEATER BICKFORD THEATER, MORRIS MUSEUM In "Love Letters," a relationship is revealed through a lifetime of correspondence.
Today at 2 P.M.; Thursday, Friday and Saturday at 8 P.M.; next Sunday at 2 P.M., and July 14-16 and 20-23.
Tickets: $17.50. 6 Normandy Heights Road, Morristown. (201) 538-0454.
EAST LYNNE COMPANY "The Woman Question" features Susan Glaspell's "Suppressed Desires," Marie Jenney Howe's "Anti-Suffrage Monologue" and George Middleton's "Unknown Lady." Wednesday through Saturday at 8:30 P.M.
Lyle Hall of the First Methodist Church, Cape May.
Tickets: $14, or $12 for the elderly. (609) 884-6900.
FOUNDATION THEATER "Nunsense." Today at 2 and 8 P.M., Wednesday and Thursday at 2 and 8 P.M., Friday and Saturday at 8 P.M. and next Sunday at 2 and 8 P.M.
Tickets: $15, or $13 for students and the elderly.
Burlington County College, Route 530, Pemberton. (609) 894-2138.
GUGGENHEIM SUMMER THEATER "I Hate Hamlet." Today at 7:30 P.M., Thursday through Saturday at 8:30 P.M. and next Sunday at 7:30 P.M.
Tickets: $17.
Monmouth University, West Long Branch. (908) 571-3475.
NEW JERSEY SHAKESPEARE FESTIVAL "Julius Caesar." Wednesday at 2 and 8 P.M., Thursday and Friday at 8 P.M., Saturday at 2 and 8 P.M. and next Sunday at 2 and 7 P.M.
Through July 22.
Tickets: $16 to $30.
Bowne Theater, Drew University, 36 Madison Avenue, Madison. (201) 408-5600.
PAPER MILL PLAYHOUSE "The Secret Garden," a musical by Marsha Norman and Lucy Simon, based on the novel by Frances Hodgson Burnett.
Wednesday and Friday at 8 P.M., Thursday at 2 and 8 P.M. and Saturday and Sunday at 3 and 8 P.M.
Through July 23.
Tickets: $29 to $44.
Brookside Drive, Millburn. (201) 376-4343.
RITZ THEATER "Oliver!," a musical.
Starts Friday.
Friday and Saturday at 8 P.M.
Tickets: $14.
Sunday at 2 P.M.
Tickets: $12. 915 White Horse Pike, Oaklyn. (609) 858-5230.
ROOSEVELT PARK AMPHITHEATER The Middlesex County Department of Parks and Recreation presents Plays-in-the-Park 1995.
"The Sound of Music" begins on July 12.
Tickets: $3.
Edison. (609) 548-2884.
THEATERFEST "On Golden Pond." Today at 3 and 8 P.M.; Wednesday at 2 and 8 P.M.; Thursday, Friday and Saturday at 8 P.M. and next Sunday at 3 and 8 P.M.
Through July 9.
Tickets: $23 and $25 or $12.50 for the elderly.
Montclair State University, Valley Road and Normal Avenue, Upper Montclair. (201) 655-5112.
TOWNSQUARE PLAYHOUSE The Townsquare Players present "Snow White Goes West," a musical.
Today at 7 P.M.; Thursday, Friday and Saturday at 8 P.M. and next Sunday at 3 P.M.
Tickets: $12, or $9 for students and the elderly.
Church and Wall Streets, Rockaway. (201) 361-5235.
WASHINGTON CROSSING STATE PARK The Open Air Theater series continues with "Camelot" by the Princeton Opera Association.
Thursday, Friday, Saturday and July 12-15 at 8:30 P.M.
Tickets: $6.50 on Wednesday and Thursday; $7.50 on Friday and Saturday.
Hopewell Township, Mercer County. (609) 737-1826.
WEISS ARTS CENTER Summerfun Theater presents "Beau Jest," by James Sherman.
Tuesday and Wednesday at 8 P.M., Thursday at 2 and 8 P.M. and Friday and Saturday at 8 P.M.
Tickets: $10-$22.
Lloyd Road off Bloomfield Avenue, Montclair. (201) 256-0576.
MUSEUMS AND GALLERIES ART MUSEUM, PRINCETON UNIVERSITY "Collaborative Landscape Photographs by Laura McPhee, Class of 1980, and Virginia Beahan," an exhibition of 20 color photographs, opens Thursday.
Through Aug. 20.
Free.
Tuesday through Saturday, 10 A.M. to 5 P.M., and Sunday, 1 to 5 P.M.
Princeton. (609) 258-3788.
BERGEN MUSEUM OF ART AND SCIENCE "Edward Walsh Sculpture," nine abstract and traditional sculptures created from stainless steel, granite and bronze.
Through July 16.
"John Schettino: Drawings and Paintings," through July 30.
"Photographic Drawings" by David Horton.
Through July 30.
Tuesday through Saturday, 9:30 A.M. to 4:30 P.M.; Sunday, 1 to 5 P.M.
Suggested admission: adults, $2.50; children, $1. 327 East Ridgewood Avenue, Paramus. (201) 265-1248.
HUNTERDON ART CENTER "NYC Underground," 17 oil canvas paintings of New York City's subway system and tunnels by Alexandra Dell'amore.
Starts today with a reception at 3 P.M.
Through Aug. 27.
Tuesday through Sunday, 11 A.M. to 5 P.M. 7 Lower Center Street, Clinton. (908) 735-8415.
JERSEY CITY MUSEUM "Albizu Lives," a visual commemoration.
Through Sept. 16.
"The Nation Is Its People: Body and Soul of Lolita Lebron." Through Aug. 18.
"Joan Fine: Wall Reliefs." Through Aug. 18.
Tuesday, Thursday, Friday, 10:30 A.M. to 5 P.M. and Wednesday, 10:30 A.M. to 8 P.M. 472 Jersey Avenue, Jersey City. (201) 547-4514.
LONG BEACH ISLAND FOUNDATION OF ARTS AND SCIENCE "Abstract Watercolors," featuring selected artists from the New Jersey Watercolor Society.
"Mobiles/Stabiles Installation," featuring works by Myron Wasserman.
Opening reception today, 5 to 7 P.M.
Monday through Saturday, 9 A.M. to 5 P.M. and Sunday, noon to 4 P.M.
Free. 120 Long Beach Blvd., Loveladies. (609) 494-3169.
MONMOUTH MUSEUM "Artists With Physical Disabilities" includes paintings, photography, printmaking and sculpture.
Through Aug. 17.
Tuesday through Saturday, 10 A.M. to 4:30 P.M., and Sunday, 1 to 5 P.M.
Brookdale Community College campus, Lincroft. (908) 747-2266.
MONTCLAIR ART MUSEUM "What Is a Print?" features the works of 60 artists and demonstrates the wide range of prints produced in America over the last 150 years.
Through today.
"Still Life Works From the Collection" offers 13 paintings by American artists ranging in style from 19th-century realism to 20th-century modernism.
Through September.
Tuesday, Wednesday, Friday and Saturday, 11 A.M. to 5 P.M.; Sunday and Thursday, 1 P.M. to 5 P.M.
Admission: $4, or $3 for the elderly and students with ID. 3 South Mountain Avenue, Montclair. (201) 746-5555.
NEWARK MUSEUM "Gods and Goddesses in Indian Art" features paintings, cloth hangings and tiny brass icons dating from the 11th to 19th centuries.
Through today.
"The Arts of Nepal" includes sculptures and paintings of the Himalayan kingdom.
Through today.
"New Jersey Arts Annual: Celebrating Diversity in Crafts" takes a look at traditional and modern crafts in New Jersey.
Starts Wednesday.


At the Pillow, a Debut And a Homecoming
THIS TUESDAY MARKS THE debut of the Batsheva Dance Company, Israel's premier contemporary dance troupe, at Jacob's Pillow in Lee, Mass.
But for Ohad Naharin, the group's artistic director since 1990, Batsheva's five-day American visit is a homecoming of sorts.
The 43-year-old Israeli-born choreographer spent 12 years in New York, studying briefly at the Juilliard School before starting the Ohad Naharin Dance Company in 1980.
"It was just a group of pick-up dancers," Mr.
Naharin said the other day, speaking from Tel Aviv.
Still, the experience helped him hone the theatrical, emotion-rich choreography that has raised Batsheva's profile and has made him a hot guest choreographer with companies like the Netherlands Dance Theater.


Happy  [ ]  Day to You
SRINGTIME IN THE HEARTLAND, AND THE funky fertilizer truck hurtles down a narrow country lane.
A spaniel yaps in its pungent wake.
Hawks glide over this 254-acre farm a half-hour northeast of Kansas City, Mo.
And beside a small pond, two poets write of love.
Jim Howard is rangy, intense, tussling with the west wind for the pages of his yellow pad.
Across the water, his lover is restless, scribbling fitfully.
She is a small, curly-haired brunette with a disposition bright as her name: Penny Krugman.
This past February, the newly engaged couple appeared on Tom Snyder's "Late Late Show" under this darn cute premise: valentine writers in love.
By way of introduction, Snyder honked: "Wonder who writes those sappy valentines? Hawwwwwwww."


Patricia E. Thomas, Jeffrey B. Wilson
Patricia E. Thomas, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John Thomas of Atlantic City, was married on Friday to Jeffrey B. Wilson, a son of Leonard and Annette Wilson of Cambria Heights, Queens.
The Rev.
Robert Johnson, a Baptist minister, performed the ceremony at the Madison Hotel in Madison, N.J.
The bride is a lawyer for Associated Aviation, a litigation management company in Short Hills, N.J.
She graduated from Rutgers University, and she and her husband received law degrees from Howard University.
The bride's father is the chairman of the Urban League of Hudson County in Secaucus, N.J.
He retired as the deputy director of constituent services for Senator Frank Lautenberg, Democrat of New Jersey.
Her mother, now retired, was a special-needs instructor at Burnet Elementary School in Newark.


Six Flags in L.A. Adds a Water Park
The 24-year-old Six Flags Magic Mountain theme park in Los Angeles has recently acquired a new next-door neighbor, Six Flags Hurricane Harbor.
A water park, Hurricane Harbor has a tropical jungle setting, with water slides, raft rides, wave pools and water play areas.
The side-by-side family entertainment sites make up a new amusement park complex called Six Flags California.
The parks share an entrance road and parking lot, but each requires separate admission.
Entrance to Hurricane Harbor is $16; $10 for children under 48 inches tall and adults 55 and older.
Children under 2 are admitted free.


Four Elements Tangle In Volatile Lockout Mix
The National Basketball Association lockout is no garden variety work stoppage.
For one thing, the lockout is not canceling games or disrupting training camps because there are no games to be played or training camps to be held.
For another, this is not the basic, easy-to-understand management versus labor confrontation sports fans have come to know and detest.
It's the mix of adversaries that takes the N.B.A.'s first work stoppage beyond the experiences of its fellow professional leagues.
This unique conflict pits (1) a large group of dissident players against (2) their union leadership and other players against (3) management.


Parks Aren't Filled, but They're Not Any Emptier
Major league baseball, two months into a major estrangement with its fans following a long and bitter strike, is still staggering with a 20 percent falloff in attendance.
Still, says Bud Selig, the acting commissioner, although baseball has not come close to resuming its boom times of the early 1990's, it has taken at least one baby step back from the abyss.


Karen L. Blinder, Robert Popper Jr.
Karen Lewis Blinder, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard Blinder of Montclair, N.J., was married yesterday to Robert David Popper Jr., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Popper of Princeton, N.J.
Rabbi Burt Aaron Siegel officiated at the Women's Club in Glen Ridge, N.J.
The Rev.
Richard Nelson, a Roman Catholic priest, took part in the ceremony.
Ms.
Blinder, who is 34 and is keeping her name, is an associate at McCarter &amp; English, a law firm in Newark.
She graduated from Mount Holyoke College, and she and her husband received law degrees from Northwestern University.
Her father is a partner in Beyer, Blinder, Belle, an architectural and planning firm in New York.


TAKING AFFIRMATIVE ACTION APART
Nowhere was it mentioned in your article that long before there was a law to help minority students, there was an unwritten agreement that the sons of alumni and of prominent or wealthy people were almost always admitted to the college where they applied.
Test scores were not even an issue.
FAITH A. SEIDENBERG Syracuse


Dina M. Alcure, Stephen J. White
Dina Marie Alcure, the daughter of Marie M. Alcure of Upper Brookville, L.I., and the late George F. Alcure Jr., was married yesterday to Stephen James White, the son of Marion White of Trenton.
The Very Rev.
Robert Wilshire performed the ceremony at the Episcopal Cathedral of the Incarnation in Garden City, L.I.
Mrs.
White, 28, is the manager of public relations for American Movie Classics, a cable-television channel in Woodbury, L.I.
She graduated from Lehigh University.


Lara H. Weber, F. P. Knuettel 2d
Lara Hope Weber, a daughter of Sue and Dr.
Robert Weber of Kingston, N.Y., was married last evening to Francis Paul Knuettel 2d, a son of Marie and Frank Knuettel of New Rochelle, N.Y.
Rabbi Jonathan Eichhorn performed the ceremony at the Wiltwyck Country Club in Kingston.
Mrs.
Knuettel, 28, is the director of special projects in the development office at the Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center in New York.
She graduated from the State University at Buffalo and received her M.B.A. degree from Fordham University.
Her father is an optometrist in Kingston.
Her mother teaches the second grade at the Edson Elementary School there.


Frederick M. Supper, Business Adviser, 78
Frederick M. Supper, the former chairman and owner of the Alexander Proudfoot Company, a management consulting firm in West Palm Beach, Fla., died on Sunday at his home in Palm Beach.
He was 78 and had suffered from emphysema, family members said.
Mr.
Supper joined Alexander Proudfoot in 1949, when it was in Chicago and had only 10 employees.
He bought the firm in 1970 from the founder's estate, and built it into a worldwide organization, with offices in Europe, Brazil, Canada, Mexico, Australia, Singapore, Malaysia and Hong Kong.
By 1987, when Mr.
Supper sold the firm to British investors, it had more than 1,000 employees and $150 million in annual revenues.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article last Sunday about shifting medical fashions misstated the use of leeches in modern medicine.
They are used after reconstructive surgery, not during it.


Beachcombing
Washed ashore: Shell Shaped pins and a handbag roll in on summer tides.


The Stanley Cup: A Devil of a Time in New Jersey
SATURDAY The party begins, above, at the Byrne Arena in East Rutherford.
The New Jersey Devils sweep the Detroit Red Wings to claim the National Hockey League championship trophy, the Stanley Cup.
The Party Moves to the Glenpointe Marriott in Teaneck for a party given by the team's owner, John McMullen.
Devils players lived in the hotel during the championship series.
SUNDAY Shortly before 3 A.M. the cup arrives at the Verona Inn, left.
Bar owners receive permission from the Verona Town Council to stay open for a private party for the players.
At 9 A.M. the party breaks up at the Verona Inn and a team employee, Thomas Shine of Jersey City, is entrusted to return the trophy to the Devils' administrative offices.
He first makes stops at a bakery and several taverns in Jersey City and Bayonne.
Mr.
Shine and the trophy visit a Bayonne fire station where, below left, a firefighter, Ted Rowe, places his 7-month-old daughter Ashlyn in the cup.
Mr.
Shine returns the trophy to the team's offices.
MONDAY Devils players, right, pour a cup of coffee from the trophy during a brief appearance on the Late Show with David Letterman.
WEDNESDAY The cup, left, is the focal point of the Devils' official victory celebration in the parking lot of the Byrne Arena.
The trophy makes a special entrance to the party, arriving by helicopter.
Twenty-five thousand fans gather to watch the players tour the parking lot in convertibles before joining their families on a giant stage.


A Woman of a Certain Age
HOW OLD IS A woman of a certain age?
Only a Nosy Parker would try to find out.
But the expression is becoming androgynous, and the age seems to be creeping upward.


Who Is Rejected For Car Rental
IN the three years since Hertz started the practice of screening renters' driving records, the situation has changed radically.
Alamo, which last year began checking the records of drivers from seven states and the District of Columbia, abandoned that policy on May 23.
Hertz and the other major rental-car companies, moving in the other direction, are screening drivers from an increasing number of states, while fine-tuning their criteria for rejection.
Hertz, which began with New York State, for example, is now screening drivers from 10 states and the District of Columbia; Connecticut is the latest addition.
In fine-tuning, some restrictions have been eased, notably ones involving accident records.
But rules involving major violations are tougher: Avis and Dollar both want to screen out drivers who in the six previous years were convicted of driving under the influence of alcohol or controlled drugs.
Avis will also reject a driver whose record shows a conviction at any time for leaving the scene of an accident or possession of a stolen vehicle.


IN SHORT: FICTION
ROSE MADDER  By Stephen King. Viking, $25.95.


In War With Geese, Most Towns Are Losing
The population of strapping, vociferous Canada geese has grown steadily in New Jersey since the 1970's when thousands stopped migrating from Canada to Florida and the Caribbean and chose instead to settle in the comfortable suburbs here and in Connecticut and New York.
Paul Castelli of the state Division of Fish, Game and Wildlife estimates New Jersey's current number at 60,000, and says it is doubling every six or seven years.
Some people admit a fondness for the geese, encouraging them to stay by feeding them.
Others are anxious to see them go, complaining that they are noisy, cause traffic problems and pollute parks, beaches and golf courses with their droppings.


Swordplay the Serious Way
"A HIT, A VERY PALPABLE HIT!" cries the courtier Osric during the climactic duel of "Hamlet." And in the Broadway production now at the Belasco Theater, those hits are palpable indeed.
Productions of "Hamlet" are often distinguished by verse speaking or physical design.
Jonathan Kent's current staging, imported from the Almeida Theater Company in London, offers an additional virtue in the face-off between Hamlet (played by Ralph Fiennes) and Laertes (Damian Lewis).
Beginning on a white rectangular fencing mat, the fight soon spills beyond it, weaving among the chairs of Claudius's dismayed court as the two combatants become increasingly fevered.


The Biggest Heat Wave In Years Stuns Irish
The Irish, who live in one of the rainiest countries in Europe, have been enjoying, and suffering, the biggest heat wave to descend on this island in years.
For 10 days, the sun, normally invisible in Irish skies for most of the day, week, month and year, has been producing temperatures in the high 80's, and there have been a few unofficial readings matching the 1976 record of 91 degrees.
That would not be remarkable in Rome or Paris.
But in Ireland, which gets 225 days of rain annually, this weather has become a national preoccupation.


Greenburgh Again Says No to Budget
VOTERS in Greenburgh's Central 7 School District apparently did not like the revised $32.9 million budget that was presented for their approval on June 21 any better than they did the $33.2 million budget they rejected on May 3.
Although the revised budget represented an effort to address voters' concerns, it was defeated by 1,100 votes to 739.
Residents also spurned a proposition that would have contracted out school bus transportation to a private Yonkers company by a vote of 1,021 to 721.


Women's Bridge Teams Vie to Play for U.S.
Four star-studded teams of women bridge players began a semifinal contest here this afternoon that will send two of them to represent the United States in world championship competition in Beijing in October.
Half the players involved have previously won world titles.
A team including Jacqui Mitchell and Federal Judge Amalya Kearse of Manhattan, who won the World Women's Pair title in 1986, scored 64 percent in heading the qualifying stage, which ended on Friday.
After 16 deals of their 64-deal semifinal, they led by 15 imps against a dark-horse squad from Seattle.


For a Touch of Color and Flavor in Risotto or Salad, Add Beets
BEETS are one of my favorite root vegetables, especially in the summertime.
They add a dash of color as well as flavor to salads and are especially good with game, duck, beef and other dark meats and things cooked on the grill. (They contain a crimson dye called betanin, which stains other ingredients, so I usually toss them in the dressing separately.)


PLAYING IN THE NEIGHBORHOOD PARKS
PROSPECT PARK A Dance to History: Africans in Early America
In a depiction of the experiences of Africans in early America, the dancer-choreographer Andrea Woods and the composer-musician David Pleasant will perform selections from Mr.
Pleasant's "Ballad of a Black Cowboy," on Friday as part of the Celebrate Brooklyn Festival.
The piece follows the experiences of blacks through forced labor, agricultural work and the struggle for freedom as black cowboys in the American West.


Reworking Under-Bridge Plans
For two decades, plans to put restaurants and shops under the vaulted arches and gracefully tiled anchorage of the Queensboro Bridge have been defeated by community opposition and financial difficulties.
Now, there's a new proposal. But once again, it is facing opposition.


Of Cabbage Whites and Monarchs
Thousands of nature lovers have fanned out across the United States and Canada for the Fourth of July butterfly count.
The counting actually spans six weeks, in different places on different dates, starting officially June 10.
Its purpose is to track and observe, not capture and collect.
Binoculars are in order.
Nets are not.
Butterflies exist all over the world, from the high Himalayas to the depths of Death Valley to the frozen tundra north of the Arctic Circle.
There are thousands of species -- great spangled fritillaries, eastern tiger swallowtails, cabbage whites, painted ladies, you name it.
New York City alone has more than 80 species.
But nowhere is there greater variety than in the tropical rain forests.


A Joyful Noise
It has been 30 years since Mississippi's brutal collisions with the civil rights movement, and with the future.
DELTA TIME: Mississippi Photographs (Smithsonian, cloth, $65; paper, $29.95) depicts -- sadly, sweetly and always with power and intelligence -- how the state's past continues to inform its present.
From 1989 to 1992, Ken Light, a documentary photographer whose previous books include "To the Promised Land" and "With These Hands," traveled among the black poor of rural Mississippi.
His photographs are in the Social Realist tradition of Dorothea Lange and Walker Evans.
Many of his duotone images -- from a haunting study of baptisms in Coahoma County to a powerful vision of a worshiper at a church in Tutwiler -- bear witness to a joy and dignity undimmed by privation.
His subjects observe the ceremonies of black life, sometimes in sadness, sometimes with a joyful noise you can almost hear.
Mr.
Light is never heavy-handed; there are no overwrought contrivances.
These faces, these lives are best served unadorned, as their own eloquent testimony to life in these hard times.
MICHAEL E. ROSS


NEWS OF A LIFETIME
Max Frankel's "News of a Lifetime" (Word &amp; Image, June 11) was delightful.
I find The Times's obits so interesting that I use them to teach English to my foreign students.
JOAN ROSENFELD New York


Rediscovering, and Discovering, Leonard Shure
IN THE SUMMER OF 1957, GILBERT Kalish, then a young pianist at the Marlboro Music Festival in Vermont, asked his mentor Rudolf Serkin to recommend a teacher.
Mr.
Serkin told him to return to New York and study with the great pianist and teacher Leonard Shure.
Mr.
Kalish had never heard of Shure, a fact that in retrospect "shows where Shure was at that time in the public perception of a young pianist," Mr.
Kalish said the other day.
Other aspiring pianists at Marlboro that summer -- Alan Mandel, Jerome Rose and Alicia Schachter -- posed the same question to Mr.
Serkin and got the same advice, which all of them followed.
Leonard Shure died at his retirement home on Nantucket in late February, six weeks shy of his 85th birthday, and the larger classical-music public is still relatively unaware of him.
A series of Shure recordings from the late 1970's, planned for CD release by Audiofon, may finally bring his significance as an artist to attention.


Orchestra Contract Called a Step Toward Parity
WITHIN the next few weeks, the musicians of the Westchester Symphony, which has just completed its first season as a unionized orchestra, are expected to sign a new one-year contract.
The orchestra's management has offered the players a 20 percent pay increase on an expanded schedule of concerts, a move that Joel Warren, executive director of the Westchester Symphony, said represents a "generous growth step" toward parity with similar ensembles of freelancers in the county and Manhattan.
But the new contract, which the musicians say also represents gains in other areas, may not quell the controversy that arose last year when Local 802 of the American Federation of Musicians agreed to let the Westchester Symphony pay its players far less than the usual freelance rate, in order to help the 70-year-old orchestra survive its transition from an avocational to a professional group.


Devils Heading to Washington
No one knows whether the Devils will be in New Jersey or Nashville next season, but the 1995 Stanley Cup champions announced yesterday that they are packing their bags for a trip to Washington next week.
As talks aimed at keeping the Devils in New Jersey continued this weekend between team officials and the New Jersey Sports and Exposition Authority, the Devils said they had been invited to the White House on July 10.


Debating the Character of West 72nd Street
Once, not so very long ago, West 72d Street between Central Park West and Columbus was a residential block like most on the Upper West Side, except wider.
Aside from a few first-floor doctors' offices, the only discernible commercial enterprise on the street was an obscure Chinese restaurant off the lobby of a building called the Ruxton.
But in just the last few years, the block has undergone something of a transformation, with three restaurants opening and another one apparently on the way.
And some community residents and local politicians have grown increasingly concerned that the block's residential character is at risk.


Poor Brits
To the Editor:
Where is the Anti-Defamation League of Great Britain when we need it?
I have not yet seen "Pocahontas," but I already resent the movie's portrayal of all Englishmen as something halfway between Prince Charles and Hugh Grant -- probably without the charm of the latter.
If you are going to be politically correct, you have to cover all bases.
SHEILA RIZZO  Tenafly, N.J.


Elizabeth Pearce, Thomas Augustin
Elizabeth M. Pearce, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
David L. Pearce of East Chatham, N.Y., was married yesterday to Capt.
Thomas David Augustin, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Kenneth A. Augustin of Columbia, Md.
The Rev.
Lee Smith performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at the Church of the Immaculate Conception in New Lebanon, N.Y.
Mrs.
Augustin, 25, was until recently the director of public relations at the Savannah Christian Preparatory School in Savannah, Ga.
She graduated from Tulane University.
Her father is the executive assistant to the rector of Grace Church in New York and also serves as the chairman of the restoration and fund-raising organization of Mount Lebanon Shaker Village in New Lebanon.
Her mother, Ann M. Pearce, is the tax collector for the town of Canaan, N.Y.


EVIL'S BACK
It may have been convenient, but was it fair to use German type to illustrate Rosenbaum's article?
Goethe's work saw the light of day in such type long before Hitler's did.
You may push a lot of easy buttons by using that kind of cultural reference.
THOMAS J. HUBSCHMAN Brooklyn


Consider Lily, Veronica and Creeping Jenny
SINCE this, the July 4 weekend, is meant to be a relaxing sort of time, let's abandon the subjects of pulling weeds and mowing lawns and concentrate on some other activities that are just as important.
Have gardeners ever paused to consider how many of the plants growing in their plots have feminine names?
Take Lily, for example.
There are all sorts of them and they come in all sorts of shapes and sizes -- from lily of the valley to lily turf to Easter lily.
In fact, this clan is one of plantdom's largest.


Other Methods, Other Madness And Always Slings and Arrows
John Barrymore claimed to have played Hamlet on a London stage while dead drunk.
And to have received rave reviews for it.
Sir Laurence Olivier played the role so well in his 1948 film version that he became the only performer in Academy Award history so far to direct himself in an Oscar-winning performance.
Actors in every generation have used the role of the melancholy, semisuicidal, possibly insane, possibly incestuous young Danish prince to establish their greatness or at least their credibility as serious actors.
And lately, it seems, a number of actors with movie careers have joined the throng.
Here are some of those who have stepped into the role in recent years, with varying results, as the critics have observed.
ANITA GATES


DIARY
DIPLOMACY Trade War, the Mini-Series Relax.
You can have your Lexuses.
The United States and Japan brought their tariff-rattling spat to a close last week with a predictably dramatic 11th-hour deal.
But this mini-drama somehow left viewers unsatisfied: weak tea when strong coffee had been promised.
With portentous huffing and puffing, the Administration had vowed, in Phil Gramm's words, "a gunfight at the O.K. Corral" -- nothing less than a historic cracking-open of Japan's notoriously sealed markets.
But the agreement that emerged was deliberately ambiguous: no specific Japanese commitments on opening its markets, nothing enforceable.
As one American trade expert put it, "We talk loudly and carry a tiny stick." LAWSUITS Now, Let Investors Beware The flood of legislation that's swamping this nation is clearly a mess, and many people, in response, indulge in an age-old reflex: blame the lawyers.
That reflex is surely behind the drive to discourage shareholder lawsuits -- a battle that has inundated innocent civilians lately with a barrage of advertising.
Brokers and accountants, emboldened by the Republicans strutting their stuff, have pushed for a law to limit lawsuits, saying many suits are frivolous.
Consumer groups have countered with ads cautioning that small investors would be left with little recourse if they were duped.
But anti-lawyer fever is clearly strong these Republican days, and last week the Senate approved the measure with a veto-proof 70-29 vote.
INSIDER TRADING Too Tempting to Resist If the money's lying there, they will take it -- whether it's theirs or not.
That seemed to be the lesson last week when a former Cravath, Swaine &amp; Moore senior associate, and his brother, pleaded guilty to insider trading.
There is a lot of money lying around these days -- in the form of advance information about the current flurry of mergers.
And cases of insider trading are growing in tandem.
Until now Cravath had prided itself on keeping its nose clean, but this lawyer passed on information that resulted in trading profits of nearly $1 million.
Now you'd think that someone who'd reached such professional heights had it made (if by "it" you mean money), but the siren song was clearly too loud.
MUNICIPAL FINANCE A County Circles Its Oranges A lot of people are against taxes, but Orange County voters surely take the prize.
Last week they refused to approve a mere half-percent emergency sales tax increase, even though this defiant stand nudged them toward a rather messy abyss.
The county's in bankruptcy, its debt is now in default, a state takeover looms, and it's far from clear how the trash will be collected and the students taught.
Couldn't the county issue more bonds to make it all better?
Right.
A fellow here has a nice bridge to sell to those bond buyers.
And perhaps worse, municipal bonds all over the place have gotten a black eye.
HEALTH CARE The H.M.O.
Giant Is Coming H.M.O.'s are coming.
Yes, yes, they've been here for some time, but now they'll really be a force to reckon with.
Last week United Healthcare, an H.M.O. giant based in Minnesota, agreed to buy Metrahealth, a more traditional insurer.
Metrahealth, carved recently out of the Met Life and Travelers health businesses, has 10 million customers, including 1.5 million in the New York area.
The merger with United Healthcare will create the nation's largest health-plan company.
So if H.M.O.'s have always seemed a distant concept -- somewhere else, affecting someone else -- that is sure to change in a hurry.
TOBACCO Keeping Minors From Smoking Let's see.
Philip Morris wants to sell cigarettes -- that's its business.
And most smokers start when they are teen-agers.
Yet last week the company said it would go all out to keep minors from smoking. (Well, not exactly all out: the plan will cost $5 million; 1994 profits were $4.7 billion.) Highlights of the program are a national ad campaign, warnings that say "Underage Sale Prohibited," and the end of promotional giveaways.


Saratoga
At Saratoga Race Course, one can still walk the length of the grandstand and view the strata of society, laid out like so many neat geological layers.
At one end stand the railbirds in their T-shirts, craning on tiptoe, The Racing Form stuffed into their back pockets.
Proceeding along the grandstand, cutoff jeans are replaced by Bermuda shorts and baseball caps give way to Ray-Bans.
Near the finish line, owners and breeders sip cocktails in their clubhouse boxes, a sea of double-breasted blazers and linen dresses.
Saratoga Springs, a 30-minute drive north of Albany, is still very much the summer playground for the elite that it has been for more than a century.
It is Mary Lou Whitney, Saratoga's most prominent socialite, making a grand entrance at her annual ball in a horse-drawn carriage.
It is the Fasig-Tipton auction, where some of the best yearlings in America sell for up to a half-million dollars.
It is the most elegant Old World horse track in the country, where, as Heywood Hale Broun once wrote, a day at the races is like being "transported by a time machine into a sporting print."


Bridging the Income Gap After Law School
SINSI HERNANDEZ-CANCIO might have expected that after three years of law school and $87,000 in debts she could at least stop borrowing money and start making it.
Surprise!
It is not that Ms.
Hernandez-Cancio, a graduate of the New York University Law School, has no job.
She landed a $28,000-a-year position as a staff lawyer for Human Rights Watch, a nonprofit group.
But after graduating, she faced three months of full-time study for the New York bar exam -- and an empty wallet.


Peel Me a Grape
NEW JERSEY wines?
To those who have never heard of them, much less tasted them, the three words sound like an oxymoron, the setup line of yet another weary Jersey joke.


Elizabeth L. Kerr And Sandy Fish
Elizabeth Lynne Kerr, a daughter of Drs.
Sandria and William Kerr of Winston-Salem, N.C., is to be married today to Stanton David Fish, a son of Ilene and Dr.
Irving Fish of Tenafly, N.J.
Rabbi Jack Bemporad is to perform the ceremony at the Benson University Center at Wake Forest University in Winston-Salem.
The bride, 25, is a graduate of Washington University in St.
Louis, as is the bridegroom.
She is a candidate for a master's degree in decorative arts at Bard Graduate Center in New York.
Her father is a professor of physics at Wake Forest.
Her mother is a professor of computer science at Winston-Salem State University.


A New Order Reigns On the Highest Court
With its term that ended last week, the Supreme Court embarked on a bold new era of conservative activism.
An ascendant bloc of three conservative Justices spurred the Court to challenge long-held assumptions about Federal power.
The Court itself has turned topsy turvy.
Activism, once derided by conservatives, is now their domain.
Liberals urge judicial restraint.
The center has evaporated.


[ APPEARANCES ] ; MADE IN THE SHADE
My friend Sigrid Burton, a painter who lives in SoHo, had a melanoma removed last summer.
A melanoma, of course, can be lethal, but when, as in Sigrid's case, it's caught early (before it spreads), the rate of cure is 93 percent.
Since melanoma is related to sun exposure, Sigrid decided to avoid suntanning as much as possible.
She vowed to cultivate an "interestingly pale" look, which was fine for winter.
But now that summer's come, and she is commuting to the Hamptons on weekends, she's been talking about her "pasty" face and "doughy" thighs.
I was worried that going pale was affecting Sigrid's self-esteem.
Her inner child happens to be a California girl who used to slather herself with baby oil and iodine to achieve the proper bronzed goddess effect.
When I suggested using a sunless tanning lotion, she was dubious.
"You mean that stuff I used when I was 13 and I came out in orange streaks?" I said I thought they'd improved it recently.
I'd heard good things along the beauty grapevine.


Long Island Q&amp;A: Jerry Shore; A Pacesetter in the Highly Competitive Computer Industry
MAKE it smaller, faster and better," Jerry Shore said. That is an appropriate mantra for the head of a company whose inventions are basic to dozens of industries.
With that philosophy, Mr.
Shore said, he transformed the business he began with $26,000 into a leading designer and manufacturer of computer-circuit boards, plumbing hardware, nameplates, adhesives and the like.


When the Night Hummed
GROWING up in the 1960's in the Monroe Park section of Atlantic City, Karlos LaSane 2d was convinced he was going to be the among the greatest musicians of his era.
His father, Karlos LaSane, was maitre d'hotel of Club Harlem, and father and son lived for the evenings -- the elder Mr.
LaSane donning a tuxedo, the younger leaving his summer job picking trash off the Boardwalk to stand in his father's shadow, where he met musicians and entertainers, sat in on the shows, learned how to play trumpet, drums and bass guitar, and eventually sat in with a few Club Harlem bands.


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
'INVENTION ADVENTURE' Legos, the Danish toy blocks and bricks, are the basis for a summer of constructive fun for children from 4 to 16 at the Science Center of Connecticut, 950 Trout Brook Drive, in West Hartford.
Developed with the help of the American Institute of Architects, Prof.
Seymour Papert of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology and the Association of Science-Technology Centers, the program "Invention Adventure" challenges young people to use creative abilities they may never have been called upon to summon up before.


Greasepaint at Greenpoint: The Roar of the Homeless Crowd
Mixing the light-hearted with the heart-breaking, a group of men from the Greenpoint Men's Shelter put on a show last week that lampooned life's absurdities and took a stark look at the problems that plague their lives -- AIDS, tuberculosis, drug addiction, violence and homelessness.
With tragicomic skits, heartfelt poems, sweet singing and powerful rapping, the troupe of about 15 shelter residents staged "Life Styles: Decisions, Choices, Consequences," a variety show with a moral.
Between pantomimes of temptation -- of drinking 40-ounce bottles of malt liquor, injecting heroin and smoking crack -- and monologues about sobering up in "Camp One-Day-at-a-Time," there were vignettes of lives not ordinarily portrayed on the stage.


County Debating Hospital's Status
THROUGHOUT the country, public hospitals are falter ing unable to keep pace with the changes around them.
In Los Angeles, a proposal is under consideration to close the Los Angeles County-University of California Medical Center -- one of the largest hospitals in the nation -- because it is facing a budget deficit of more than $1 billion.
In Nassau County, a committee appointed to question whether government should be in the business of health care is studying privatization of the financially strapped County Medical Center there.
And in Washington, budget cuts have forced the District of Columbia to consider changing the form of governance at its public hospital.


Eagles Are Back, Minus Grime
The eagles have landed.
After a year-and-a-half cleansing, four 1,200-pound bronze statues returned Wednesday to their roosts atop doric columns at the Grand Army Plaza entrance to Prospect Park.
Weather, smog and the droppings of real feather-and-blood birds had marred the sculpted eagles, which were installed in 1901.
So they were taken to the Modern Art Foundry in Queens for a high-tech bird bath -- workers blasted the eagles with tiny glass beads or crushed walnut shells to remove corrosion.


The World; Why the U.S. Takes Guff From Weaklings
BURIED in the praise that the American diplomat Mickey Kantor heaped upon his trade agreement with the Japanese was a kernel of realism.
"We did the best we could on this," Mr.
Kantor, the United States Trade Representative, said the other day.
"Given the state of the Japanese economy, we had to be realistic."
What he also could have said is that, in order to avert a trade war, the United States had to accept less than it wanted in its trade agreement with Japan because the Government in Tokyo was too weak to make many concessions -- and very eager to claim victory over the United States.


The Spy Who Sold Out
SELLOUT  Aldrich Ames and the Corruption of the CIA.
By James Adams.
Illustrated. 322 pp.
New York: Viking. $23.95.
KILLER SPY  The Inside Story of the FBI's Pursuit and Capture of Aldrich Ames, America's Deadliest Spy.
By Peter Maas.
Illustrated. 243 pp.
New York: Warner Books. $21.95.
BETRAYAL  The Story of Aldrich Ames, an American Spy.
By Tim Weiner, David Johnston and Neil A. Lewis.
Illustrated. 308 pp.
New York: Random House. $25.
NIGHTMOVER  How Aldrich Ames Sold the CIA to the KGB for $4.6 Million.
By David Wise.
Illustrated. 356 pp.
New York: HarperCollins Publishers. $25.


The Urban Swimming Hole
I NEVER imagined a backyard swimming pool in my industrial neighborhood -- where there isn't a lot of space -- until one day I heard mysterious splashing.
I peeked through some fencing to see an enormous above-ground pool virtually filling an entire backyard, leaving room only for a few tables and chairs.
Randel Turner of Jamaica, Queens, told me that Count Basie had had a big pool in his backyard in St.
Albans.
On hot summer nights you could hear the sound of his band mixed with the laughter of ebullient swimmers.
And if you drove by you'd see a whole line of children peering through the fence.


Diana K. Larr, Richard P. Gabriel
Diana Kirsten Larr, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Peter Larr of Hong Kong and Rye, N.Y., was married yesterday to Richard Peter Gabriel, the son of Barbara Gabriel of Riverdale, the Bronx, and Richard Gabriel of Melborne, Fla.
The Rev.
Edward Johnson performed the Episcopal ceremony at Christ Church in Rye.
Mrs.
Gabriel is an assistant treasurer in the personal banking division of Chase Manhattan Bank in New York.
She graduated from the College of New Rochelle.
Her father is a senior vice president and the portfolio manager of the Asia Pacific region at Chase Manhattan in Hong Kong.
Her mother, Rosamond W. Larr, was a councilwoman in Rye from 1993 to 1995.
Mr.
Gabriel is an account executive for the Chase Manhattan Mortgage Corporation in New York.
He graduated from the State University at Albany.
His mother is a dental assistant in New York.
His father is a consultant with Synectics, a management consulting company, in Melborne.


LAST LOOK


POSTINGS: Auction in the Poconos; For Sale: An Airport
A 440-acre combination airport, picnic grove, lake and Christmas tree farm in Sterling, Pa., subdivided into 17 parcels, is to be sold at auction next Saturday.
Mike Caputo, a tree farmer and private pilot, bought the property in 1969 when it was just another 1,750-foot mountaintop in the Poconos with 60-mile views.
Mr.
Caputo turned it into a landscaped multipurpose air park complete with a beach, tennis courts and a children's playground.


Aquavit, Please
CHRISTER'S ** (212) 974-7224; 145 West 55th Street; $$$; all major credit cards


SUNDAY, July 2, 1995; STUFF: Money and Chrome -- the American Way
In the 1969 movie "Easy Rider," Peter Fonda rode a chopped Harley-Davidson Panhead, painted in stars and stripes, in search of America.
Today, magnates and movie stars ride Harleys and true devotees spend thousands to customize machines once known as hogs.
The six Harleys d'art above show some of the passion and lunacy of motorcycle romance.
Top left: An orange 1980 Shovelhead, a classic super-sanitary (meaning spare, Bauhaus style) chopper with precise chroming, $15,000.
Right: A candy-red, full-fendered Softail (the term refers to the suspension), which aficionados would call "swoopy" -- long, low . . . and $40,000.
Middle left: An over-the-top Southwest-style paint job on a $40,000 Softail.
Right: A yellow-and-violet, $50,000 superbike (Softail) with exotic billet parts, each machined from a solid block of aluminum.
Bottom left: a blue $35,000 Fat Boy that James Dean, whose face is on the gas tank, would surely have found too rococo.
Right: A tough, massive $38,000 silver-and-white Softail, notable for its stretched gas tanks.


IN SHORT: FICTION
REDEMPTION  By Leon Uris. HarperCollins, $25.


'Hamlet' as Autobiography, Spoken in Reflective Voice
Robert Wilson, the renowned American theater artist who spends much of his time overseas, has joined an exclusive society.
He is a member of what might be called the Hamlet Club, made up of performers who have taken on the most famous of all Shakespearean roles.
But because the avant-garde Mr.
Wilson is who he is -- creator, performer, director, designer -- he will open the Serious Fun Festival at Lincoln Center on Thursday in a solo show: "Hamlet: A Monologue."
The play, with original music and sound score by the frequent Wilson collaborator Hans Peter Kuhn, has been directed and designed by Mr.
Wilson.
It is a production of the Alley Theater in Houston, where the world premiere was held in May.
Mr.
Wilson, who is 54 and was born in Waco, Tex., is an associate artist at the Alley.
Performances at Alice Tully Hall at Lincoln Center are through Saturday.


Pitching Shortage Big Worry For Yanks
The calendar inside Buck Showalter's ubiquitous black notebook would usually have these names listed on successive days: Key, McDowell, Perez, Kamieniecki and Hitchcock.
In a world without injuries, the manager would have a dependable rotation, but the world is not always healthy and so Showalter's calendar has become a sloppy and tedious exercise.
Three of his five starters are injured and unavailable.
Already, Jimmy Key was unlikely to pitch this season because of chronic pain in his left shoulder and Scott Kamieniecki was recuperating from a sprained right elbow, then on Friday, Melido Perez left a 12-6 shellacking against the Brewers with stiffness and soreness in his right shoulder.
He will miss at least one start.


Tunes in the Summer Air
A concert and an opera, and a fantasy ball fit for Cinderella.


Still Rural, Amagansett Is Changing, But Warily
SETTLED in 1680, Amagansett is a sleepy hamlet of 902 inhabitants between East Hampton and Montauk.
For some travelers it is only a blur through a car window, a nanosecond on Route 27 with a Main Street two blocks long.
But for some residents, plans could turn "the Place of Good Water," the original meaning in the Montauk language, into a "town of bad feelings."


Lisa Simmons, Joshua Weinstein
Lisa Simmons, a magazine editor, and Joshua Weinstein, a television producer, are to be married today in Waban, Mass., at the home of the bride's parents, Maureen and Dr.
James B. Simmons.
Rabbi Frank Waldorf is to perform the ceremony.
The bride, 31, is the West Coast editor of Cosmopolitan magazine in Los Angeles.
She graduated cum laude from Barnard College.
Her father is the chief of radiology at Marlborough Hospital in Marlborough, Mass.


Americans in a Land of Opportunity: Europe
FOR GENERATIONS, AMERICAN ARTISTS heeded the call of Paris.
First came the painters, Mary Cassatt and Winslow Homer among them, lured by the Impressionist movement of the late 19th century.
Then it was the turn of writers, with Edith Wharton leading the way in the 1910's and Ernest Hemingway, Gertrude Stein, Ezra Pound and Scott Fitzgerald soon following.
By the 1930's, Josephine Baker was the toast of le tout Paris, and black American performers had found a home here.
After World War II, Paris was where Henry Miller could get published, where James Baldwin felt free to live and write.
Then, it seems, Paris stopped being an important port of call for American creators.


Portraits of a Memento Mori That Used to Meow
One balmy evening, Andrew Garn, 38, a photographer whose work is regularly seen in the O. K. Harris gallery in SoHo, opened his freezer and pulled out a black garbage bag wedged between two sticks of Hotel Bar butter and a couple of Stouffer's frozen dinners.
Inside the bag was a slightly dingy pink towel, which he gently unwrapped to reveal a frozen cat.
"Hi, Clay," he sang cheerfully, fluffing up her gray fur, which was still soft.


Trouble Down on the Farm
Where have all the baseball fans gone?
Apparently fed up because of the strike and the economic and legal machinations in the major leagues, many are abandoning big league ballparks this season, driving down attendance more than 20 percent and taking their discretionary income elsewhere.
Disenchantment, however, hasn't spread to the minors.
"Baseball the way it used to be" is how fans and pundits commonly characterize minor league baseball.
Cheap seats, closeness to the playing field, the hustle of young athletes -- the traditional virtues of minor league baseball are still evident.
While fans stay away from the big leagues, attendance in the minors is holding steady, the latest sign of strength in a 15-year resurgence in popularity.


Knicks Offer the Job to Nelson
Madison Square Garden President Dave Checketts said the Knicks have offered Don Nelson the job as coach of the team and that negotiations between the two parties could come to a close early this week.
"Offers have been made, and we're in the midst of going over a few things that still need to be worked out," Checketts said last night.
"Things are going well, but I'm not going to announce anything until everything is signed and sealed."


Playing for the Love of Baseball
IT has been a long time between innings.
The Peekskill Highlanders zipped up their bat bags in 1949.
But professional baseball returned to Westchester County this weekend.
After more than two weeks on the road, the Yonkers Hoot Owls of the new Northeast Baseball League were to open their home season last night against the Sullivan County Mountain Lions.
They are scheduled to play the Mountain Lions again tonight at Fleming Field in Yonkers.


Benign Bugs: Hello Phobics
A 25-FOOT-LONG ant?
An 18-foot praying mantis?
A dragonfly with a 17-foot wingspan?
Sounds like a B-grade horror movie?
These bugs are neither B-grade, nor horrifying.
They're handmade from trees, dried branches, vines, bark and similar materials, and will be on display all summer at the New York Botanical Garden in the Bronx.


Funds With a Continental Flair
A SIZZLING year in 1993 put European stock funds on the map.
The number of funds in the group nearly doubled, to 43, soon afterward.
If this year's returns continue apace, as the pundits are suggesting, look for the group's ranks to swell again next year.


90's Cuisine in a 19th-Century Setting
TAVERN ON MAIN looks as if it has been around since Revolutionary War days, but in fact it's a new addition to Westport -- and a welcome one.
The building is indeed vintage 1810, and has evolved from farmhouse to girls' school to the town's original ice cream parlor.
The last occupant was Chez Pierre, long a local landmark, more for its cozy atmosphere than its food.


Rain Claims a Casualty As Briton Takes Tumble
The start of the Tour de France was skewed tonight by a heavy and steady rainstorm that began after the first few dozen of 189 riders set out, one by one, in the short prologue of the three-week bicycle race.
The only rider who appeared to take a chance and go all out in the rain, Chris Boardman of England, the winner of the prologue in the last Tour, skidded on the slippery pavement, crashed into a rail and seemed to be badly injured.
Helped into his team car when he tried and failed to continue on another bicycle, he had to quit after perhaps four minutes of competition.


June 25 - July 1: Aspirations; Whitman's Budget Ax Clears a Path for Her
Haley Barbour, the Republican national chairman, likes to say that, by getting elected a year ahead of the Republicans who won last November, Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman of New Jersey gave herself a chance to be the pathfinder in her party's trek toward lower taxes and leaner government with more local control in statehouses.
Last week, Mrs.
Whitman showed she knew the way when she rolled over the objections of some of her own party's leaders to enact the second half of her 30 percent income tax cut a year ahead of schedule.
The legislature, which is in Republican hands, also passed her $16 billion budget for the coming year, including a plan to put dozens of state operations in the hands of private contractors, at the cost of 2,900 public jobs.
The Governor's easy budget victory did nothing to diminish her reputation as a contender for the national ticket next year.
Even complaints from statehouse Democrats that she is starving the state of services to fatten her own national reputation have failed to dampen New Jerseyans' affection for her.
But Mrs.
Whitman must wonder if her national destiny will find her before the weaknesses in her budget do.
Her tax cut needs a strong economy and the indicators are faltering.
And even Republicans fear that her cuts may only raise property taxes.
But by then she could be in Washington.
IVER PETERSON


The Nation: Presidential Poses; Campaign Trail or Garden Path?
WHAT ever happened to the Rose Garden strategy?
Time was when a President facing a re-election campaign would use the majesty and aura of his office to rise above all challengers, when he would spend his time signing bills and making pronouncements in the lush green expanse of the White House Rose Garden.
The subliminal message: I'm too busy presiding to stoop to mere campaigning.


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
STEPPING INTO HISTORY The business district of Nyack, where several 19th-century Victorian buildings still stand, will be explored in an architectural walking tour today at 2 P.M.
The $5 fee includes a map offering several self-guided Nyack walking tours.
The meeting place is the Nyack Community Center, on South Broadway; no reservations are necessary.
Robert Goldberg, chairman of the Discover the Nyacks Committee of the Friends of the Nyacks will lead the walk.
"Things look very much as they did when Nyack was at its height as a river port in the 1870's and 80's," he said.
"That's when most of the downtown buildings were built." The ground floors have been altered but, "if you look up, the second stories are almost all intact," Mr.
Goldberg continued.


Sky Beauty, a Favorite At Belmont, Is Retired
Sky Beauty, the queen of New York mares, is being retired at the age of 5 after winning 15 of her 21 races, an Eclipse Award and $1.3 million in prize money.
Allen Jerkens, who trained the filly, confirmed yesterday that she was being sent to the Wycombe Farm in Reddick, Fla., by her owner, Georgia E. Hofmann, who has delayed the announcement because she has been traveling in Europe.
He added, "I hate to lose her because she has been so good to us for so long."


When New York Was the New Place to Play
IT WAS THE BEST OF TIMES, IT WAS THE worst of times.
Some concerts were so popular that tickets were scalped for $650.
Legendary virtuosos made their way to New York, which was also the testing ground for aspiring performers.
Grand concert halls were constructed, though some were harshly criticized for putting decoration above good acoustics.
Critics lobbied for American composers and condemned the New York Philharmonic for its excessive love of European models.
Some writers were astounded by the plentiful "trash" attracting inordinate public attention.
It was, in other words, a time very like the present.
But this was New York in the 1850's, when the city was not yet a world-class metropolis and American musical culture was in its infancy.
So everything was radically different, as if taking place in a parallel universe in which the language was the same but the meaning unfamiliar.


INSIDE
Russian Leaders Survive The Russian Government averted a political showdown when opponents in Parliament failed to gather the 226 votes needed to pass a crucial vote of no confidence.
Page 9.
Special Olympics Begins
The schedule is heavy on running, jumping, lifting, throwing.
But, ultimately, the Special Olympics World Games emphasizes caring.
Page 30.


Changing Face of Health Care (Cont'd): Private Doctors, Public Patients
Alisia Charles was bundling up her 5-week-old son Jemuel last week after a visit to the pediatrician.
She was in a good mood.
In less than an hour, she and Jemuel had been seen by nurses and a doctor at the Chelsea Practice health center here on Ventnor Avenue and was on her way.
"It's a lot quicker now," Ms.
Charles said, recalling the days when the center was run by the Atlantic City Health Department.
"They are more organized."


'Blatantly Racist'
To the Editor:
Poor old offensive Uncle Remus.
According to the short piece with the main article on "Pocahontas"  [ "It's a Small World . . . and Not Always P.C." ] , this man's politically incorrect crimes (as depicted in the 1946 Disney movie "Song of the South") included being happy-go-lucky, telling stories about animals and cheering white folks up with a song.
I thank God we live in an age when enlightened self-reproach can deliver us and our children from this repellent Negro caricature.


At the Casinos
What's happening on stage at all the Atlantic City casinos this week.
Tickets are available through Ticketmaster, (800) 736-1420.
Bally's Park Place  Boardwalk and Park Place. (800) 225-5977.
PARK CABARET "Legends in Concert," impersonations of Neil Diamond, Judy Garland, Whitney Houston, Tom Jones, Elvis Presley, Tina Turner, Madonna, Elton John and the Blues Brothers.
Sunday through Thursday at 7:30 and 10 P.M.; Saturday at 8 and 10:30 P.M.
Tickets: $20; Caesars Atlantic City  2100 Pacific Avenue. (800) 677-7469.
CIRCUS MAXIMUS THEATER Natalie Cole.
Today at 8 P.M. and tomorrow at 8 P.M.
Tickets: $45.
COMING UP Chicago, July 27-30.
Claridge Hotel  Boardwalk and Park Place. (800) 257-8585.
PALACE THEATER "Magic and Beyond" with Brett Daniels.
Monday and Tuesday at 7:30 P.M.; Wednesday, Thursday, Saturday and Sunday at 7:30 and 10 P.M.
Tickets: $15; $19 on Saturday.
One-drink minimum.
The Grand  Boston at Pacific Avenue.  (609) 340-7200.
CAMBRIDGE BALLROOM Bill Cosby.
Today at 8 P.M.
Tickets: $35 and $50.
COMING UP Paul Anka with Stewie Stone, comedian.
July 13-16.
Harrah's Hotel Casino  Harrah's Boulevard and Huron Avenue. (800) 242-7724.
ATRIUM LOUNGE Michaels and Mitchell.
Monday through Saturday.
Alan Dale.
Monday through July 16.
BROADWAY-BY-THE-BAY "The Will Rogers Follies." Sunday, Monday and Tuesday at 7 and 10 P.M.
"Guys and Dolls." Starts Wednesday.
Through Sept. 3.
Tuesday through Sunday, 7 and 10:30 P.M.
Tickets: $20.
Merv Griffin's Resorts Casino Hotel  1133 Boardwalk. (609) 340-6830.
SUPERSTAR THEATER "The Coconut Ballroom," with Pia Zadora and a 29-piece orchestra conducted by Merv Griffin, features the music of the Big Band era with salutes to Tommy Dorsey and Glenn Miller.
Today at 3 P.M.
Tickets: $30.
COMING UP Tom Jones, July 19-23.
Sands Hotel and Casino  Indiana Avenue and Brighton Park. (800) 257-8580.
COPA ROOM "Sophisticated Rhythms." Six singers, a five piece live band and Walter Freeman, dancer, accompany Clint Holmes as he covers hits by the Mills Brothers, Smokey Robinson, Louis Armstrong, Nat King Cole, the Pointer Sisters and the Supremes.
Sunday through Wednesday at 3:30 and 8:30 P.M.; Saturday at 8 and 11 P.M.
Tickets: $20.
Showboat Hotel Casino  Delaware and Pacific. (609) 343-4000.
MARDI GRAS SHOWROOM "The Basin Street Follies," a revue with song, comedy and magic, with new acts every month.
Featuring Bobby Arvon and Lori Dobson, singers, and the Great Tomsoni and Company, a comedy and magic act.
Monday through Saturday at 8 and 10:30 P.M.
Tickets: $10.
Tropworld  Boardwalk and Brighton Avenue.  (800) 257-6227.
COMING UP Dick Fox's "Doo Wop." July 26-31.
Trump's Castle Casino Resort  Huron Avenue and Brigantine  Boulevard. (800) 777-8477.
CRYSTAL BALLROOM The Beach Boys.
Thursday, Friday, Saturday and next Sunday at 9 P.M.
Tickets: $50.
One-drink minimum.
KING'S COURT SHOWROOM Dick Clark's "American Bandstand Live: The Beat Goes On." Four decades of rock-and-roll, presented through song, dance, magic, comedy and novelty acts.
Monday through Thursday and Saturday at 7:30 and 10:30 P.M.; Sunday at 9 P.M.
Tickets: $12.50 on weekdays and $15 on Saturdays.
One-drink minimum.
VIVA LOUNGE Cozy Morley, comedian.
Tuesday through Saturday, 8 P.M.
Free with a one-drink minimum.
Through Sept. 2.
Trump Plaza  Boardwalk at Mississippi Avenue. (800) 759-8786.
PLAZA SHOWROOM Lou Rawls.
Today at 9 P.M. and tomorrow at 8 P.M.
Tickets: $35.
Donna Summer.
Wednesday and Thursday at 9 P.M.
Tickets: $40.
Friday and Saturday at 10 P.M. and next Sunday at 8 P.M.
Tickets: $45.
Trump Taj Mahal  1000 Boardwalk at Virginia Avenue. (609) 449-1000.
CASBAH "A Tribute to the Platters," with Sonny Turner, singer.
Monday through Thursday and Saturday and Sunday at 7:30 and 10:30 P.M.
Tickets: $12.50; $15 on Saturday.
MARK G. ETESS ARENA Yanni.
Today and tomorrow at 8 P.M.
Tickets: $47.50.
COMING UP Dion, Brenda Lee and Gene Pitney.
July 14-15.


Other Methods, Other Madness And Always Slings and Arrows
John Barrymore claimed to have played Hamlet on a London stage while dead drunk.
And to have received rave reviews for it.
Sir Laurence Olivier played the role so well in his 1948 film version that he became the only performer in Academy Award history so far to direct himself in an Oscar-winning performance.
Actors in every generation have used the role of the melancholy, semisuicidal, possibly insane, possibly incestuous young Danish prince to establish their greatness or at least their credibility as serious actors.
And lately, it seems, a number of actors with movie careers have joined the throng.
Here are some of those who have stepped into the role in recent years, with varying results, as the critics have observed.
ANITA GATES


ANGRY FATHERS
Some 35 years ago, at the age of 15, I wrote my first letter to the editor -- to Mell Lazarus, at The Herald Tribune, telling him that his comic strip "Miss Peach" made me laugh.
Now, so many years later, I write to let him know that his About Men column "Angry Fathers" (May 28) made me cry.
I thank him again.
MELANIE (STEIN) STRELL New Paltz, N.Y.


The Pool House: Making A Stylish Splash
THE English have long had a passion for temples, for ruins, for garden follies; starting in the early 18th century, they began dotting them around the landscape like daffodils in the spring.
Americans, being more practical, generally eschewed such fantastical and useless architectural objects.
Outbuildings were tool sheds, four-square and double-doored; garages were wooden boxes where the family automobile was stored.


Family Picnic
Patrick Clark, who recently became executive chef of the celebrated Tavern on the Green in Manhattan, is a chef's son who grew up in the Carnarsie section of Brooklyn.
Clark's father, Melvin, was an early practitioner of New American cuisine -- down-home food, local ingredients.
He was adept at polishing dishes that had been long taken for granted and using ingredients that had been nearly forgotten.
Clark suspects he was fated by blood to learn restaurateuring, like his father, at the New York City Technical College.
Clark also says that he was graced by changing times when he had a chance to hone his cooking skills with some European maestros, unlike his father, who worked at various New York restaurants, including the Four Seasons and Charley O's (as executive chef).
Big family gatherings -- the Fourth of July, for example -- are always a reckoning for the 40-year-old Clark, himself the father of five.


For Nine Days, Connecticut Is Host to a World of Athletes and Abilities
The first soccer ball was booted at 8:15 A.M. today and one hour later the first runner finished the first race, the first of many to come at the Special Olympics World Games.
She was Aspasia N. Kalla of Athens, and the event was a preliminary heat of the 3,000 meters.
Although Kalla looked back often, there was no need because she led the field of 15 from the start and had a comfortable margin in all seven and a half laps around the Yale track.
Her time was a commendable 11 minutes 36 seconds.


Jennifer Foust, Jefferson Tuttle
Jennifer Lynn Foust, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Gregory B. Foust of Rochester, was married yesterday to Jefferson Spiers Tuttle, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Woodruff L. Tuttle of Weston, Conn.
The Rev.
Robert J. Kaiser performed the ceremony at the Gates Presbyterian Church in Rochester.
Mrs.
Tuttle, 22, graduated in May from Purdue University.
Her father is the manager of new business development for the consumer imaging division of the Eastman Kodak Company in Rochester.


Smothering in Junk, State Plans to Clean Its Attic
Anyone who doubts New Jersey's commitment to conservation has never been inside the nondescript yellow building at 300 Whitehead Road.
There, behind a metal door, lie several decades worth of the accumulated debris of bureaucracy: endless shelves stacked with Jetsons-era computer keyboards, water-damaged chairs, reams of copying paper, a contraption that looks like a hand-cranked film projector with a built-in water bottle but is actually a vintage gummed packing-tape wetter.
For the privilege of holding onto these possessions, taxpayers are paying the building's owner $18,000 a year.


What's Going On: A Partial Park Calendar, Through Labor Day
MANHATTAN  July 2: Central Park Summerstage: Cassandra Wilson &amp; Papa Wimba.
Jazz and pop. 3 P.M. (212) 360-2777.
July 3: Bryant Park Film: "Meet Me in St. Louis," starring Judy Garland; 8:30 P.M. (212) 512-5700.
July 4: Battery Park to South Street Seaport Great July 4th Festival; 11 A.M. (212)809-4900.
Central Park Summerstage: Continental Drifters.
Rock, country blues and piano. 3 P.M. (212) 360-2777.
July 5: Central Park Summerstage: New York Grand Opera; 7:30 P.M. (212) 360-2777.
July 6: Central Park Summerstage: Spoken Word -- Monologues by Anna Quindlen, Miss Coco Peru, Lucy Grealy; 8:30 P.M. (212) 360-2777.
South Cove (Battery Park City) Trio Globo.
Jazz/world music featuring cello, piano; 7 P.M. (212) 267-9700.
July 7: Central Park Bicycle racing.
Century Road Club Association. 6:30 A.M. (212) 222-8062.
Traffic calming ride for skaters and cyclists; 6:15 P.M.; Lower Loop Road, (212) 802-8222.
Summerstage: Douglas Dunn and Dancers, Axis Dance Troupe; 8:30 P.M. (212) 360-2777.
July 8: Central Park Summerstage: Africa Fete Day 1, Baaba Maal, Osibisa and Femi Kuti; 3 P.M. (212) 360-2777.
July 9: Bryant Park Buddhist Church Dance Festival; 11 A.M. (212) 983-4142.
Central Park Summerstage.
Africa Fete Day 2, Discussion of African sounds and images; noon.
Boukman Eksperyans, Tabu Ley Rochereau and Oumou Sangare, 3 P.M. (212) 360-2777.
July 10: Bryant Park Film: "Laura" (1944), based on Vera Caspary mystery novel; 8:30 P.M. (212) 512-5700.
July 11: Hudson River Park Jupiter Symphony; 6:30 P.M. (212) 416-5354.
July 12: Central Park Breakfast Run; 6:30 A.M.; Tavern on the Green.
New York Road Runners Club. (212) 860-2280.
Summerstage: New York Grand Opera. 7:30 P.M. (212) 360-2777.
July 13: Central Park Tennis Tournament (through July 16); 9:30 A.M.; Frederick Johnson Park (212) 560-0177.
New York Road Skaters Race; 6:30 P.M., registration, 4:30 P.M.; (212) 534-7858.
Summerstage: Spoken Word -- June Jordan, Bill T. Jones; 8:30 P.M. (212) 360-2777.
South Cove (Battery Park City) "Nudes," acoustic cello/ guitar duo; 7 P.M. (212) 267-9700.
July 14: Central Park Traffic calming ride for skaters and cyclists. 6:15 P.M.
Lower Loop Road, Central Park, (212) 802-8222.
Summerstage: Tere O'Connor Dance, Bill Young &amp; Dancers; 8:30 P.M. (212) 360-2777.
July 15: Central Park Bicycle racing; 6:30 A.M.
Century Road Club Association. (212) 222-8062.
Summerstage: Freddy Johnston and Alejandro Escovedo.
Alternative and soul; 3 P.M. (212) 360-2777.
Harlem River Park 3-on-3 basketball tournament; 9 A.M. (212) 360-2738.
Hudson River Park Outdoor Family Theater; 6:30 P.M.; (212) 267-9700.
July 16: Central Park Summerstage: Black Stalin and Super Blue backed by the Love Band.
Soca and Calypso; 3 P.M. (212) 360-2777.
July 17: Bryant Park Film: "Born Yesterday," starring Judy Holliday. 8:30 P.M.
Bryant Park (212) 512-5700.
July 18: Hudson River Park "Cabaret Cool" with jazz vocalist Evan Matthews; 6:30 P.M. (212) 416-5354.
July 19: Central Park Summerstage: New York Grand Opera; 7:30 P.M.; (212) 360-2777.
July 20: Central Park Summerstage: Spoken Word -- Art Spiegelman &amp; Paul Auster; 8:30 P.M. (212) 360-2777.
South Cove (Battery Park City) "Cybergarden-Prog," rock, improvisational jazz, world music; 7 P.M. (212) 267-9700.
July 21: Central Park Summerstage: Anna Sokolow's Players' Project and Kevin Wynn Collection; 8:30 P.M. (212) 360-2777.
July 22: Central Park Bicycle racing; 6:30 A.M.
Century Road Club Association. (212) 222-8062.
Summerstage: John Cale &amp; Stereolab, European and American New Music; 3 P.M. (212) 360-2777.
July 23: Central Park New York Road Runners Club team championship; 8:30 A.M. 5-mile championship (public invited) 9:30 A.M. (212) 860-2280.
Summerstage: Boukan Ginen &amp; Vodu 155, world roots music; 3 P.M. (212) 360-2777.
July 24: Bryant Park Film: "Strangers on a Train;" 8:30 P.M. (212) 512-5700.
July 25: Central Park New York Philharmonic and fireworks; 8 P.M., Great Lawn. (212) 875-5709.
Hudson River Park Cabaret tribute to Judy Garland, Barbara Streisand and Lauren Bacall; 6:30 P.M. (212) 416-5354.
July 27: Central Park Summerstage: The poets Patti Smith and Janet Hamill; 8:30 P.M. (212) 360-2777.
South Cove (Battery Park City) Michael Hill Blues Mob; 7 P.M. (212) 267-9700.
July 28: Central Park Summerstage: The dancers Doug Varone &amp; Sungsoo Ahn Pick-up; 8:30 P.M. (212) 360-2777.
Moonlight ride for skaters &amp; cyclists; 10 P.M.
Meet at Columbus Circle; (212) 802-8222.
July 29: Central Park Bicycle racing; 6:30 A.M.
Century Road Club Association. (212) 222-8062.
Reservoir run; 9 A.M.
New York Road Runners Club. (212) 860-2280.
Summerstage: Pete Rock and C.L.
Smooth &amp; Soul Coughing; 3 P.M. (212) 360-2777.
July 30: Central Park Summerstage: Steve Riley and the Mamou Playboys plus more.
Cajun, Irish, Finnish music. 3 P.M. (212) 360-2777.
New York Philharmonic and fireworks; 8 P.M., Great Lawn. (212) 875-5709.
July 31: Byrant Park Film: "War of the Worlds" (1953) based on H.G.
Wells novel; 8:30 P.M. (212) 512-5700.
Aug. 1: Hudson River Park Cabaret; "We've Got Thunder," an HBO Comedy; 6:30 P.M. (212) 416-5354.
Aug. 2: Central Park Summerstage: New York Grand Opera; 7:30 P.M. (212) 360-2777.
Aug. 3: South Cove (Battery Park City) International music and improvisational jazz; 7 P.M. (212) 267-9700.
Aug. 4-6: Site 23/24 (Battery Park City -- between Warren and Murray Streets) 11th Annual Carnival in New York; Noon. (212) 307-7420.
Aug. 5: Central Park Bicycle racing; 6:30 A.M.; Century Road Club Association. (212) 222-8062.
Racewalk Championship; 9 A.M. (212) 628-1317.
Summerstage: Ali Farka Toure &amp; Lucky Peterson, blues; 3 P.M.
Tompkins Square Park Youth Festival; 11 A.M. (212) 397-3109.
Aug. 6: Central Park Summerstage: Gilberto Santa Rosa &amp; Olga Tanon, salsa and merengue; 3 P.M. (212) 360-2777.
Riverside Park Jazz Festival; 79th Street rotunda; 4 P.M. (212) 408-0266.
Aug. 7: Bryant Park Film: "Top Hat," starring Ginger Rogers and Fred Astaire; 8:30 P.M. (212) 512-5700.
Aug. 7-11: DeWitt Clinton Park Children's programs; 10 A.M. (212) 541-9257.
Aug. 8: Hudson River Park Cabaret; The Jenny Burton Choir; 6:30 P.M. (212) 416-5354.
Aug. 9: Central Park Youth Extravaganza; 10 A.M.; North Meadow. (212) 408-0226.
Aug. 12: Central Park Bicycle racing; 6:30 A.M.; Century Road Club Association. (212) 222-8062.
Baptist Association reunion; 10 A.M; East Meadow. (212) 408-0226.
Tompkins Square Park Theatre for the New City; 3 P.M. (212) 408-0226.
Aug. 13: Central Park New York Road Runners Club half-marathon; 8:30 A.M. (212) 860-2280.
Riverside Park Jazz Festival; 79th Street rotunda; 4 P.M. (212) 408-0266.
Aug. 12-13: Central Park Chill Out Weekend; Zoo. (718) 220-5100.
Aug. 14: Bryant Park Film: "Sabrina," with Humphrey Bogart and Audrey Hepburn; 8:30 P.M. (212) 512-5700.
Aug. 15: Hudson River Park Music: classical, cabaret, crossover; 6:30 P.M. (212) 416-5354.
Aug. 19: Central Park Bicycle racing; 6:45 A.M.; Century Road Club Association. (212)222-8062.
Hudson River Park or Esplanade Plaza Outdoor Family Theater; 6:30 P.M. (212) 267-9700.
Aug. 20: Central Park Big Apple Triathlon Club triathlon; 7:30 A.M.
Lasker Pool. (212) 289-4113.
Tompkins Square Park 3d Annual Jazz Festival; 2 P.M. (212) 397-3109.
Riverside Park Jazz Festival; 79th Street rotunda; 4 P.M. (212) 408-0266.
Aug. 21: Bryant Park Film: "The Searchers," Western with John Wayne and Natalie Wood; 8:30 P.M. (212) 512-5700.
Aug. 22: Hudson River Park Style &amp; Stride cabaret -- Cole Porter meets Fats Waller; 6:30 P.M. (212) 416-5354.
Aug. 23: Inwood Hill Park Native American Festival; 11 A.M. (800) 201-PARK.
Aug. 26: Central Park Bicycle racing; 6:30 A.M.; Century Road Club Association. (212) 222-8062.
Aug. 27: Central Park New York Road Runners Club marathon training run; 7:30 A.M. (212) 860-2280.
Riverside Park Jazz Festival; 79th Street Rotunda; 4 P.M. (212) 408-0266.
Aug. 28: Washington Square Park Jazz Concert; 4 P.M. (212) 408-0226.
Bryant Park Film: "Auntie Mame," with Rosalind Russell; 8:30 P.M. (212) 512-5700.
Aug. 29: Hudson River Park "The Caribbean Music Experience" Ray Santos Orchestra; 6 P.M. (212) 416-5354.
September 2-3: Central Park Big Apple Balloonfest; 10 A.M.; Great Lawn. (212)360-3456.
September 4: Byrant Park Film: "Barefoot in the Park," with Robert Redford and Jane Fonda; 8:30 P.M. (212) 512-5700.
QUEENS  July 4: McNeil Park Little Brass Band of the American Concert Band; 5 P.M. (718) 358-0067.
July 8: Forest Park Mighty Sparrow Caribbean Dance Festival; 6 P.M.; bandshell. (718) 520-5911.
July 9: Riis Park Boardwalk concert; Noon; (718) 338-3338.
McNeil Park Stonewall-Country concert; 5 P.M. (718)358-0067.
Gateway National Recreation Area Ssunset picnic concert with Long Islands Pops; 6 P.M.; Fort Tilden; (718) 634-4747.
July 10-16: Forest Park Clyde Beatty Cole Brothers Circus; 4:30 P.M. and 6:30 P.M.; bandshell parking lot. (718) 441-0080.
July 15: Forest Park QCA Dance Festival '95.
Savannah Sky.
Country music, line dancing. 6 P.M.; bandshell. (718) 520-5911.
July 16: McNeil Park Phil Costa's Something Special Orchestra.
Fox trot, lindy, swing; 5 P.M. (718) 358-0067.
Forest Park Something Special Big Band; 6 P.M.; bandshell. (718) 520-5911.
July 23: Flushing Meadows-Corona Park Colombian Independence Day Festival; 10 A.M. (718) 760-6587.
McNeil Park The New York Doo Wops; 5 P.M. (718) 358-0067.
Gateway National Recreation Sunset picnic concert with Eugene Pitt and Special Delivery, 50's music and a cappella; 6 P.M.; Fort Tilden. (718) 634-4747 July 29: Bayswater Park Community Day. (718) 520-5911.
Forest Park Demetrios Kastaris &amp; The Latin Jazz Coalition Dance Festival; 6 P.M.; bandshell; (718) 235-0760.
July 30: McNeil Park Folk music with County Rhodes; 5 P.M. (718) 358-0067.
Cunningham Park New York Philharmonic concert with fireworks; 8 P.M. (212) 875-5907.
Aug. 6: Gateway Nationall Recreation Area Sunset picnic concert with Alex Nakhimodsky Orchestra; 6 P.M.; Fort Tilden. (718) 634-4747.
Aug. 12, 13, 19: Flushing Meadows-Corona Park Hong Kong Dragon Boat Festival; 10 A.M. (718) 760-6587.
Aug. 12-13: Kissena Park Kissena Summerfest; noon; (800) 201-PARK.
Aug. 13: Flushing Meadows-Corona Park Ecuadorian Independence Day Festival; 10 A.M. (718) 760-6587.
Aug. 19: Forest Park Country Western Musical Dance Festival '95; 6 P.M.; bandshell; (718) 520-5911.
Aug. 20: Gateway National Recreation Area Sunset picnic concert with Arnold Mig and Serenaders in Blue Orchestra; 6 P.M.; Fort Tilden, (718) 634-4747.
BROOKLYN  July 2: Prospect Park Folklore with Jackie Torrence; 3 P.M.; bandshell; (718) 855-7882.
July 7: Prospect Park Andrea Woods and David Pleasant, dance; 8 P.M. (718) 855-7882.
July 8: Prospect Park Kissena Cycling Club ride; 6 A.M. (914) 941-1960.
July 9: Prospect Park "They Might Be Giants," pop music; 3 P.M.; bandshell; (718)855-7882.


Group Wants To Broaden Securities Bill
THE comprehensive securities bill that passed the Senate last week is too narrow, the Investment Company Institute, the Washington trade group for mutual funds, has argued.
In addition to the sale of stocks and bonds, the measure should apply to the sale of mutual funds, Matthew P. Fink, the group's president, wrote in a letter to Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato, chairman of the Banking Committee.


Elizabeth Constable, N. H. Hewitt
Elizabeth Howe Constable, a daughter of Mrs.
W.
Pepper Constable of Princeton, N.J., and the late Dr.
Constable, is to be married today to Nathaniel Hawley Hewitt, a son of Dr.
Elizabeth Chapman Hewitt and Dr.
George Hewitt of Lincoln, Mass.
Mary DesRosiers, a justice of the peace, is to perform the ceremony at the Nelson (N.H.) Congregational Church.
Ms.
Constable, 35, is keeping her name.
She graduated from the University of Massachusetts at Amherst.
She is a guitarist and singer.
Mr.
Hewitt, 37, is a graduate of Goddard College.
He is a violinist and guitarist.


TAKING AFFIRMATIVE ACTION APART
I am an advocate of at least some degree of affirmative action, especially when it encourages men with the energy of Dr.
Patrick Chavis.
To bill Medicaid $800,000 a year at $14 an office visit and $400 a delivery, he would have to see 10 patients an hour, 10 hours a day, seven days a week, 52 weeks a year, and then deliver two babies on each of those days.
GORDON COTLER New York


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
THE X FACTOR  A Quest for Excellence. By George Plimpton. Norton, $18.95.


EYES ON THE PRIZE
Nicholas Wade's "Eyes on the Prize" (Method &amp; Madness, April 30) makes some good points that we at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology will take into account in developing the Lemelson-M.I.T.
Prize for invention and innovation in its second year.
But he was wrong to belittle our first winner's achievements.
William Bolander's nine patents cover a range of innovations in automotive technology that has improved the cost, efficiency and safety of American cars.


Up on the Roof With Some Heat-Loving Plants
This roof garden of mine is the urban story of Job.
A 90-pound bag of potting soil, for instance, is about as easy to carry as a bale of hay, so I ask some sinewy gardener at the nursery to heft it into my old Trooper.
When I get home, I slash open the bag and carry the soil in two of the white plastic buckets I'm in the habit of collecting from construction sites around town.
I make several trips up five flights of stairs, after which I don't need the Stairmaster or that arm-pull whatzit at the gym.
I've considered buying smaller bags, but that would be like buying one tea bag when you're serving a convention of English gardeners.
Roof gardens require containers as deep and wide as your roof can support without collapsing, because it gets hotter than Hades up there when the sun shines all day.


Word for Word / The Skinhead International; Some Music, It Turns Out, Inflames the Savage Breast
THE notion of a global network of xenophobes seems implausible, but that is what a recent report about neo-Nazi skinheads describes.
"The Skinhead International," issued last week by the Anti-Defamation League, describes murders, beatings, fire-bombings, race-baiting and other activities by small groups of shaven-headed nationalist thugs in 31 countries, most in Europe and the Americas.


World News Briefs; 3 Linked to Attack On Mubarak Are Killed
Three of the gunmen involved in an attempt to assassinate President Hosni Mubarak of Egypt in Addis Ababa, Ethiopia, on Monday were killed today in a shootout with security forces, Ethiopia said.
The announcement that more gunmen from the group, estimated at nine, that attacked Mr.
Mubarak's convoy in Addis Ababa had been killed appears to have fanned suspicions here that Ethiopia is helping to wipe out evidence of the assassination plot.
Egypt has accused the Sudan of being behind it.


THE NEW YORK TIMES BUSINESS BEST SELLERS
HARD COVER 1 THE SEVEN SPIRITUAL LAWS OF SUCCESS, by Deepak Chopra. (Amber-Allen/New World Library, $12.95.) How to "generate wealth in all its forms."
2 HOW TO ARGUE AND WIN EVERY TIME, by Gerry Spence. (St. Martin's, $22.95.) A lawyer describes ways to win arguments at home and at work.  3 THE DEATH OF COMMON SENSE, by Philip K. Howard. (Random House, $18.) How governmental rules and regulations are fettering the lives of all Americans.
4 THE BEARDSTOWN LADIES' COMMON-SENSE INVESTMENT GUIDE. (Godin/Hyperion, $19.95.) Tips for successful investing from 16 Illinois women.
5 FIRST THINGS FIRST, by Stephen R. Covey et al. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $23.) Ways to organize your life.
6 THE DISCIPLINE OF MARKET LEADERS, by Michael Treacy and Fred Wiersema. (Addison-Wesley, $25.) A discussion of competitive business strategies.
7 MICROSERFS, by Douglas Coupland. (ReganBooks/HarperCollins, $21.) A novel in the style of PowerBook diary entries, set on the campus of Microsoft, and featuring "geek" heros.  8 BEING DIGITAL, by Nicholas Negroponte. (Knopf, $23.) A discussion of ways computers will change our lives in the future.
9 MODEL, by Michael Gross (Morrow, $25.) The growth of modeling from a small business into a huge industry  10 RETHINKING AMERICA, by Hedrick Smith. (Random House, $25.) A comparison of American industry and education with their overseas counterparts through interviews with innovators. 11 *
THE WARREN BUFFETT WAY by Robert G. Hagstrom Jr. (Wiley, $24.95.) An account of the careers of the man said to be the world's most sucessful investor.  12 *
EVERYONE'S A COACH by Don Shula and Ken Blanchard (Zondervan/HarperBusiness, $22.) Motivational pitch on how to win.  13 *
SILICON SNAKE OIL, by Clifford Stoll. (Doubleday, $29.95.) Second thoughts on the information highway.
PAPERBACK  1 THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE, by Stephen R. Covey. (Fireside/S&amp;S, $12.) Principles for success.
2 CREATING A NEW CIVILIZATION, by Alvin Toffler and Heidi Toffler. (Turner Publishing, $7.95.) A proposal for reshaping society to meet the conditions of the 21st century.
3 BRING ME THE HEAD OF WILLY THE MAILBOY! by Scott Adams. (Andrews and McMeel, $8.95.) Comics about a cubicle-dwelling engineer, Dilbert, and his chatty companion, Dogbert.
4 THE 1995 WHAT COLOR IS YOUR PARACHUTE? by Richard Nelson Bolles. (Ten Speed, $14.95.) Advice about careers.
5 REENGINEERING THE CORPORATION, by Michael Hammer and James Champy. (Harper Business, $13.) Innovation in business.
Rankings are based on June sales figures of 3,050 bookstores and of wholesalers serving 28,000 hardcover retailers and 38,000 paperback retailers (gift shops, department stores, newsstands, supermarkets).
The numbers are statistically weighted to represent sales in all such outlets nationwide.
An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.


Jeannie A. Egas, Olivier Trouveroy
Jeannie Amparo Egas, the daughter of Ivan Egas of Bay Shore, L.I., and Atala Egas of Bayside, Queens, was married yesterday to Olivier Luis Trouveroy, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph Trouveroy of Brussels.
The Rev.
Edward Penonzek performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at the Church of St.
Ignatius Loyola in Manhattan.
Mrs.
Trouveroy, 38, is a human resources consultant in New York.
She graduated from the University of Southern California.
Her father is the sales manager for Canal 66, a Spanish-language cable-television station in Long Island City, Queens.


What Ford Discovered When He Paid His Workers $5 a Day
To the Editor:
"Bad News for Workers" (editorial, June 24) will also prove to be bad news for capital owners.


For a Touch of Color and Flavor in Risotto or Salad, Add Beets
BEETS are one of my favorite root vegetables, especially in the summertime.
They add a dash of color as well as flavor to salads and are especially good with game, duck, beef and other dark meats and things cooked on the grill. (They contain a crimson dye called betanin, which stains other ingredients, so I usually toss them in the dressing separately.)


CHATTER: Public and Private; What Customer Service?
Public or private, services need to change.
As someone who once bragged about the swift and thorough manner New Jersey delivered to its consumers, I was appalled at the way my parents were treated the last time we visited the D.M.V.
What happened to the customer service training?


So Far, Nomo Tops the List of Season's Remarkable Rookies
The word rookie has two O's; so does the name Nomo.
That's just about where the resemblance ends between Hideo Nomo and a rookie.
Nomo, of course, is a major league rookie, but he hasn't pitched like one.
He has more closely resembled a Hall of Famer, Sandy Koufax.


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: July 2, 1995
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
36
CONGO, by Michael Crichton. (Ballantine, $6.99.) An American team seeks to discover why a group of archeologists died among ruins.
2
2
THE ALIENIST, by Caleb Carr. (Bantam, $6.99.) A journalist and a psychologist track down a murderer in turn-of-the-century Manhattan.
3
14
THE CHAMBER, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $7.50.) A lawyer represents a racist who is on death row for his part in a 1967 bombing.
4
1
DEBT OF HONOR, by Tom Clancy. (Berkley, $7.50.) Jack Ryan and the C.I.A. vs. a Japanese plot to strike America's territory and economy.
5
8
REMEMBER ME, by Mary Higgins Clark. (Pocket, $6.99.) After an estranged couple reunite, they are haunted by a mysterious force.
6
4
UNDUE INFLUENCE, by Steve Martini. (Jove, $6.99.) A defense attorney is caught in a web of murder and deceit within his own family.
7
3
CHARADE, by Sandra Brown. (Warner Vision, $6.99.) Following a heart transplant, a television host finds her life enriched -- and threatened.
8
8
THE STONE DIARIES, by Carol Shields. (Penguin, $10.95.) The journey of a woman from childhood to motherhood through old age.
9
2
ASSAULT AT SELONIA, by Roger MacBride Allen. (Spectra/Bantam, $5.99.) The second volume of the "Star Wars" Corellian Trilogy.
10
7
ALL THAT GLITTERS, by V.C.
Andrews. (Pocket, $6.99.) From plantation house to shanty: Ruby's marital ordeals continue.
11
25
CIRCLE OF FRIENDS, by Maeve Binchy. (Dell, $6.50.) The coming of age of women in an Irish village and in Dublin's academia.
12
5
TUNNEL VISION, by Sara Paretsky. (Dell, $6.99.) V.I.
Warshawski probes a murder and a scandal in an agency for the homeless.
13
9
THE KEY TO MIDNIGHT, by Dean Koontz. (Berkley, $6.99.) A 1979 novel about a man who helps a troubled nightclub singer in Japan.
14*
1
ONLY LOVE, by Elizabeth Lowell. (Avon, $5.99.) A woman living in the post-Civil War Rockies fends off dangers and finds romance.
15
1
HOLLYWOOD KIDS, by Jackie Collins. (Pocket, $6.99.) The tribulations of the privileged adult children of movie stars.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
NonFiction
1
41
EMBRACED BY THE LIGHT, by Betty J. Eadie with Curtis Taylor. (Bantam, $5.99.) A woman's near-death experience.
2
14
REVIVING OPHELIA, by Mary Pipher. (Ballantine, $12.50.) The dangers that beset teen-age girls.
3
77
CARE OF THE SOUL, by Thomas Moore. (Harper Perennial, $12.) A psychotherapist discusses spirituality and everyday life.
4
8
MOTHERLESS DAUGHTERS, by Hope Edelman. (Delta, $12.95.) The experiences of women after the deaths of their mothers.
5*
608
THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $10.95.) Inspiration.
6
40
HAVING OUR SAY, by Sarah L. Delany and A. Elizabeth Delany with Amy Hill Hearth. (Dell, $5.99.) Two black sisters reflect on their lives.
7
6
DOLLY, by Dolly Parton. (Harper Paperbacks, $5.99.) The autobiography of the country singer.
8*
1
LIFE OF THE PARTY, by Christopher Ogden. (Warner, $6.50.) A biography of Pamela Harriman, the United States Ambassador to France.
9*
120
I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS, by Maya Angelou. (Bantam, $4.99.) The poet's depiction of her childhood and adolescence.
10*
29
SOUL MATES, by Thomas Moore. (Harper Perennial, $13.) Love and relationships.
11
19
MAKES ME WANNA HOLLER, by Nathan McCall. (Vintage, $12.) The life of a young black man in America.
12
10
MAYBE (MAYBE NOT), by Robert Fulghum. (Ivy, $6.99.) Inspirational essays.
13*
43
A HISTORY OF GOD, by Karen Armstrong. (Ballantine, $14.) The development of monotheism over the past 4,000 years.
14*
3
THE KENNEDY WOMEN, by Laurence Leamer. (Ivy, $7.99.) Five generations of an American family.
15
43
MAMA MAKES UP HER MIND, by Bailey White. (Vintage, $10.) Life in a Georgia town.
16*
9
CREATING A NEW CIVILIZATION, by Alvin Toffler and Heidi Toffler. (Turner Publishing, $7.95.) A proposal for reshaping society.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Advice, How-To and Miscellaneous
1
40
CHICKEN SOUP FOR THE SOUL, compiled by Jack Canfield and Mark Victor Hansen. (Health Communications, $12.95.) Uplifting stories.
2
9
A 2ND HELPING OF CHICKEN SOUP FOR THE SOUL, compiled by Jack Canfield and Mark Victor Hansen. (Health Communications, $12.95.) One hundred more stories.
3
6
O.J.'S LEGAL PAD, by Henry Beard, John Boswell and Ron Barrett. (Villard, $8.95.) Notes and doodles supposedly made by O.J.
Simpson during his trial; a spoof.
4
218
THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE, by Stephen R. Covey. (Fireside/S&amp;S, $12.) Principles for success.
Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending June 17, at 3,050 bookstores plus wholesalers serving 38,000 other retailers, statistically weighted to represent sales in all such outlets nationwide.
An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.


Eating a Sub on One
Las Vegas is filled with hotels pretending to be everything from an Egyptian pyramid to a medieval castle.
Now there's a restaurant masquerading as a submarine.
The interior of Dive, a sandwich shop that opened last month on the Strip across from the Treasure Island hotel and casino, simulates the inside of a submarine, with the clanging of bells and other sounds of a diving maneuver.
It is the second in what the entertainment executives Jeffrey Katzenberg and Steven Spielberg plan as a chain (or fleet?).
Call (702) 369-3483.


Michael Graves, Kymberly Truman
Kymberly Ann Truman, the daughter of Lois Tillman of Philadelphia and Peter Truman of Millville, N.J., was married yesterday to Michael Alan Graves, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Earl G. Graves of Scarsdale, N.Y.
The Rev.
Canon Thomas S. Logan Sr. performed the ceremony at Holy Trinity Episcopal Church in Philadelphia.
Mrs.
Graves, 29, graduated from the University of Maryland at College Park and received a law degree in May from the District of Columbia School of Law.
Her father retired as the chief administrator of the Philadelphia Court of Common Pleas.
Her mother is an investigator in Philadelphia for the Pennsylvania Department of Revenue.


Crime
In his ambitious mystery debut, ZIA SUMMER (Warner, $21.95), Rudolfo Anaya, the author of "Bless Me, Ultima," whom Tony Hillerman calls the "godfather and guru of Chicano literature," makes Albuquerque, N.M., sound like the birthplace of life and the cradle of civilization.
Other regional writers may feel the same about their own blessed plots, but few manage to express that feeling with Mr.
Anaya's passion and lyricism.
"His parents had given him a history, a sense of the traditions of the valley . . . but somewhere along the way, he began to get separated," we learn of Sonny Baca, a private detective whose investigation into the grisly ritual slaying of his cousin leads him back to the cultural heritage of the antepasados, his ancestors.
Sonny's hunt for the murderer sends him up and down the Rio Grande Valley, into the ideologically armed camps of environmentalists, New Age cultists and real estate developers, who all invoke the Zia sign -- "the powerful, positive image of the sun, symbol of the state flag, god of life" -- for their designs on the land.
But the real journey is the spiritual one that takes Sonny through his racial and regional history and into the soul of his people.


A Needed Ingredient For Stratford Theater
Re the Shakespeare Theater: ("Will Stratford Ever Be Home to Shakespeare Again?," June 11).
All the miscarried efforts at revival over the past years have lacked one essential ingredient.
That ingredient is a competent theater person at the head -- either a top artistic director or a top theater administrator -- seconded in either case by a very good representative of the other.
Such names as Lawrence Langner, John Houseman and Michael Kahn come to mind from the original Shakespeare Theater.


IN SHORT: FICTION
GHOST STORIES  By E. M. Broner.
Global City Press/Consortium Book Sales, 1045 Westgate Drive, St.
Paul, Minn. 55114; paper, $12.


The Future Of the Aquacade
To the Editor:
We must not let the Aquacade fall victim to the wrecker's ball  [ Real Estate, May 28; news article, June 6 ] .
It is a great public space that provides a direct memory of a time in the not-too-distant past when New Yorkers delighted in a proud and generous civicism.
It far exceeds, in both scale and ambition, the vast majority of public spaces built today.
We simply don't build buildings like it now.


Summer in the Park With the Bard
THE NEW YORK SHAKESPEARE FESTIVAL is marking its 40th season this summer with productions of "The Tempest" and "Troilus and Cressida" at the Delacorte Theater in Central Park.
"The Tempest" opened on June 22 and continues through July 19; it stars Patrick Stewart of "Star Trek: The Next Generation" fame."Troilus and Cressida," directed by Mark Wing-Davey, opens Aug. 4 and closes Sept. 3.
Free tickets may be picked up on the day of the performance starting at 1 P.M. at the Delacorte Theater box office, or from 1 P.M. to 3 P.M. at the Public Theater, 425 Lafayette Street. (The box offices distribute two free tickets per person.) For ticket information, call (212) 861-7277.


No Headline
"A tent -- oh, for heaven's sake, are you kidding me? I've got a whole house with me. My wife likes to shower every day. Why would I ever go camping in a tent?" REDMAN HULSE, sitting in the shade of his 31-foot Airstream in Olympic National Park.  [ 1:4. ]


The Danger of Myth Served Up as History
To the Editor:
Your June 23 movie review of "Pocahontas" mentions some of the things the film forgot to mention.
Here are some more:


Old Technology
To the Editor:
Are the networks clueless on cyberspace people?  [ "You Loved the Show? We're Sorry, It's History," June 4 ]  You would think that they would care about understanding a group from which they are getting a lot of viewer mail.


In Northern New Mexico, Some Seek The End of the Rainbow Gathering
Long before the county control movement or the Sagebrush Rebellion, the people here in Rio Arriba County in northern New Mexico considered the Federal Government an occupying power that stole their birthright -- old Spanish and Mexican land grants absorbed by the United States Forest Service.
The Nortenos, or people of the north, as they call themselves, have also long been suspicious of outsiders, particularly long-haired Anglos like the people who arrived en masse in the late 60's and early 70's, setting off a series of skirmishes known locally as the Chicano-hippie wars.


China Has World's Best Reason to Limit Births; Forced Abortions
To the Editor:
Thank you for your poignant June 25 front-page article on China's tragic population control methods.
It was astonishing, however, that the word "abortion," let alone "forced abortion," did not appear in the article.
Mandatory sterilization and insertion of intrauterine devices were mentioned, but not abortion, which is also a part of the program.


Invisible Man
MOVING VIOLATIONS  War Zones, Wheelchairs, and Declarations of Independence.
By John Hockenberry. 371 pp.
New York: Hyperion. $24.95.


Talks May Worry Lebanese in Israeli Zone
As Israel and Syria finished an inconclusive new round of peace talks in Washington this week, Israeli Army commanders in southern Lebanon cautioned that the negotiations create "uncertainty" for the roughly 200,000 Lebanese living in this region that is under Israel's control.
Brig.
Gen.
Giora Inbar, commander of Israeli forces in the strip of southern Lebanon proclaimed by Israel as its "security zone," said this week that public morale was low in the area, with many people worried about what a possible Syrian-Israeli peace treaty would mean for them.


Loss of Supermarket Puts a Heavy Burden on Elderly Hartsdale Residents
FOR Nathan Goldstein, a retired senior citizen who has lived for the last 12 years in one of the high-rise apartments that dot East Hartsdale Avenue, his lack of a driver's license has rarely been a problem.
With a variety of stores within easy walking distance of his home, he and his wife have been able to run the errands that most other suburbanites undertake from behind the wheel.
But when Gristede's moved at the end of last year, leaving a vacant supermarket, Mr.
Goldstein and many of his Hartsdale neighbors felt the loss.


Looking Back to 1855 For July 4 Celebration
THE musical "1776" recalled the way Americans marked their first Fourth of July, but 1855 is the year chosen for celebratory re-creations at Sunnyside, the Washington Irving homestead in Tarrytown.
Burns Patterson, spokesman for Historic Hudson Valley, which operates Sunnyside, said that Tuesday should be a great day for the whole family: "A brass band will perform, there' will be an entertaining juggler, and actors will bring the crucial issues of 1855 to life with rousing speeches."
In 1855, incidentally, Irving coined the phrase the "almighty dollar," the Know-Nothing Party claimed 1.5 million voters, and a musical version (not animated) of "Pocohontas" by John Brougham opened in New York.
It was subtitled "Ye Gentle Savage."


City Ballet, at the Boiling Point
WONDERS NEVER CEASE.
For years, Jerome Robbins staged "N. Y. Export: Opus Jazz," his 1958 ballet about gang warfare, for a variety of companies but never for the New York City Ballet -- ostensibly because he considered the troupe too classical for the work's vernacular style.
But suddenly this spring, the City Ballet had a smash hit on its hands: a suite of dances about, yes, gang warfare, derived from Mr.
Robbins's 1957 Broadway musical "West Side Story." The production is called simply "West Side Story Suite." The operative word is suite, and it not only defines what the work is and is not but also says something about the City Ballet's particular approach to music.


Froth and Fun Emerge on Summer Stages
IN the summertime, the mind must rest.
That's the perception of warm-weather theater, which traditionally goes by names like Summerfun, Summerfest or some such tag that perpetuates the old saw of summer stock as frothy and unthreatening, or, the way theater managers put it, light and lively.
Rather than buck the convention, New Jersey summer theaters are going with the rules or just not playing.
Stageworks/Summit is not playing.
An audacious company that didn't flinch from summer fare as an intellectual dare, whether the subject was Melville's whale or Hauptmann's trial, is switching seasons.


No-Smoking Law Takes Full Effect in Vermont
Smoking is prohibited starting this month in restaurants, bars and the common areas of hotels and motels in Vermont.
These establishments had been given a two-year grace period under the state's Clean Indoor Air Act, which went into effect in July of 1993 and outlawed smoking in most places of business.
There are 3,500 to 4,000 restaurants in Vermont, according to the state's Department of Health.
Only establishments licensed as cabarets by the state's Department of Liquor Control are exempt from the smoking ban.
As a result, the number of cabaret licenses in Vermont has more than doubled in recent months.
For the last license year, May 1994 through April 1995, the department issued about 80 full-year cabaret licenses.
In the last two months, more than 200 restaurants have been issued the licenses.
Cabarets must receive less than half of their receipts from the sale of food.


Crime Coverage Mellows, and Answers Are Not at All Simple
The New York City news media, usually packed with chilling accounts of urban mayhem, have been presenting a mellower portrait of crime in the city lately.
Although there are always especially horrifying crimes that force their way into the headlines, like the murder spree of Darnell Collins last month, a review of recent crime coverage indicates there has been sharply less of it -- less than half the number of articles in the city's newspapers than in a comparable period last year.


Ernest V. Heyn; Author and Editor, 90
Ernest Victor Heyn, an author and editor of popular-science books who was the founding editor of Modern Screen and Sport magazines, died on Wednesday at DeWitt Nursing Home in Manhattan.
He was 90 and lived in Manhattan and Westport, Conn.
Mr.
Heyn edited Popular Science from 1964 to 1971.
He was author of "A Century of Wonders: One Hundred Years of Popular Science" (Doubleday, 1972), a history of the magazine.


Sheree Rumley and Delmar Gillus
SHEREE NICOLE RUMLEY, 26, grew up on the Upper West Side reading African-American authors like Langston Hughes and Toni Morrison; taking flute lessons at the Harlem School for the Arts; singing in the choir at the Convent Avenue Baptist Church; excelling in math at Horace Mann High School, and attending meetings of Jack and Jill of America, a social organization for young African-Americans.
As a teen-ager, she kept a checklist of qualities she wanted in a future husband.
Among other things, he had to be handsome, outgoing, good at math and knowledgeable about black history and culture.


2 Reasons to Maintain Ban on Self-Service Stations
To the Editor:
I agree 100 percent with Jerry Ferrara, executive director of the New Jersey Gasoline Retailers Association, who opposes changing the state's ban on self-service stations (Jersey column, June 25).


Milbury Likes Islanders
It appears that former Boston Bruins Coach Mike Milbury has emerged as the front-runner for the vacant Islanders head coaching position.
"I've had a couple of real good discussions with Don Maloney," Milbury said by phone last night from his Boston-area home, referring to the Islanders general manager.
"I think it could be a good fit. We're working on something and I feel good about saying things look like they are progressing. I hope to have some indication one way or another by mid-week."


Yugoslavia Tops Greece To Make European Final Vs. Surprising Lithuania
Political symbolism was the loser tonight in the semifinals of the European basketball championships.
It was beaten by a big-hearted guard named Sarunas Marciulionis, a big-bodied center named Arvidas Sabonis and a relatively anonymous supporting cast that hardly played like extras.
Yugoslavia will indeed be in Sunday's final.
It beat Greece and its strong-lunged fans, 60-52.
The surprise is that the Yugoslavs will not meet their former teammates, the Croats.
Instead, Vlade Divac and his fellow Serbs and Montenegrins will face Lithuania, a team with its own rich and turbulent history.


Uncertainty Pains Oklahoma City Merchants
"Yes, We Are Open," read the plaintive signs at the Phoenix Book Store nailed to sheets of plywood where windows used to be, three blocks from where the bomb destroyed the Federal Building here on April 19.
"The roof got lifted off and set back down, so every time it rains, the ceiling leaks," said Andy Waner, an assistant manager of the store, which sports a huge collection of old dime-store westerns.
"Then we have to cover up all the bookcases with tarps, and we get out the Shop-Vac."


CHATTER: Public and Private; Just a Start
Not only should the Governor privatize the D.M.V., but she should also consider privatizing the inspection centers and the prison system.
And then take a serious look at taking over the various highway authorities in New Jersey and removing the tolls.


Are the Bulls Headed For Europe Now?
HERE in Europe, it is often said that market trends are like the prevailing weather patterns: they blow from west to east.
What is hot in America, the reasoning goes, eventually blows out over the Atlantic and arrives on the Continent some months later.
Now, with near unanimity, investment advisers are forecasting warm and sunny weather ahead for European stocks.


And Now, Betty Buckley In the Turban
BETTY BUCKLEY IS LEAVING nothing to chance.
Ankles, calves, thighs, stomach, vocal cords, psyche: all are being ruthlessly toned, massaged, stretched, flexed, analyzed.
Physical therapists are kneading the aching ilio-tibial bands in her legs.
Voice specialists are refining the aspiration of her vowels.
"That's the one!" shouts her endurance trainer as Ms.
Buckley completes her third set of reps on the chin-up apparatus in a tony gym off Central Park West.
"Up and up and up and yes!" chants her strength trainer as she pants on the floor of his apartment on West 68th Street.


U.N. Charter Signing
To the Editor:
Contrary to your June 27 news article on the ceremony marking the adoption of the United Nations Charter 50 years ago, the document was not signed on the stage of the San Francisco Opera House, where the commemorative celebration took place, but on the stage of the Herbst Theater in the Veterans War Memorial Building next door.


Denying History Disables Japan
IN BEIJING, IN JUNE 1960, I WAS SITTING ACROSS FROM MAO Zedong.
In the courtyard through which we had walked to his office, magnolias were white in the midnight darkness, emitting a heavy scent, and that is what has remained most deeply in my memory.
How skillfully Garcia Marquez might recreate the scene!
Mao Zedong said only things that even I, at 25 and not his most enthusiastic reader, could tell consisted of quotations from his own writings.
By his side sat Zhou Enlai, turned not toward us but toward Mao, who spoke as if he were remembering things of the past for his old comrade.
Each time Mao, who smoked incessantly, reached for a can of Giant Panda brand cigarettes, Zhou would gently push it slightly away.


On the Senate Floor, One Vote, All Alone
The Senate chamber seems surprisingly small at night.
From the gallery, visitors look down on the members, who sit at square oak desks in a semicircle around the well, their faces illuminated from below, as if by footlights, from the reflected shine of brass reading lamps on each desk.
It has become easy over the years for reporters and maybe a lot of other people to see this formal room, with its stage lighting and faux marble as a kind of theater where nothing real takes place.
The speeches are usually prepared and often rehearsed, bored lobbyists can mouth each member's favorite cliche as it is delivered, and nothing deepens the voice or straightens the posture of a senator more than the stare of a television camera.
It is not hard to think: noble setting, petty motives.


June 25 - July 1: Affirmative Action; Administration Scrambles To Get Into Line With the New Rules
As the Clinton Administration tries to figure out which Federal affirmative action programs are fair, effective or possibly outdated, it is confronted with a fact it cannot ignore: Under new rules it can't control, some are clearly illegal.
The Supreme Court ruled on June 12 that any program that doles out benefits on the basis of race has to be "narrowly tailored" and meet a "compelling national interest." Now, faced with possible lawsuits to challenge Federal affirmative action programs, the Administration has had to act quickly.
Last week, the Justice Department sent out a 38-page legal opinion to Federal agencies with guidelines to see if their programs can pass the new test.
The questions raised in the memo and some of its directives challenged long-standing justifications for affirmative action.
The idea of promoting diversity by itself is no longer good enough.
But even if Federal programs pass the legal test, the question remains whether they will pass political examination.
For that, stay tuned.
STEVEN A. HOLMES


Are Cold-Calling Brokers Making You Crazy?
THE BEEF: Richard L. Berman of Rockville, Md., says he has been inundated with harassing calls by stockbrokers who largely pitch him schlock.
And he is steaming because he says the brokers persist in calling him despite his requests to be put on "do not call" lists.
At the same time, he has opened accounts with several of the brokers, which has only set him up to receive more calls.
THE BROKERS: Americorp Securities has incurred the wrath of Mr.
Berman for its persistent telephone calls, as have Duke &amp; Company and Lew Lieberbaum &amp; Company, among a half-dozen others.


Thinking Person
To the Editor:
Betsy Sharkey's article about Disney's new animated film "Pocahontas"  [ "Beyond Tepees and Totem Poles," June 11 ]  is another accommodating essay on the burdens of political correctness.
Is anybody ever going to challenge these overstated accusations of "insensitivity"?


Interior Designers Lend Their Skills to Communal Spaces
IF a visitor asks the interior designer Alice Burnham which project is her favorite, she won't tell you it's the fabulous waterfront house in Connecticut, she won't tell you it's the chic Manhattan apartment and she won't tell you it's the villa in Florida.
Instead, she will beam with pride about an AIDS hospice in Georgetown, a shelter for young people in Greenwich, the Ronald McDonald House in New Haven or a community center in New Canaan.
Those are just a few of the pro bono jobs she and other Connecticut members of the American Society of Interior Designers have enthusiastically taken on -- at no benefit to themselves other than feeling good.


Corrections
An article last Sunday about antique recipes misstated an ingredient for calves-feet jelly.
The recipe calls for the whites of six eggs, not three.


Be Glad This One Is Too Costly
SOMETIMES hoi polloi have it better.
In a red-hot market for new technology stocks, for example, the resulting high prices and lack of access can protect many regular folks from themselves.
But costly errors are still possible.
Consider Legato Systems, which plans to go public this month.
Based in Palo Alto, Calif., it develops networking software designed to store the huge amount of data that corporations are now keeping on groups of computers rather than on mainframes.


The Nation; At the Fed, It Looks Like Deja Vu, Again
THE Federal Reserve is supposed to smooth capitalism's bumps.
Its track record, however, has been oddly one-sided.
When the economy is booming, the Fed is very good at slowing it down -- reducing inflation but also making it harder for people to buy homes, keep jobs and purchase cars.
Then, a funny thing happens once the economy slows: The Fed gets reluctant to bring back prosperity.
That reluctance is very much in evidence now.
Until February, the economy was robust.
The Fed's response, given its visceral hatred of inflation, was to slow it down by doubling interest rates in the space of a year.
The slowdown came, and the urgency to act disappeared, although by law the Fed is supposed to be as quick to maintain jobs as to control inflation.


3 Fashionable Benefits Battle AIDS
THOUSANDS of people -- and thousands of dollars -- are expected at three benefits this month for the fight against AIDS.
Golf, dance, a fashion show, auctions, tennis, volleyball and three-legged races are on tap as organizations seek new ways to attract people and money as the charity season moves into full swing.
Stopping AIDS Together holds its ninth Sunday by the Bay next Sunday from noon to 6 P.M.
The event, which has raised more than $2.1 million, will be at a new location, at 99 South Howells Point Road in Bellport, where many people involved in the fashion industry have houses.


On the Desks of America, a Canvas of Self-Expression
A pair of Plexiglas dice.
A chunk of the Berlin Wall.
And a hive with 2,000 bees.
"Idiosyncratic" best describes the items people keep on their desks, The New York Times has learned from a request for readers' stories.
But "useful" -- a rubber stamp that declares, "Boring! Longer than three pages," say -- is often appropriate, too.
Here, a roundup of responses:
Isn't all life a gamble?
Malcolm Deutsch, a certified public accountant in Morro Bay, Calif., tops his desk with an antique chuck-a-luck cage, terming the hourglass-shaped gaming device with its three dice "one of my most valuable business tools."


Rice Works for Hours And Defies the Years
It is 7 o'clock and the early-morning clouds have produced a hard, steady rain.
Still, the thought of canceling the first half of the daily morning workout doesn't even enter the mind of Jerry Rice.
On this day, five people have chosen to work out with him, to get a taste of one of the most legendary and rigorous workout routines in professional sports, one that normally lasts from four to five hours.
Players like Detroit running back Barry Sanders and San Francisco Giant Barry Bonds have tried it.
And with the exception of Sanders and a few others, most have left with bruised egos and sore bodies.
Only a handful can actually finish it; even fewer return for more.


It's a Grand Old Flag, Not Just an Icon
JULY 4 approaches this year with booming demands that the Bill of Rights be amended at once to put a stop to public flag desecration.
Since this act actually occurs with less frequency than a nickel-slot jackpot, the hubbub is a sure sign of one thing: The 1996 Presidential campaign is about to bear down on us like a freight train.


Lynn D. Halpern, T. W. Fogarty Jr.
Lynn Diane Halpern, the daughter of Marjorie A. Halpern of New York and the late Edgar A. Halpern, is to be married today to Thomas Waldon Fogarty Jr., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Fogarty of Bloomfield Hills, Mich.
Rabbi Roger Ross is to perform the nondenominational ceremony at the Vassar College Chapel in Poughkeepsie, N.Y.


Heather Vincent and Kenneth Holley
Heather Elise Vincent, the coordinating producer of "Dateline NBC," the television program, in New York, is to be married today to Kenneth Richard Holley, a vice president and portfolio manager at Morgan Stanley Asset Management in New York.
Canon A. Gordon Okunsanya, an Episcopal priest, is to perform the ceremony, assisted by the Rev.
Charles G. Adams, a Baptist minister, at the Hartford Memorial Baptist Church in Detroit.
The bride, 36, graduated from Syracuse University.
She is the daughter of Martha and Dr.
Charles C. Vincent of Detroit.
The bride's father is the chief of obstetrics and gynecology at Detroit Riverview Hospital.
Her mother is the director of volunteer services at Harper Hospital of the Detroit Medical Center.


Elissa Gerstman, John Fullerton 3d
Elissa E. Gerstman, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Stephen Gerstman of North Tarrytown, N.Y., was married yesterday to John F. Fullerton 3d, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Fullerton Jr. of Marlton, N.J.
Judge Allyne R. Ross of the United States District Court for the Eastern District of New York, in Brooklyn, officiated at the Tarrytown (N.Y.) Hilton Inn.
Mrs.
Fullerton, 24, teaches the first grade at Public School 40 in New York.
She received a bachelor's degree and a master's degree in education from New York University.
Her father is a dentist in New York.
Her mother, Linda Gerstman, teaches history at the Hackley School, a preparatory school in Tarrytown.


An Auction And Tribute


3,000 Hits Later, a Few Words
For 19 years, Eddie Murray, despite his excellence as a major league baseball player, a man whose attainments have placed him in the category with Aaron and Mays and Pete Rose, has been a virtual mystery man to the public.
On Friday night, Murray, hitting from a low crouch, became only the 20th player in major league history to gather 3,000 hits.
And while there were headlines and an acknowledgment by the sports world of this grand achievement by the Indians' 39-year-old first baseman and designated hitter, there was little that generally seemed to touch the heart.


Cincinnati's 4 Home Runs End Mets' Winning Streak
A pleasant homecoming it has not been.
The Long Island-born Pete Harnisch, who starred at Fordham and signed a three-year, $9 million deal with the Mets this year after six productive major league seasons, was knocked around again last night.


Sarah Rothstein, Timothy Eustis
Sarah Elsom Rothstein, the daughter of Harriet Elsom Rothstein of Haverford, Pa., and David Samuel Rothstein of Sheffield, Mass., is to be married today to Timothy Wood Eustis, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Truman William Eustis 3d of Riverside, Conn.
The Rev.
Alistair Votaw is to perform the ceremony at St.
Paul's Episcopal Church in Stockbridge, Mass.
The bride, 26, graduated from Smith College.
She is an associate designer in the Ralph division of the Polo Ralph Lauren Corporation in New York.
Her father is the president of the Architects Development Corporation, an architectural firm in Sheffield.
Her mother is a pianist and a private piano teacher in Haverford.


Los Angeles Completing Market Renovation
Renovations are nearing completion on the historic open-air Grand Central Market in downtown Los Angeles.
The one-block market opened in 1917 at 317 South Broadway between Third and Fourth Streets.
It is home to dozens of restaurants, food stands and produce vendors.
As part of the renovation, the outside facade has been restored, sky lights installed and vintage neon signs erected.
The improvements are part of a $60 million program that began 10 years ago, and that includes the restoration of two turn-of-the-century buildings in the immediate vicinity and the construction of a parking garage.


The Newest Acquisitions Are Wands and Web Sites
THE SIGHT OF PEOPLE wearing headsets rushing to keep up with prerecorded tours has been commonplace in museums since such tours were introduced in 1957.
But now, thanks to the CD-ROM and the digital chip, that may soon be a thing of the past.
Museumgoers who want information can now stroll with hand-held "wands" or linger over interactive computer stations that provide information in the order they want and with varying degrees of detail.
More than 30 institutions have been offering such devices since 1993.
Many curators like the new technologies.
Maxwell Anderson, director of the Michael C. Carlos Museum in Atlanta and chairman of the technology committee of the association of museum directors, says the easily grasped information on the computers will bring more people to museums and get them to return more often.


Ofelia Trevino, Ramon Gonzalez
Ofelia Mercedes Trevino, a vice president and controller of the Lone Star Seed Company in San Antonio, was married in New York yesterday to Ramon Esteban Gonzalez 3d, an assistant vice president in the private client group of Merrill Lynch &amp; Company in Washington.
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani performed the ceremony at City Hall.
Mrs.
Gonzalez, 45, is a graduate of Escuela Libre de Derechos in Mexico City.
She is the daughter of the late Isidoro Trevino Jr. and Ofelia Cardenas de Trevino.
The bride's father was the president of Casa I. Trevino S.A., a seed company in Mexico City founded by her grandfather Mr.
Trevino Sr.


Mindy Basser, Jonathan D. Gray
Mindy Basser, a daughter of Pearl and Philip B. Basser of Philadelphia, is to be married this evening to Jonathan David Gray, a son of Susan Florsheim of Highland Park, Ill., and Allen Gray of Barrington, Ill.
Rabbi Ira F. Stone is to perform the ceremony at Temple Beth Zion Beth Israel in Philadelphia.
The couple both graduated magna cum laude from the University of Pennsylvania, where he was elected to Phi Beta Kappa.


Lucille M. Poirier, Howard J. Prince
Lucille Marie Poirier, an apparel designer, and Howard Jay Prince, a trombonist and composer, were married yesterday at the Seaman's Inne in Mystic, Conn.
The Rev.
Robert E. McNulty, a Roman Catholic priest, officiated.
The Rev.
Bonnie Cohen, a nondenominational minister, took part in the ceremony.
Ms.
Poirier, who is 34 and is keeping her name, works for Nap Inc., a sleepwear and lingerie manufacturer in New York.
She received associate's degrees from the School of Fashion Design in Boston and the Fashion Institute of Technology in New York.
The bride is a daughter of Ida and Ernie Poirier of Gales Ferry, Conn.


Elizabeth Wagg, Alexander Gray
Elizabeth Moore Wagg, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas E. Wagg 3d of Greensboro, N.C., was married there yesterday to Alexander Lathrop Gray, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Harvey Lathrop Gray of Southport, Conn.
The Rev.
Timothy Jay Patterson, an Episcopal minister, performed the ceremony at the Holy Trinity Episcopal Church.
Mrs.
Gray, 26, was until recently a national accounts sales coordinator at Random House in New York.
She graduated from the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill.
Her father is a partner in Carruthers &amp; Roth, a Greensboro law firm.
Her mother is the secretary-treasurer of Panache Ltd., an interior design company in Greensboro.


A Direct Hit


Gentle Voice From Brazil Casts a Spell of Serenity
Gravity was suspended for two hours on Wednesday night when Gal Costa sang at Carnegie Hall.
For most of her two sets, Ms.
Costa sang ballads, bossa novas and gentle sambas that floated in their own sphere of graceful sensuality.
Ms.
Costa has been one of Brazil's leading singers since the late 1960's.
She emerged from the state of Bahia alongside the songwriters Gilberto Gil and Caetano Veloso, whose rebellious, poetically ambitious and musically omnivorous songs changed the course of Brazilian pop.
She is still singing their material, old and new; they are still among the world's greatest songwriters.


Stock Markets To Close Early
The major stock exchanges will close early today in anticipation of the Fourth of July holiday.
The New York, American and Nasdaq exchanges will stop trading at 1 P.M.
Eastern time.
Most commodity exchanges in New York will be closed, but in Chicago, the market will be open until 1:15 P.M.
Eastern time.


Bronx Lobster And Defender: A Good Match
Sal Comerico is the undisputed king of Bronx lobsters, if only because no one else would ever bother to claim the title.
In fact, few care to acknowledge that such a kingdom exists: the Bronx lobster's very being, if not in doubt, is still not widely acknowledged.
Though brownish and truncated, the crustacean does exist, in the waters off City Island.
And Mr.
Comerico catches more Bronx lobster than anybody, defending it, selling it and proudly serving it with butter in his City Island restaurant, King Lobster.


New Jersey Daily Briefing; Fishy but Not Boring (So Far)
New Jersey State Aquarium officials said they were pleased with the weekend turnout as the public got its first glimpse of the newly spruced-up attraction.
Mike Krajsa, director of public affairs and marketing, said 3,561 people visited the aquarium on its opening day, Saturday, and another 3,876 yesterday.
But the real test will come later.
Attendance in 1992, the first year the aquarium was opened, was more than one million, but fell sharply amid complaints that even the fish on display were boring.


The Battle of the Bands, Part Two
Silence played a big part in the Battle of the Bands, a showdown between the jazz orchestras of Carnegie Hall and Lincoln Center on Friday night at Avery Fisher Hall.
The concert, in its second year as part of the JVC Jazz Festival, featured two orchestras at their peak.
Silence was part of the huge arsenal brought by both bands to the show: in stop-time sections and as part of false beginnings and endings, it appeared in just about any form, one of the many tricks meant to grab an audience's attention and win the fight.


Waiter, Oh, Waiter! Excuuuse Me, but There's a Mouse in My Coffee!
In the middle of Harvard Square is a new hot spot, a cafe offering coffee, croissants and all that is new in the malls of cyberspace.
The cafe, Cyber smith, is not just another hangout for techies.
It is set up to appeal to the many who don't know the first thing about navigating in the new technopolis.
At Cybersmith, personal computers line the counters and customers can sip cappuccinos while surfing the Internet.
Those who prefer to sit at booths have a selection of specialties to choose from, like "Internet Access" and "CD-ROM and Multimedia." And customers -- from 7 to 70 years old -- can sit and experiment, with a staff of "technosmiths" to help them with any problems.


New Jersey Daily Briefing; Bigger Berries, Lower Prices
Dennis Doyle, the manager of Tru-Blu Cooperative in New Lisbon, has seen a lot of blueberries in his time, but he says this year's berries are the largest he has ever harvested.
Favorable spring conditions are the reason.
"Whatever makes us comfortable makes blueberries comfortable," he said.
But since the weather was good in other blueberry-growing states, Mr.
Doyle predicts that consumers will not only find the large berries they are seeking but will also like the price.
"There's quite a few berries around," he said, noting that a lot of other states are now in the blueberry business.


An Erotic Dream For Seamier Times
One of the most celebrated images in 20th-century ballet is that of Vaslav Nijinsky wearing a rose-petal costume in "Le Spectre de la Rose." In Michel Fokine's neo-Romantic ballet of 1911, this spirit of a rose appears in a dream to a young woman who returns from a ball and falls asleep with a rose in her hand.
Nijinsky called his role "too pretty." Angelin Preljocaj, the 39-year-old French choreographer whose company performed at the American Dance Festival here on Saturday night, might agree.
In his harsh, unsentimental version of the ballet, the rose-covered figure is a flasher in a short raincoat who ravishes a sleeping woman.
Surprisingly and impressively, this reinterpretation is anything but a provocation; the new production, which received its United States premiere here, is powerful on its own terms and a persuasive gloss on the erotic dream that Fokine's ballet treated with subliminal sophistication in its own time.


Technology: ON THE NET; Out, damned geek! The typical Web user is no longer packing a pocket protector.
IS the Internet's World Wide Web becoming a mainstream medium?
Apparently so, according to consumer research by a University of Michigan marketing professor, who sees the Web expanding the Internet's audience well beyond its techie core.
"It's the end of geekdom," said Sunil Gupta, who has spent much of the last year gathering data on how people use the Web and their attitudes about the new medium.
"This technology is still available only to technologically literate households," he noted.
"But it has moved beyond the university and corporate domination of the past."


Tory Infighting Highlights Labor's Comeback
As they debate whether to dump John Major as their leader and select a new Prime Minister, Britain's governing Conservatives are staring not only into their own political souls, but into the face of the opposition Labor Party.
And if they are unnerved by their internal divisions, the Tories are downright scared by Labor's growing electoral strength.
Labor is benefiting in part from simply not being the Tories, who after 16 years in power are running at record lows in public opinion polls.


In America; Let Them Eat Poison
In the summer of 1993, Alex Donley was 6 years old.
He had just graduated from kindergarten.
One day he did the most routine of things.
He ate a hamburger.
Four days later he was dead.
He died horribly.
"Nearly all of the organs in Alex's body were destroyed," said his mother, Nancy Donley.
"Portions of his brain were liquefied. That's how virulent a pathogen this is. My husband and I wanted to donate his organs and have him live on in another child, but we couldn't. We were able to donate his corneas. That's all."


Fan With Gun Arrested in Alomar Threat
A distraught female fan seeking a relationship with ROBERTO ALOMAR went to the Skydome with a loaded pistol yesterday apparently intent on killing the Toronto Blue Jays second baseman, the police said.
TRICIA MILLER, 31, a factory worker from Port Hope, Ontario, was arrested at the Skydome hotel while Alomar was playing in Toronto's 9-7 loss to Baltimore.
Alomar, who lives at the hotel during the season, was removed from the game in the ninth inning because the police wanted to speak to him immediately.


Knicks Waiting to Dot the I's on Nelson Contract
Negotiations have gone well.
They want him to coach, and he is already sick of retirement after four months.
The questions are no longer who, where, why or how but simply when.
Barring a sudden change of heart, Don Nelson, the Big Whistle, will set up shop in the Big Apple later this week.


CHRONICLE
When GABRIEL GARCIA MARQUEZ, the Colombian author, strolled backstage at the Plymouth Theater on Broadway after yesterday's performance of "Chronicle of a Death Foretold," the cast treated him like the star of the show with tears, screams, pleas for autographs and even a couple of genuflections.
"I started to cry when I embraced him," said GRACIELA DANIELE, the director and choreographer, whose stylish dance-drama about betrayal and murder in a small South American village was based on Mr.
Garcia Marquez's novel of the same name.
"Why? Because when you're embracing God you feel this way."


CHRONICLE
Now peeking out from a corner of millions of toothpaste cartons: PARIS SMOTHERS, 15, of Clifton, Va.
That is part of her prize as one of three winners in a nationwide search for exceptional young volunteers between the ages of 12 and 24.
Paris, who also received $2,500 in the contest sponsored by Close-Up toothpaste, is a member of Young Voices of Chantilly, a choral speech and dance ensemble.
The group sets the writings of the Rev.
Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr. and Maya Angelou to music and performs in churches and schools in the Washington area.


The Flag and Freedom
To the Editor:
I love the irony in your June 29 article about the flag-burning amendment.
Do people really think that burning the flag to express an opinion dishonors the "thousands who have died fighting for this country?" If anything dishonors our war dead, it's this absurd amendment.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Buying American Goods, Through the Japanese Mail  If the recent Japanese-American trade dispute gives the impression that American goods are being held at bay in Japan, consider the near-doubling in the last year of one segment of American exports.
A growing revolt by Japanese consumers is fighting high prices with an American retailing custom: mail-order shopping.
Clothing, camping gear and cosmetics are arriving in record quantity.  [ Page 1. ] A Grimmer Reality on the Job  The economy may be starting to sputter.
The fray has drawn members of the Government opposition charging the Prime Minister with nepotism, a regulatory agency complaining that its authority is being undermined and consumer groups protecting their interests.  [ 39. ] Tug-of-War Over Food Safety  Congress is to consider legislation that would sharply change rules on food safety.
Scattered through several bills, the changes would lessen the burden on business to prove food is safe, increase it on agencies to prove that proposed rules are worth the cost and expand the industry's opportunity to appeal.  [ 1. ] S.E.C.
Said to Investigate Firm  S.E.C. regulators are to visit the office of First Capital Strategists today to investigate the firm's loss of $128 million of college endowments, people familiar with the situation said.  [ 38. ] Underwriting Profits Keep Rising  The pace of Wall Street's bedrock business, underwriting the sale of stocks and bonds, continued to improve in the second quarter, according to the Securities Data Corporation.
At $189.9 billion, underwriting volume was up 36.7 percent from the first quarter.  [ 38. ]
Among winning and losing stocks in the second quarter, Continental Airlines, not too far removed from bankruptcy court, was the New York Stock Exchange's biggest gainer.  [ 40. ] As the Web Grows, So Grow Its Fans  A consumer researcher believes that the World Wide Web's on-line marketplace is expanding the Internet's audience.
For on-line users, the researcher said, "It's the end of geekdom." Steve Lohr: On the Net.  [ 39. ] On World's TV, Life's a Beach  America's most pervasive cultural export is a TV show that was canceled after one season on NBC, has never earned an award or any critical respect.
But "Baywatch," which stars David Hasselhoff and is nominally about the adventures of California lifeguards, has a wider audience on the planet than any other entertainment show ever.
Bill Carter: Television.  [ 41. ] For Cartoonists, a Fading Glory  Editorial cartoonists say they are incisive social analysts whose wit can change the course of current events.
But they fear they are becoming the buggy-whip makers of American journalism, accessorizers to a business -- newspapers -- that is the industry's horse-drawn carriage.  [ 41. ]


The Future, in the Words of Gingrich
Speaker Newt Gingrich's new book, "To Renew America," is an effort to distill for the general public his dread of the "welfare state" and his hopes for the computerized future.
There are no startling revelations, either personal or political, in the book, which has spurred Democratic attacks and complaints to the House ethics committee since Mr.
Gingrich agreed to a $4.5 million advance.
In the face of Democratic criticism, he later rejected the advance, accepting instead a 15 percent royalty, or $3.60 on every copy of the $24 book sold.


So Why Do We Subsidize That Filthy Weed?; Teen-Age Smoking
To the Editor:
Philip Morris's "Action Against Access" program (news article, June 28) purports to limit minors' access to cigarettes.
If Philip Morris really wished to prevent young people from smoking, it would take much stronger steps, such as:


The Facts Clear Fuji Of Charges by Kodak
To the Editor:
We were extremely disappointed by "Tokyo's Trade Hypocrisy" (editorial, June 21).
You declare that "Tokyo is in the wrong" in the case filed by Eastman Kodak, alleging that it has been shut out of the Japanese photographic market by Fuji Photo Film and the Japanese Government.
You rush to draw this conclusion without waiting to hear the other side of the story.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 2-5  RUSSIAN CORRUPTION RISES
Prime Minister Viktor S. Chernomyrdin, the former head of the natural-gas monopoly, Gazprom, is a rising political star in Russia.
He is also seen as an example of a close relationship that makes the Government blind to corruption.  1  BUYING AMERICAN, BY MAIL
A growing number of Japanese consumers are fighting sky-high prices with an American option: mail order.
The market for U.S. goods bought through catalogues has nearly doubled in the last year. 1  TORIES FEAR LABOR COMEBACK
As they debate whether to dump John Major and select a new Prime Minister, Britain's governing Conservatives are scared by Labor's growing electoral strength.  2  C.I.A.
CHIEF'S NEW GOALS
The new Director of Central Intelligence, John M. Deutch, says he wants to insure that espionage is consistent with "American interests and American values." 2  VOW TO REVIVE ARAB-ISRAELI TALKS
Israeli and Palestinian leaders tried to pick up the pieces of their failed peace negotiations, promising to resume talks soon but warning that they are still far apart on how to widen Palestinian self-rule.  3  MEXICANS DEBATE SOCIAL PROGRAM
Critics of the Mexican social spending program known as Solidarity say it has done little to ease poverty but much to win support for the political party known as PRI.  5  Egypt's leader has become the focus of mass discontent.3  A Serbian mortar shell hit U.N. headquarters in Bosnia.  4  Berlin Journal: The city's future seems to lie in the east.  4  National 6-7, 28  EFFORT TO ALTER FOOD RULES
Congress is set to consider legislation to drastically alter rules on food safety.
The changes have been proposed by Republicans to limit the Government's authority to regulate not only food safety but also health and the environment.  1  JOB MARKET WORSE IN LONG TERM
Reports suggest that the economy is starting to sputter.
And many of the problems that workers faced only in bad times have become fixtures: Some wages are falling, people must work 12-hour shifts and 6-day weeks, and no job is for keeps.  1  NEW FOCUS IN HEALTH CARE DEBATE
Representatives of some of the largest employers and buyers of health insurance have agreed to pursue a shift in emphasis for managed health care: They want the focus to be placed on measuring the quality of care, not controlling costs.  1  RAID IN VERMONT DRAWS CRITICISM
After Federal agents burst into the home of a lawyer in Vermont, traumatized his children and confiscated his computers, on suspicion that he was involved in drugs, the town stood behind him.  6  NEW LINK IN BOMBING CASE
Investigators have made links between weapons stolen in a robbery in Arkansas last year and suspects in the Oklahoma City bombing.  6  TOWN CAUGHT AMID FLOODS
When rain-swollen creeks flooded central Virginia last week, Graves Mill, a small farming town tucked among the foothills of the Blue Ridge Mountains, found itself caught in the middle.  6  GINGRICH'S NEW BOOK
The new book by Speaker Newt Gingrich, "To Renew America," is an effort to distill for the general public his dread of the "welfare state" and his hopes for the computerized future.  28  DEMOCRATS PLAN TO STALL
The House Democratic leader said that Democrats will continue trying to stall motions in the House to draw attention to Republican budget initiatives.  28  Metro Digest 23  PRISONS SHUN DRUG TREATMENT
For inmates, drug rehabilitation programs can offer a potent weapon for decreasing addiction, crime and the spiraling costs of incarceration.
George Seldes, author, journalist and critic of the press.
Wolfman Jack, rock-and-roll disk jockey.
George A. Elbert, author of of cookbooks and books about plants.
Editorials/Op-Ed 20-21  Editorials  A season of vacant seats.
A disappointing labor deal.
Steven Weisman: Christo's spell.
Letters Anthony Lewis: Paradise enow?
William Safire: Where is globocop?
Bob Herbert: Let them eat poison.
Michael Field: How to stop militant Islam.
Bridge 17  Chronicle 44  Crossword 16


Editorial Notebook; Wrapping the Reichstag
Part of the delight of a project by Christo is that everyone gets to be a critic.
You too can have a theory about the artist's wrapping of the Reichstag in a million square feet of polypropylene fabric.
Some might consider Christo's accomplishment self-indulgent and banal.
But I love the way that hulk of a building has been transformed into a delicate and spectral presence, forcing visitors to contemplate a familiar landmark in a fresh way.
Since the Reichstag is to be renovated as the new headquarters of the German Parliament, Christo has also provided the means for a notorious symbol of German imperialism, Nazi villainy and cold-war confrontation to be literally unwrapped as a symbol of a nation's reunification and rebirth.
If that sounds too pompous, think of the delicious absurdity of President Reagan lobbying Chancellor Helmut Kohl during a break at the Venice G-7 summit meeting in 1987 to let the project proceed.
Think of Chancellor Kohl, grumpily opposed to the wrapping as a trivialization of German aspirations, refusing to go see it even though he was in Berlin.
No matter.
Like all of Christo's projects, it is transitory, rendering his vision both arrogant and modest.
The landscape always returns to its original state.


K-III Acquires Craftrends
A unit of the K-III Communications Corporation has acquired Craftrends, a trade magazine for the sewing and crafts market, and Craftrends Today, a newsletter, from the privately held Century Communications Inc.
The terms were not disclosed.
K-III Communications, controlled by Kohlberg, Kravis, Roberts &amp; Company, the New York buyout firm, plans to combine Craftrends with its PCM magazine.
The new magazine will be called Craftrends/PCM.


So Why Do We Subsidize That Filthy Weed?
To the Editor:
Our Government, from its highest health officer, the Surgeon General, has issued warnings about smoking and health.
Warnings appear on every cigarette package that smoking may be hazardous to health.
Science has documented that the effects of tobacco use are disease -- cancer, heart disease, leukemia -- and death.


CONGRESS MOVING TO REVAMP RULES ON FOOD SAFETY
In the next few weeks, Congress will consider legislation to alter rules on food safety drastically.
The changes, scattered throughout several bills, have been proposed by the Republicans to limit the Federal Government's authority to regulate not only food safety but also health and the environment.
Taken together, the bills would reduce the burden on businesses to prove that food is safe and would increase the burden on Government agencies to prove that proposed rules would reduce risks to the public and would be worth the cost.
The bills would also expand the food industry's chances to appeal the rules in court.


Toll Workers Set to Strike On Turnpike
Faced with the prospect of a strike by 1,500 toll collectors and maintenance workers, New Jersey Turnpike Authority officials vowed today to keep the roadway open and to keep traffic moving.
The Turnpike Authority and its toll collectors broke off three days of round-the-clock labor negotiations at 3:30 A.M. today, still deadlocked in a dispute over wages, work rules and health benefits.


At Home Abroad; Paradise Enow?
Generations of American visitors have fallen in love with Italy.
It offered what home so often did not: beauty, passion, history, sensuality in food and clothes and life.
With their revolving governments, Italians might not order their politics as efficiently as we did; but they knew how to live.
What few of us noticed, in our romance, was that postwar Italy carried off an economic miracle.
It made itself the world's fifth-largest industrial economy.
And it did that, handling the resulting social strains without compromising individual liberty.


Equity Offerings For This Week
The following equity and convertible-debt offerings are expected this week:
Legato Systems Inc., Palo Alto, Calif., an initial public offering of two million shares.
Robertson, Stephens and Co.


The Root of Devils' Unrest Is Unwritten Promise in '82
From the day he became the New Jersey Devils' owner in 1982, John McMullen believes, he was deceived by the New Jersey Sports and Exposition Authority.
Now that he admits erring in relocating the former Colorado Rockies to his home state, he is seeking to create the legal right to relocate to Nashville.
"They don't give a damn about us," he said recently, referring to the authority.
"Aren't I entitled to break even?" He said that the Devils' Stanley Cup-winning season added a $2 million loss to his $18 million deficit.


Holiday Tomorrow
Tomorrow is the Fourth of July.
Today, government offices, banks, post offices and transportation will operate on normal weekday schedules.
Financial markets will close at 1 P.M.
Following is tomorrow's schedule.
NEW YORK  FIREWORKS Two shows: downtown, 9:15 P.M., south of the Brooklyn Bridge; midtown, 9:30, 25th to 42d Streets in the East River.
Franklin D. Roosevelt Drive closed from the Battery to 96th Street from 6 P.M. to 1 A.M.


1915 Knoxville, With an Urban Accent
You don't think of Samuel Barber's melancholic "Knoxville: Summer of 1915" as an urban piece.
But during the opening Summergarden concert Friday night at the Museum of Modern Art, Barber's setting of James Agee's poetic memoir of a small Southern city of 80 years ago seemed not so far removed from midtown Manhattan today.
Hearing music in the museum's Sculpture Garden may not be quite as homey an experience as "rocking gently and talking gently" on porches in the Knoxville of 1915.
But the walled garden provided an equivalent sense of seclusion.
The peace and quiet of this Knoxville summer evening are interrupted by automobiles and buggies and "a streetcar raising its iron moan." And there were plenty of iron moans coming from West 54th Street, including, for a while, a buzzing power saw.
But it didn't matter.
The performance was affecting.


Dividend Meetings
Following is a partial list of dividend meetings this week:  MONDAY  National City Corp


Two French Rarities By Opera Manhattan
"An Evening of Myths and Immortality," a semi-staged concert of scenes from three late Romantic French operas, is to be presented by Opera Manhattan on July 10 and July 13 at 8 P.M. at St.
Peter's Lutheran Church, Lexington Avenue and 54th Street.
The excerpts, to be sung in French with English surtitles under the direction of Gabriel Guimaraes, are Act I of Alberic Magnard's 1901 tragedy "Guercoeur," the love scene from "Le Roi Arthus," composed in 1895 by Ernest Chausson, and the last act of Ernest Reyer's 1884 opera "Sigurd."


New C.I.A. Chief Wants to Revamp U.S. Spying Overseas
The new Director of Central Intelligence, John M. Deutch, says he wants to change the thinking and the behavior of American spies overseas, to insure that American espionage is consistent with "American interests and American values."
The directorate of covert operations "knows that it's necessary to change its attitudes, its practices and its habits," Mr.
Deutch said in an interview at the Central Intelligence Agency's headquarters in Langley, Va.


A New Kind of Suburbia Arises Out of the New Jersey Farmlands
Twenty years ago, fields of corn, barley and wheat stretched for hundreds of acres in all directions from the crossing of South Middlebush Road and Claremont Road here in southern Somerset County.
But in the last decade, the cropland has vanished.
Now the area is filled with 2,600 new single-family homes, garden apartments and town houses.
To city dwellers and even residents of the older, close-in suburbs, these new outlying developments, like the Wynnefield Village town houses and garden apartments, seem isolated.


QUALITY IS FOCUS FOR HEALTH PLANS
At a meeting quietly convened at a mountain house in the Grand Tetons of Wyoming, representatives of some of the largest employers and purchasers of health insurance agreed last week to pursue a fundamental shift in emphasis in the nation's managed health-care systems: They want the primary focus to be placed on measuring the quality of care now that costs have begun to be controlled.
The broad-based agreement was reached at Jackson Hole last week by 30 officials of Federal, state and local public employees organizations, consumer groups and officials of such major employers as American Express, the Minnesota Mining and Manufacturing Company, the Ameritech Corporation and Pepsico, which together represent an estimated 80 million consumers of health insurance.


New Jersey Daily Briefing; Missing in Seoul Collapse
For the family of 58-year-old Frank Bakes of Fort Lee, this holiday weekend has been a time of frustration and tearful anxiety.
Mr.
Bakes, an engineer with Burns &amp; Roe of Oradell, is believed to be among the 200 people still missing from Thursday's collapse of a department store in Seoul, South Korea.
"We are completely desperate," his former wife, Maria Bakes, said yesterday from her Northvale home.
"This man is there for sure." Just before the collapse, Mr.
Bakes told a colleague he was going to the store to shop for imported food, Mrs.
Bakes said.


Cyprus Respects Law
To the Editor:
Re "Cyprus Shores Wash Dirty Money" (news article, June 15):


Young Starters Get the Call
Still unsure whether they want to or need to obtain a starter, the Yankees will probably summon two more young pitchers from Class AAA Columbus for starts against the White Sox Tuesday and Wednesday.
If they promote Mariano Rivera and Brian Boehringer, as expected, the Yankees will have three rookies and one starter in his first full season in the rotation.
If Rivera and Boehringer had not already stumbled in brief stints in the majors, the moves would be considered routine because both right-handers have excelled at Class AAA.
Rivera is 2-1 with a 1.17 earned run average, pitched a five-inning no-hitter against Rochester in his last start and has a streak of 20 2/3 scoreless innings.
Boehringer is 2-3 with a 1.55 e.r.a.
The Yankees hope the two pitchers will form an effective kiddie corps with Sterling Hitchcock and Andy Pettitte.


CHRONICLE
Nyet, nyet, a thousand times, nyet.
MIKHAIL S. GORBACHEV says that is the answer he gets from RAISA GORBACHEV when he brings up the idea of returning to politics.
"Politics took away the best years" of their lives, the former Soviet leader told the newspaper Moskovsky Komsomolets.
He said Mrs.
Gorbachev was particularly bothered by allegations made against him when he was in power.
"Those lies really affect her," he said. "She is more emotional than I am."


Critics Troubled By Computer Study On Pornography
A new study, which concludes that the exchange of sex-related images is "one of the largest (if not the largest) recreational applications of users of computer networks," is being challenged as unscientific and sensationalistic by opponents of Government regulation of those networks.
The study -- conducted a year ago by a student at Carnegie-Mellon University in Pittsburgh and published last week in the Georgetown Law Journal -- has intensified the debate over indecent material on the Internet, galvanizing both those who favor tighter Government controls on the information networks and those who fear the erosion of First Amendment rights in cyberspace.


Sparky Enjoys a Security Beyond Job Security
Davey Johnson and Dallas Green have won it all as managers.
Unless a George Steinbrenner gets in the way, Buck Showalter likely will one day, too.
But winning it all and having it all can be two very different things.
Especially if what you wish to have is the comfort of being all but bulletproof in one of the most tenuous jobs in sports.


CUNY Restructures for a Fiscal Crisis That Doesn't Exist; College, a Privilege
To the Editor:
As a graduate of CUNY (Brooklyn College), I support the tightening of remedial education at the four-year colleges (news article, June 27).
It is a necessary step to attempt to balance the system's budget.


New Jersey Daily Briefing; Sightings in a Jail's Final Days
The old Hudson County Jail, which shut down in 1990 because of overcrowding, was demolished yesterday, but the seven-story structure did not give up the ghost without a fight.
Six whacks with the wrecking ball were needed to dislodge the first bricks -- a circumstance likely to confirm rumors that the jail, built in 1926, is haunted.
Workers cutting up the steel cages inside the jail during the past month have reported hearing ghoulish laughter and seeing tools make mysterious movements.
Eugene Neapolitan, a foreman on the wrecking job, wrote "Happy the Ghost" on his hard hat after what he claims was a sighting of the spirit.
TERRY PRISTIN


JAZZ
Pop-Funk Explorations With a Slight Difference  Greg Osby, saxophonist The Knitting Factory


In Schools, Subtle Pressure To Change Students' Grades
Principals and teachers around New York City say that the pressure to reassess the grades of failing students -- as a high school principal did last week -- surfaces in subtle ways.
They describe the case of Robert Durkin, the principal of Washington Irving High School in Manhattan, as an extreme case.
He was removed last week for giving 17 failing seniors extra homework and permitting them to graduate.
He bypassed the authority of teachers, who reported him to Board of Education officials.


New Jersey Daily Briefing; Rabbi in Assault May Appeal
Asserting that it sends the wrong message about racial hatred, an Orthodox rabbi who was found guilty of assaulting a 13-year-old youth said he would probably appeal the verdict by a Municipal Court judge, James Shepard.
Rabbi Zev Liebowitz of Congregation Ahavat Torah said the incident last February occurred after the boy, Justin Vallier of Lake Hiawatha, taunted him with anti-Semitic and off-color remarks.
He said he pushed the teen-ager against a door, scolded him and then released him.


Adventurous Riffs on Gershwin Classic
The pianist Marcus Roberts closed Thursday's JVC Jazz Festival concert at Bryant Park with his interpretation of George Gershwin's "Rhapsody in Blue." Mr.
Roberts stretched it out, keeping whole sections but adding long segments of riffing and improvisations.
With its mixture of early-20th-century modernism and contemporary jazz improvisations, the piece swelled into something new and important, and the audience gave the performance a standing ovation.
Mr.
Roberts was backed by a string section from the Orchestra of St.
Luke's, his own trio and parts of the Lincoln Center Jazz Orchestra, and for the most part they performed well, from the opening clarinet figure to the dissonant string writing.
Mr.
Roberts teased the audience with solo sections that breezed through moments of stride piano only to stop or wander into less rhythmic territory.
The improvisational sections featured competitive duets between two trumpeters or two trombonists, and at times the music seemed on the verge of boiling over, barely able to contain its vitality.


New Internet Feature Will Make Voluntary Ratings Possible
A consortium of 59 companies, including the nation's leading hardware and software concerns, is planning to change the Internet's most popular software, making it possible to create rating systems similar to those used in the movie and video-game business to warn of violent or sexual content.
The new software feature, to be added later this summer to the Internet's popular World Wide Web service, will allow parents, schools and other organizations to use a rating system to screen categories of material from children or from anyone who might find it objectionable.


How Foes Unraveled Apartheid
One lesson of the 1980's is that in the commotions of nations, happy endings are neither common nor permanent: dictatorships fall amid rejoicing, only to be replaced by floundering, corrupt or authoritarian regimes.
But South Africa, of all places, has produced a heartening transformation: apartheid peacefully replaced by what looks to be (fingers crossed) a multiracial democracy led by a hero in the form of Nelson Mandela.
How that came about is the subject of "Mandela's Fight for Freedom," a far more revealing report than the cliche of a title suggests.
In three fascinating hours, the main players on all sides of a complex and periodically murderous political standoff tell of the pressures that forced them to the negotiating table and of the tactics -- through a decade of mostly closed-door talks -- that resulted in a peaceful accommodation.


Auction This Week Features Only Bills
The Treasury's schedule of finan cings this week is limited to today's regular weekly auction of three- and six-month bills.
By the close of the New York cash market on Friday, traders said, the rate for the outstanding three-month bill was 5.41 percent, and for the outstanding six-month bill was 5.33 percent.


Patents; A hybrid car, with battery and internal combustion engine, may be the bridge to a fully electric auto.
MANY people await the even greater changes in car design and performance that will come with electric automobiles.
But manufacturers now say that some sort of hybrid vehicle will be on the roads before a purely electric car is perfected.
The hybrid would run on a gas-fueled internal-combustion engine, but would use a highly efficient battery to raise mileage to about 80 miles a gallon.
A Ringwood, N.J., company said it has patented just such a cell using technology from space satellite batteries.
Philip A. Burghart, a senior vice-president of Ergenics Inc., predicted his company's battery would allow drivers to travel up to 300 miles before recharging, and would vastly increase mileage performance in hybrid gas-electric cars.


No Headline
"The average American thinks we've got guys in jail like the ones Jimmy Cagney and Humphrey Bogart played in the 1930's. In reality, the prisons are wall to wall with alcohol and drug abusers and the mentally ill. They're not hardened criminals; they're people who can change. But they can't change without help." -- JOSEPH A. CALIFANO JR.  [ 26:1. ]


Fox's Powerful Role in Children's TV
In August 1993, after Margaret Loesch, president of the Fox Children's Network, decided to put a show called "Mighty Morphin Power Rangers" on her fall schedule, she sent videotapes of several episodes to Lucie S. Salhany, then head of Fox Broadcasting.
Then Ms.
Loesch went on vacation.
The next day a fax came from Ms.
Salhany, urging that "Power Rangers" be shelved.
"Maybe I'm too old," the message continued, "but I think this will be a disaster."


An Effort to Protect a Reservoir Is Attacked by Environmentalists
Emie Barnes paused in her daily jog along Route 120 to catch her breath and describe how she watched in horror over the last three weeks as a three-and-a-half-mile chain-link fence went up around a portion of the picturesque Kensico Reservoir.
"First they cleared brush and set out flags and tags, then came the posts, and when the fence went up, I said, 'Oh God,' " said Ms.
Barnes, who lives in Chappaqua in Westchester County.
"This was one of the prettiest stretches of road I know. Now it looks like the Bronx."


Reviving Frescoes (and a Debate on Art)
For centuries, the mysterious power in plaster and color that adorns a small papal chapel here was locked from prying eyes.
But with a solemn Mass by a representative of Pope John Paul II, the Vatican recently unveiled eight frescoes in the chapel, known as the Sancta Sanctorum, and in so doing revived an impassioned debate over the origins of Renaissance art.


Balloons for the Holiday


George Elbert, 83; Wrote of Cooking And Indoor Plants
George A. Elbert, who collaborated with his wife, Virginie, on a score of cookbooks and books about indoor plants, died on Thursday in the New York University Medical Center.
He was 83 and lived on the Upper West Side of Manhattan.
The cause was congestive heart failure, Mrs. Elbert said.


Hugo Weisgall Receives Composition Award
Hugo Weisgall is the recipient of this year's William Schuman Award, a $50,000 prize for music composition, Columbia University has announced.
The 82-year-old composer is the fifth recipient of the award, which honors "the lifetime achievement of an American composer whose works have been widely performed and generally acknowledged to be of lasting significance."


Why Studios Bet On the Summer Blockbuster; With Bid Debts and Big Budgets, Hir are More Critical Than Ever
Even before "Apollo 13" opened on Friday and generated an estimated -- and stunning -- $26 million at the box office in its first weekend, Tom Pollock, chairman of the MCA Motion Picture Group, was pretty sure he had a hit on his hands.
The early word was positive from critics who had previewed the film in recent weeks.
And if Mr.
Pollack needed further reassurance it came last Monday evening after a Manhattan screening for a tough crowd: 1,150 people who work in the entertainment industry.
When the closing credits started to roll, the hard-bitten group broke into applause.


Newest British Star Hits Pretty Hard, Eh?
A month ago, just after this nation's hyperactive oddsmakers gloomily estimated the chances of a reincarnated Fred Perry turning up in time to win Wimbledon at 1,000-to-1, a turncoat dressed in white and carrying a smoking racquet arrived on the scene.
Not since Perry's victory in 1936 has a British man won this coveted singles championship, but as soon as a towering 21-year-old Canadian with the 137 mile-an-hour serve and a ranking of 60th jumped across the Atlantic, the odds on a Briton dropped to a manageable 50-1.
On Monday, with all 13,000 of the Center Court's spectators poised to adopt his cause the way he has adopted their country, Greg Rusedski will try to justify his sudden celebrity, and the epic amount of pressure that accompanies it, with a fourth-round upset of Pete Sampras, Wimbledon's two-time defending champion.
Helped along by his English mother, Helen, but sought after primarily because he owns the world's fastest serve, the hired gun was promptly installed as the British No. 1.
The snub to the nation's incumbents caused at least one British player to quit the country's Davis Cup squad, and Rusedski's first-round losses at Nottingham and Queen's Club in his first two events as a Briton seemed to suggest the controversial conversion might have been a flop.
But now 77 aces and three rounds deep into Wimbledon, a frontier no other British player has crossed this year in singles, Rusedski has stolen the scene if not the hearts of his fellow players.
Andre Agassi has sneered about Rusedski's new way with the British vernacular: they don't use words like "telly," "blokes" and "brilliant" back in Montreal, a city where Rusedski claims to have spent 16 formative years without learning how to play hockey.
He was, he said, escorted directly onto a tennis court by his father, who dreamed that his 7-year-old son might one day do what he could not: take on Ivan Lendl.
Instead, Rusedski is taking on the No. 2 player in the world, the player whose game and accomplishments epitomize what he aspires to.
Although Rusedski may have fired the world's fastest serve, it is Sampras who has been immortalized in the act of serving on Wimbledon T-shirts.
Doubtless Rusedski will not be receiving any further tennis lessons from Sampras, who claimed not to remember the results of a two-set practice session they had back in Tampa, Fla., in the days when Rusedski was just a 117th-ranked Canadian prospect and not the venerated British No. 1.
"I don't remember a lot of my practice matches; that's why they're practice," he sniped after being told that the gregarious Rusedski recalled splitting sets with Sampras, who at the time was ranked No. 1.
This weekend, Sampras expressed reluctance to give up his practice court to "a British player," as Wimbledon protocol requires that the top British player gets solo court time upon request, once he saw that the player in the wings was Rusedski.
Sampras also said that regardless of what any radar gun decrees, he believes Goran Ivanisevic's serve is superior to Rusedski's.
Sampras said he found it ironic that Wimbledon, in retaliation against the rally-less final he and Ivanisevic played here last year, selected this year to debut softer, slower balls in the hope of reducing aces and enhancing rallies -- obviously a decision arrived at before Rusedski arrived to save the day.
"Maybe next year they'll use golf balls," Sampras said.
Sampras added: "There's not a whole lot of strategy involved when you play someone like him. He's got a big serve, he's lefty, and whenever you get those two things on grass it's going to be a tough match. And he's obviously filled with a lot of emotion. Hopefully I can get off to a good start and put him out of the match." Sampras apparently didn't notice that the same strategy failed miserably for 16th-seeded Guy Forget against Rusedski in the second round.
Rusedski admitted that his own game will need to be perfect if he expects to give the defending champion significant trouble.
Rusedski, whose only previous Wimbledon experience was a second-round loss last year, needed all 36 aces he launched in his 6-7 (6-8), 6-4, 6-4, 7-6 (7-3) escape from the clutches of Olivier Delaitre of France in the third round.
"I will really have to serve well if I'm going to do well against Pete, so I'm not going to go out on a limb and make predictions," said Rusedski, who currently lives in Surrey with the family of his girlfriend, Lucy Connor.
He met her four years ago when she was a ball girl for one of his matches.
Meantime, Wimbledon is keeping its grass short, the better to create a sympathetic environment for the bullets of its hired gun -- a tactic that, unfortunately for the home country's hopes, also plays right into the hands of Sampras and the other big servers in the Round of 16, the fourth-seeded Ivanisevic and third-seeded Boris Becker.
Still, the mood is jubilant for this eager transplant who insists he "feels British."
"This is why I came over here," he said.
"I love the country. I feel British completely."
That's something Sampras, Agassi, and Ivanisevic, and not even the citizen-of-the-world Becker, will ever say.


Media: TELEVISION; Stand aside, CNN. America's No. 1 TV export is -- no scoffing, please -- 'Baywatch.'
AMERICA'S most pervasive cultural export is a television show that was canceled after one season on NBC, has never earned an award or even any critical respect for dramatic excellence and is often derisively called "Babewatch."
But facts are facts.
"Baywatch," which is about the adventures of lifeguards on a California beach but is really mostly about swimwear and suntan lotion, has a wider audience on the planet Earth than any other entertainment show in history.


A Handful of Newcomers at No. 1
The film "Dumb and Dumber" was the top video-rental title its first week on the shelves.
In its premiere week, "Apollo 13" ousted "Pocahontas" after a one-week reign at No. 1 ("Apollo 13," the book, is No. 1, too).
"HIStory: Past and Present," the Michael Jackson album released on Tuesday, leads the music album charts.


Murray Breaks 2 Ribs During Indians' Victory
Indians 7, Twins 0
The Indians' Eddie Murray broke two ribs on his left side when he was tagged hard while sliding into home plate in the third inning of Cleveland's 7-0 victory over Minnesota yesterday at the Metrodome.
He was expected to go on the 15-day disabled list today.


A Season of Vacant Seats
Two months into the strike-delayed 1995 baseball season, the ballpark can be a lonely place.
Attendance is down 20 percent compared with a year ago.
Home runs and long foul balls clatter around acres of empty seats at many stadiums.
Sometimes there are hardly enough paying customers to generate a respectable cheer.
Baseball fans are clearly disillusioned by the long stalemate between the millionaire owners and millionaire players that prematurely ended the 1994 season and produced the first autumn in 89 years without a World Series.
When play resumed in April under pressure from a Federal judge, with the labor dispute unresolved, many fans apparently decided they were not going to spend a penny more on the sport.
Free hot dogs and other sales gimmicks borrowed from Bill Veeck and Charles Finley, Barnumesque owners of an earlier era, have failed to lure back the fans.


Essay; Where Is Globocop?
An unholy alliance of corrupt politicians and sophisticated thieves is ripping off the world, while police and intelligence agencies seem helpless to combat it.
*
In Moldova, a Russian general popular for keeping the peace quit rather than take part in a plot to sell off his disbanded army's weapons through the Russian mafiya.


Credit Clergy for Concessions in Mexico
To the Editor:
Re your June 25 article on three priests deported by Mexico:


So Why Do We Subsidize That Filthy Weed?; Another Misperception
To the Editor:
The bipartisan vote by the House Appropriations Committee extending the moratorium on new offshore oil drilling as well as maintaining tobacco supports illustrates reaction to incorrect perceptions, rather than to facts (news article, June 28).


CUNY Restructures for a Fiscal Crisis That Doesn't Exist
To the Editor:
Your coverage of the City University of New York (news articles, June 27 and 28) accepts the restructuring and retrenchment arguments that the Board of Trustees voted on June 26 as received wisdom.
Interviews with trustees and the chancellor's staff ignore the arguments the faculty and students have pressed since the state budget passed.


Flooding Turns Town Into 'Lunar Landscape'
When violent thunderstorms hit and swollen creeks flooded central Virginia last week, this small farming town tucked among the foothills of the Blue Ridge Mountains found itself caught in the middle.
Kinsey Run and the Rapidan River broke their banks in the valley below, and boulders and mud slid down from the mountains above.
Much of what was in between just washed away.
"This was the most beautiful place in the world," said Susan Hull, who spent a large part of her childhood here and returned today to help clean the mud out of her family's old plantation house.
"I guess you can still get a sense of that, even though there is this lunar landscape."


In the Course of a Visit to Washington


Job Insecurity: A special report.; In New Work World, Employers Call All the Shots
Not so long ago, American workers would suffer the sting of a recession by losing jobs or having their hours or wages reduced.
They responded by taking part-time work, signing with temp agencies and just making do -- at least until the economy revived.
Then they would pour back to work, their wages rising as employers competed for their services.
Not anymore.
Recent reports suggest that the economy is starting to sputter after perking along for the four years since the last recession.
But whatever the economy's prospects, the latest stretch of growth shows that for all but professionals, executives, new college graduates, and the most skilled blue-collar workers, many problems that workers faced only in bad times have become fixtures in all times: Some wages are still falling, people must be ready to work 12-hour shifts and 6-day weeks, and no job is for keeps.


George Seldes Is Dead at 104; An Early, Fervent Press Critic
George Seldes, author, journalist and critic of the press who protested the suppression of news and the power of business interests in the 1930's and 1940's, died yesterday in Mount Ascutney Hospital and Health Center in Windsor, Vt.
He was 104 years old and lived in Hartland Four Corners, Vt.
Mr.
Seldes brought a muckraker's fervor to his critical commentaries on the press in books and in the newsletter In Fact, which he edited from 1940 to 1950.


Stock Gainers and Losers in the Second Quarter
Common stocks with the largest gains and declines in percentage terms in the second quarter of 1995 on each exchange, as calculated by the Media General.
Stocks that began the quarter at less than $5 a share and stocks of closed-end invesment funds are excluded.
Only one class of stock is listed for each company.


Rain Acts as a Caution Flag for the Tour's First Stage
Battling more cold rain, riding over tricky roads and keeping in mind the crash on a wet street that eliminated Chris Boardman during the prologue, the Tour de France moved at a cautious pace today until the top sprinters smelled the finish line.
From then on, the pace exploded.
After a short uphill burst, Fabio Baldato, an Italian with the MG team, was first across the line by a bicycle length ahead of Laurent Jalabert, a Frenchman with ONCE.
Djamolidine Abdoujaparov, an Uzbek with Novell, was third.


Underwriting Activity Is Up in 2d Quarter
The pace of Wall Street's bedrock business, underwriting the sale of United States stocks and bonds, continued to improve in the second quarter, according to the Securities Data Company.
At $189.9 billion, underwriting volume was up a strong 36.7 percent from the first quarter, 16.4 percent over the second quarter of 1994. .


Gale Gordon, TV Actor, 89; Longtime Foil to Lucille Ball
Gale Gordon, a character actor known for his comic fussiness and his television sitcom roles opposite Lucille Ball, died on Friday at the Redwood Terrace Health Center in Escondido, Calif.
He was 89.
The cause was cancer, the Associated Press reported.


INSIDE
New Link in Bombing Case
Federal investigators have made links between weapons stolen in a robbery in rural Arkansas last November and the two suspects in the the bombing the Federal Building in Oklahoma City.
Page 6.
Desperately Seeking Jobs
With money for job programs drying up, the search for summer work has a depressing air of futility for many teen-agers throughout the New York City region.
Page 23.


The City's Disappointing Labor Deal
A package of $600 million in labor concessions announced hours before the start of a new fiscal year on Saturday has led Mayor Rudolph Giuliani to proclaim that New York City's budget has at last been balanced.
But the package falls disappointingly short of the Mayor's original goal.
Many promised savings remain unidentified, and the package failed to save money by changing work rules that have impeded productivity.
If the city is to achieve long-term financial health, the Mayor must get more from the unions.
The labor package was the third act in a fiscal drama that began in February, when Mr.
Giuliani projected a $3.1 billion deficit for the next fiscal year.
First, he pushed the Legislature in Albany, with limited success, to cut welfare and Medicaid costs and provide a modest amount of state aid.
Second, he drove his own painful budget cuts through the City Council.
Now he has tackled wages and benefits, which constitute half of the entire city budget, making the last act in some ways the most critical.


Economic Calendar
Listed below are the scheduled release dates for major economic indicators this week.
Monday  Personal Income May Construction Spending May


DANCE
African-Derived Rituals With a Modern Touch  Ancient Vibrations St. Mark's Church


Krone Unhurt, 2 Horses Die
Julie Krone and Jean-Luc Samyn escaped serious injury yesterday when their horses suffered broken ankles in unrelated accidents during the seventh race at Belmont Park.
Neither Krone, who has undergone three operations in the past two years to repair injuries suffered in violent spills, nor Samyn was injured, but both horses were destroyed by injection.
The spills occurred two races before the 78th running of the Dwyer, which was won by the 2-1 favorite Hoolie, a 3-year-old son of Criminal Type who stretched his winning streak to four races.
He stalked Reality Road for the entire mile and a sixteenth and caught him near the finish to win by a length and a quarter.
Reality Road fought off D. Wayne Lukas's Western Larla by a head for second.
Hoolie covered the distance in 1:423/5 on a muddy track and paid $6.60.


Drug Therapy: Powerful Tool Reaching Few Inside Prisons
On a summer night as sweet and soft as any he had ever known, Pierre Mathurin and another young man pulled to the curb in a quiet section of Queens, snorted a couple of lines of cocaine and set out down the sidewalk.
They had spotted a man and a woman strolling alone, and now they were going after them, Mr.
Mathurin's fingers tightening on a chrome-plated .25-caliber pistol.
It was just a week shy of Mr.
Mathurin's 20th birthday, and his career as a drug dealer and robber was gathering momentum nicely.
But that evening did not go as expected.
The woman screamed, and Mr.
Mathurin, fleeing with a wallet and a gold chain, was chased down by neighbors with baseball bats, turned over to the police and eventually sent to a prison drug treatment program that transformed his life.


Politics Take Center Court as Yugoslavs Win Title
Midway through the European basketball championships, Vlade Divac had said, "Sports and politics should not go together."
Divac was hardly the only player to make such a comment during the last, relatively tranquil week of competition, but on the night the championships came to an end with a 96-90 Yugoslav victory over the Lithuanians, there was simply no escaping politics.


Anti-Poverty Program Under Fire in Mexico
Every Sunday, no matter how hot it gets in this fiery land between the desert and the sea, Joel Incunza Contreras and the Campo Plata Harvesters play at least nine innings of baseball at a new stadium, which they built with $30,000 from the anti-poverty program that was a trademark of the former President, Carlos Salinas.
Critics have asserted that such spending by the program, known as Solidarity, has done nothing to ease Mexico's grinding poverty.
Nor, they say, have the millions of Solidarity dollars spent all over Mexico in the last six years to build more than 2,000 basketball courts, dozens of gymnasiums and enough baseball stadiums to support a league.


Goal Missed, Israel and P.L.O. Vow to Revive Talks Soon
Israeli and Palestinian leaders tried to pick up the pieces of their failed peace negotiations today, promising to resume talks soon but cautioning that they are still far apart on how to reach their goal of widening Palestinian self-rule.
The two sides had set July 1 as their target for an agreement, a date chosen months ago almost at random but one that had increasingly assumed symbolic importance.
They came up empty, though, despite talks that had dragged on for more than eight hours, through Saturday night and into today.


Bringing Relief to Israel's Blazing Woodland


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League  CALIFORNIA ANGELS -- Purchased the contract of Orlando Palmeiro, outfielder, from Vancouver of the Pacific Coast League.
Optioned Mark Dalesandro, catcher, to Vancouver.
SEATTLE MARINERS -- Recalled Darren Bragg, outfielder, from Tacoma of the Pacific Coast League.
Optioned Ron Villone, pitcher, to Tacoma.
National League  COLORADO ROCKIES -- Signed Todd Helton, first baseman, and assigned him to Asheville of the South Atlantic League.
HOUSTON ASTROS -- Optioned Pedro A. Martinez, pitcher, to Tucson of the Pacific Coast League.
Purchased the contract of Ross Powell, pitcher, from Tucson.
Sent Phil Plantier, outfielder, to Tucson on an injury rehabilitation assignment.
NEW YORK METS -- Signed Jeffrey Parsons, shortstop, and assigned him to Pittsfield of the New York-Penn League.
ST.
LOUIS CARDINALS -- Placed Bernard Gilkey, outfielder, on the 15-day disabled list, retroactive to June 28.
Activated Geronimo Pena, second baseman, from the 15-day disabled list.


This Yankee Loss From the Strange-but-True Department
The developments on the field at County Stadium had given the afternoon a goofy backdrop: The Yankees misplayed a fly ball into a triple the first time a Milwaukee player swung the bat, made two other errors, ran the bases recklessly and had trouble with a rookie's fluttering knuckleball.
So when the San Diego Chicken made an unannounced appearance and three adults dressed in costumes depicting different sausage products chugged around the field, it was strangely fitting.
Was the real Goofy hiding in the bullpen?
Manager Buck Showalter was not smiling, though, because there was nothing goofy about his Yankees' 7-6 loss to the Brewers.
Not when the rookie Steve Sparks adeptly overcame three Brewer errors and confounded hitter after hitter.
Not when the Yankees left the potential tying run on second base after scoring three runs in the eighth inning.
Not when their last chance wilted in the ninth after Luis Polonia was out for being hit near the left eye by Wade Boggs's chopping grounder near second base.


Accounts
*
Sizzler InternationalInc., Los Angeles, to Foote, Cone &amp; Belding, Los Angeles, a unit of True North Communications, as the first agency to handle advertising for the Sizzler American Grill, a revamped restaurant chain operating in test markets in California.
Dailey &amp; Associates, Los Angeles, a unit of the Interpublic Group of Cos., continues to handle advertising for Sizzler's existing restaurant chain.
Billings were not disclosed. *
Mercury One-2-One, London, a joint venture of Cable and Wireless P.L.C. and U S West Inc., to Bartle Bogle Hegarty, London, to handle advertising for the mobile phone company, previously handled by Woollams Moira Gaskin O'Malley, London.
The billings were estimated at $15 million. *
Rag Shops Inc., Hawthorne, N.J., to Ramm Advertising and Public Relations, Cranford, N.J., to handle advertising and public relations for the fabric and crafts chain, previously handled by GFR Promotions, Rahway, N.J.
The billings were estimated at $4.5 million. *
Java City, Sacramento, Calif., to the Evans Group, Seattle, to handle advertising for the bakery cafes, previously handled on a project-by-project basis.
The billings were estimated at $2 million.


ResultsPlus
BOXING  Lewis Wins Tuneup and Seeks Title Bout
The Former World Boxing Council heavyweight champion Lennox Lewis, keeping busy while waiting for a title fight, yesterday stopped the Australian Justin Fortune in the fourth round in Dublin.
Lewis's manager, Frank Maloney, said he expected him to have a championship fight before October, with the W.B.C. belt of Oliver McCall -- who stopped Lewis in two rounds last September -- the top priority.


Espresso Machine Accounts Awarded
Two companies that market espresso and cappuccino machines have named agencies.
DeLonghi America Inc. in Carlstadt, N.J., has selected Gilbert Whitney &amp; Johns in Whippany, N.J., as the first agency to handle advertising for its espresso and cappuccino makers.
The billings were estimated at $6 million.
Gilbert Whitney was awarded the account by DeLonghi America, a unit of DeLonghi S.p.A. in Treviso, Italy, after a three-month review that also included Howard Goldberg &amp; Associates Advertising in Cedar Grove, N.J.
The Stogel Companies in New York continues to handle advertising and other responsibilities for the DeLonghi housewares products.


Young Turks and Old, Be-Bop and Standards
Gary Bartz, the 54-year-old alto saxophonist, was the odd man out in the JVC Jazz Festival show on Friday afternoon at Bryant Park.
The four other groups on the bill were all led by musicians in their 20's and 30's.
But Mr.
Bartz's impassioned, exuberant, daring quintet raised the stakes the highest.
The concert offered an A B C of New York's jazz-club elite, with groups led by Wessell Anderson (alto saxophone), Carl Allen (drums), Mr.
Bartz, Cyrus Chestnut (piano) and James Carter (alto and tenor saxophones).
All five are signed to Atlantic Records, which sponsored the concert.
The label favors extroverts who please audiences while challenging themselves with complex music.


New Jersey Daily Briefing; Voting on School Takeover
The State Board of Education is expected to vote Wednesday on whether Newark should join Jersey City and Paterson and become the third school system to lose local control.
Newark school officials have said that if the takeover is approved, they will try to block it through the courts.
The State Education Commissioner, Leo F. Klagholz, has recommended the takeover, citing the school's district low test scores and high dropout rates.
But Newark school officials say they have not been allowed to make their case for retaining control.


Cartoonists See a Future That's No Joking Matter
Ted Rall, mop-headed antiestablishment political cartoonist, has abundant talent, a 1,400-drawing portfolio, seven years' experience, the acclaim of peers and the approval of newspaper editors who, every so often, print his work.
What he lacks is someone who will hire him full-time.
"People have been telling me I'll find a job for seven years now," he said, sprawled glumly on a sofa at the downtown Stouffer's here.
"I'm not going to find a job. There are no jobs."


Japanese Do Buy American: By Mail and a Lot Cheaper
Gathered outside a college classroom, Sayaka Fujimoto and six of her friends tore open their packages from the United States, and to the astonishment of their male friends who were watching, pulled out $1,133 worth of Victoria's Secret lingerie.
"We're going to have a sleep-over and wear everything -- like a fashion show," said Miss Fujimoto, a 20-year-old college student who often orders clothes through the mail along with her friends.


Medleys, Messages And Tape
In decades past, pop musicians were expected to perform their music live.
Using backing tapes was a short cut suitable for television shows, not for live concerts.
But with the advent of hip-hop and other forms of electronically based pop music, playing taped music has become de rigueur at some concerts.
On Friday night at the Brendan Byrne Arena in East Rutherford, N.J., during the Summer Jam organized by WQHT-FM radio, known as Hot 97, there was not a single live instrument on stage as seven urban-music groups, each of which has had at least one top-five single in the past few months, performed for the sold-out crowd.


Condom Controversy in a Park
Last year, the All Saints Lutheran Parish in the South Bronx gave out about 1,500 condoms at its annual basketball tournament.
Yesterday, it was able to give out only about 300 -- the result of a dispute with the city, which does not want them given away in parks at all.
The parish was facing a ban on condom distribution until the New York Civil Liberties Union sued the city on the church's behalf last week.
And it was not until the organization's lawyers found an appeals court judge at home on Saturday night that the parish received limited permission to hand out condoms to anyone 16 years or older who specifically requested one.


Grey Advertising Gets 3M Contract
Grey Advertising in New York was awarded one large account and resigned a smaller one on Friday.
The Minnesota Mining and Manufacturing Company, the marketer of brands like Scotch tapes, Scotch-Brite cleansers and Post-it notes, named Grey to handle the bulk of its worldwide corporate and consumer account, which was previously handled by 25 agencies.
The billings were estimated at $40 million.


Democrats Vow to Slow the Budget Debate
Having kept the House up all night last Wednesday with a series of parliamentary maneuvers, Democrats will continue trying to stall in the weeks ahead to draw attention to Republican budget initiatives, Representative Richard A. Gephardt of Missouri said today.
The Republicans "don't want to have a debate this summer about what's really at stake for the American people," Mr.
Gephardt, the minority leader, said on the NBC News program "Meet the Press."


Town Rises to Defend a Lawyer
The target of the drug raid that went down here three weeks ago was not your usual suspect: Will Hunter is son of two ministers, graduate of Exeter, Yale and Harvard Law School, Rhodes scholar, former Vermont state legislator, newspaper publisher and low-paid lawyer for the down and out.
He drives a rusty, secondhand Mazda, buys his clothes at rummage sales and runs his law practice out of his basement.
He says he earns about $20,000 a year and has accepted payment in maple syrup, cheese, cups of coffee and the tie-dyed cummerbund he wore at his wedding three years ago to April Hensel, a district coordinator for the state environmental board.


Stolen Guns Linked to Oklahoma Bombing
Federal investigators have now linked weapons stolen in a robbery in rural Arkansas last November to suspects in the bombing of the Federal Building in Oklahoma City in April.
Several of the 66 rifles and shotguns and 8 handguns stolen from an Arkansas gun collector have been matched to weapons seized in a search of the Herrington, Kan., home of Terry L. Nichols, one of two suspects being held in the bombing, Federal officials say.
That search, conducted shortly after the bombing, netted 33 weapons.


Weiskopf Wins First Major Title In U.S.
The moment Tom Weiskopf had long waited for arrived today at the United States Senior Open, and a small pink ribbon pinned to his cap helped him keep his focus to get there.
Weiskopf captured his first major American championship, at the Congressional Country Club, showing a mastery of every shot and running away from the field for a final round 68 that left him 13 under par for the tournament and four shots better than the second-place finisher, Jack Nicklaus.


DANCE
'Les Saisons Russes,' Featuring New Faces  Kirov Ballet Metropolitan Opera House


A.L.'s All-Star Lineup Is Heavy on Indians
Voting for baseball's All-Star Game plummeted this year, but the Cleveland Indians performed so well at the ballot box that their 1996 payroll will feel the results.
The awesome Indians, who in the previous 25 years of fan balloting had only three players elected as starters a total of five times, had two players, second baseman Carlos Baerga and left fielder Albert Belle, elected and four others selected for the American League roster.


THEATER
All the Ills of the Age In a One-Night Stand  'A Candle in the Window' One Dream Theater


Bridge
Two women's teams clashed today in the final of the International Team Trials, with the winner due to play in the world championships in Beijing in October.
One team, with John Lowenthal of Manhattan as captain, consists of Judi Radin, Kitty Munson and Sue Picus of Manhattan, Rozanne Pollack of Warren, N.J., Carol Simon of Summit, N.J., and Karen McCallum of Exeter, N.H.
The other team, led by Phillip Alder of Manhasset, L.I., includes Judge Amalya Kearse and Jacqui Mitchell, both of Manhattan; Joyce Lilie of Las Vegas, Jo Morse of Tucson, Ariz., and Tobi Deutsch and Mildred Breed, both of Austin, Tex.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Bartering is big for media companies. And it may get bigger with insurance for trade credits.
CORPORATE barter has long been used by many producers of goods and services, especially to acquire advertising time and space.
In 1994 alone, the value of barter transactions in the United States exceeded $7.5 billion, up from about $7 billion the previous year.
In addition to direct exchanges between, say, a manufacturer of widgets and a publisher of a widget trade magazine, there is also a thriving business these days in trade finance -- the use of credits as a form of payment to manufacturers when transferring unsalable inventory to a third party.
Such credits could be used, for example, when a barter, or trading, company already controls blocks of time and space for advertising.


Lewis Rabbage, 63, Miniatures Collector
Lewis Hoyer Rabbage, a New York businessman who was a leading collector of American portrait miniatures, died on Tuesday at his sister's home in New Canaan, Conn..
He was 63.
The cause was cancer, said Susan Strickler, curator of American art at the Worcester Art Museum in Massachusetts, to which Mr.
Rabbage donated many works.


In Canada, Satellite Digital TV Stirs Row
Fifty thousand Canadian "gray marketeers" who can't do without small-dish satellite television have touched off a war here between telecommunications titans over who will provide the service.
Jumping into the fray are members of the Government opposition charging the Prime Minister with nepotism, a communications regulatory agency complaining that its authority is being undermined and consumer groups protecting their interests.
On one side of the battle is Expressvu, a consortium of three of Canada's biggest electronics and communications companies, which had been scheduled to offer, beginning Sept. 1, direct broadcast from satellite, or D.B.S., television.
This service, also known as the Digital Satellite System, not only provides images and sound that are close to laser disk quality but also upward of 100 channels, including pay TV.


Wolfman Jack, 57, Raspy Voice of Rock-and-Roll on the Radio
Wolfman Jack, the rock-and-roll disk jockey whose unmistakable raspy voice and on-the-air howls brought him something of a cult following as one of America's best-known radio personalities, died on Saturday at his home in Belvidere, N.C.
He was 57.
The cause was a heart attack, said his daughter, Joy Renee Smith of Belvidere.


Courts Put Safety First in Drug Tests
In 1986, the baseball coach at McCutcheon High School in the Tippecanoe County School Corporation in Indianapolis, having heard of possible drug use, ordered 16 team members to provide urine samples.
Five students' tests proved positive for marijuana.
From this event as well as parents' concern over the high incidence of drug abuse among students nationwide, the school board instituted a random urine-testing program for athletes and cheerleaders in the school system.
Two students, Darcy Schaill and Shelley Johnson, then 15, went out for varsity sports but changed their minds after being told they would have to undergo a urine test as a condition of playing.
They were offended by the policy, they said.
They later filed a Federal court complaint that said their rights against unlawful search and seizure and due process had been violated.


A Corrupt Tide in Russia From State-Business Ties
Viktor S. Chernomyrdin, Russia's Prime Minister, is widely seen as a potential successor to President Boris N. Yeltsin.
Since becoming Prime Minister in December 1992, Mr.
Chernomyrdin, the former Soviet Minister for Natural Gas, has grown remarkably in office.
He has developed a sophisticated new understanding of macroeconomics and of political survival, nurtured a close relationship with Vice President Al Gore and disclosed a new humanity to Russians when he negotiated an end to the hostage crisis in Budyonnovsk.


Berlin Journal; As All Eyes Turn East, Streets Will Soon Bloom
For more than a decade, Fofi's Estiatorio has been a favorite spot for chic Berliners to see and be seen.
Writers, politicians and show business stars favor it not just for its arty feel and fine food, but also for its location on a handsome tree-shaded street just off the glittering Kurfurstendamm.
But the restaurant's Greek-born owner, Photini Akrithakis, has just made a business decision that would have been unthinkable only a couple of years ago.
After assessing the future of what has for years been Berlin's most elegant neighborhood, she has decided to pack up and move her restaurant to the former East Berlin.


Acting on Tip, Police Discover an Arsenal of Guns and Explosives
Acting on a tip that a Queens man was running a gun-rental operation for criminals, police officers said they uncovered a closet full of weapons and explosives during a raid on the man's Corona apartment.
The weapons discovered Saturday at the home of Arecio Collado included three hand grenades, a remote-controlled bomb, a .45-caliber machine gun with a silencer, a rifle and a shotgun, a 9-millimeter semiautomatic handgun and two bulletproof vests, a police spokesman said.
He called it one of the largest stashes of illegal weapons the department has turned up in recent years.


For the Young, It's Looking Like a Jobless Summer; The Hunt for Work Is Taking On an Air of Futility as Openings Grow Scarcer
Around the Queens housing complex where 17-year-old Cynthia Roman lives, the search for a summer job has taken on a depressing air of futility.
For weeks, Ms.
Roman has been applying for jobs at retail outlets around the city, but no one calls with an offer.
"If I don't find one, I'll just hang around the projects -- broke, hot and thirsty," she said.


Zhang Film for Festival
"Shanghai Triad," a new film by the Chinese director Zhang Yimou, is to open the New York Film Festival on Sept. 29 at Lincoln Center.
The film, a portrait of the Shanghai underworld of the 1930's, stars Gong Li, the actress who has appeared in Mr.
Zhang's other films, which include "Raise the Red Lantern," (1991), "The Story of Qiu Ju" (1992) and "To Live" (1994).


METRO DIGEST
TREATING DRUG ADDICTION IN PRISONS
With more than one million Americans behind bars and up to 80 percent of them involved with powerful drugs like cocaine and heroin, rehabilitation programs, at their best, offer a potent weapon for decreasing addiction, crime and the spiraling costs of incarceration.
Yet only about one in six inmates receives any kind of treatment, and much of it amounts to "just say no" admonishments.
A result is that prisons perpetuate a kind of pinwheel of failure among drug users, who return to the streets unchanged and end up back in prison, sometimes within weeks.  [ Page 1. ] NEW YORK CITY  FEWER CONDOMS IN GIVEAWAY
The All Saints Lutheran Parish in the South Bronx gave away 1,500 condoms last year during its annual basketball tournament.
This year, it was able to give out only about 300 -- the result of a dispute with the city, which does not want them given away in parks at all.
The city argues that condoms should not be distributed freely where young children are so prevalent, while the church says a park is the perfect place to reach the youths who most need to learn about preventing AIDS.  [ 25. ] WHERE A FAILING GRADE IS NEGOTIABLE
Principals and teachers in New York City say that the pressure to reassess the grades of failing students surfaces in subtle ways.
They describe the case of Robert Durkin, the principal of Washington Irving High School in Manhattan, as extreme.
He was removed for giving 17 failing seniors extra homework and permitting them to graduate.
He bypassed the authority of teachers, who reported him to the Board of Education.
The conflict ripples more gently through the rest of the school system, with teachers describing pressure from principals and principals saying they sometimes change a grade, based on a student's appeal.  [ 25. ] A MAN'S CLOSET YIELDS AN ARSENAL
Acting on a tip that a Queens man was running a gun-rental operation for criminals, police officers said they uncovered a closet full of weapons and explosives during a raid on the man's Corona apartment.
The weapons discovered at the home of Arecio Collado included three hand grenades, a remote-controlled bomb, a .45-caliber machine gun with a silencer, a rifle and a shotgun, a 9-millimeter semiautomatic handgun and two bulletproof vests, a police spokesman said.
He called it one of the largest stashes of illegal weapons the department has turned up in recent years.  [ 25. ] REGION  TOLL TAKERS POISED TO STRIKE
Faced with the prospect of a strike by 1,500 toll collectors and maintenance workers, New Jersey Turnpike Authority officials vowed to keep the roadway open and keep traffic moving.
The Turnpike Authority and its toll collectors broke off three days of round-the-clock negotiations, still deadlocked in a dispute over wages, work rules and health benefits.  [ 27. ] FENCE DIVIDES THE CITY AND ITS NEIGHBORS
A six-foot-high fence was erected by New York City along part of the Kensico Reservoir in Westchester County as a barrier to illegal dumping.
But it has been attacked by both environmentalists and Westchester residents as an eyesore that ruins the environment and drives yet another wedge between the city and the northern communities around the sprawling water supply.  [ 27. ] Chronicle 44  Holiday schedule 24


Two Men and a Cat Rounding Cape Horn in a 25-Foot Sloop
MY OLD MAN AND THE SEA A Father and Son Sail Around Cape Horn  By David Hays and Daniel Hays Illustrated. 231 pages. . $19.95.


New Jersey Daily Briefing; State Workers' Union Negotiates
Negotiations between Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman's administration and the union that represents 35,000 of the state's public employees are scheduled to resume today after a breather yesterday.
The principal sticking point is the administration's plan to make state workers contribute to health insurance premiums, The Associated Press reported.
Contracts for both the Communications Workers of America and the International Federation of Professional and Technical Employees expired at 12:01 A.M. on Saturday.
The two unions have voted to authorize strikes.
The International Federation, which represents 7,000 employees in state government and colleges, met yesterday with state officials.


Where the Rent-Stabilized Rental Units Are.
More than a million rental units in the city are regulated by either rent-control or rent-stabilization programs.
Rent control applies to about 100,000 pre-war apartments.
Tenants have no leases, and rent increases are limited to 7.5 percent a year.
When a tenant moves or dies, a landlord may raise the rent to nearly the market value, and the aprtment becomes rent stabilized.
Rent stabilization applies to about 900,000 post-war units.
A state board ties rent increases roughly to inflation and to the landlord's maintenance costs.
Last week the Rent Guidelines Board approved increases of 2 percent for one-year leases and 4 percent for four-year leases for all of the city's 900,000 rent-stabilized apartments.


S.E.C. Said to Investigate Investment Firm
Regulators from the Securities and Exchange Commission are to visit the York, Pa., office of First Capital Strategists Inc. today to investigate the firm's loss of $128 million of college endowments, according to people familiar with the situation.
The S.E.C. is expected to look into whether the firm's actions in the accounts of the Common Fund violated anti-fraud provisions of the Investment Advisers Act of 1940.


Sports of The Times; New Coach, Old Blood, Same Story?
DON NELSON'S courtship with the Knicks reminds me of my decision to move to New York several years ago.
Aside from the professional advantages and cultural stimulation of living here, I thought a change of scenery might also put some life in what, as it happened, was a terminally ill marriage.
When I explained the last rationale to a friend who had lived here for a while, he said, expressing sorrow and humor, "This is not the place you move to salvage your marriage."


Margeotes Fertitta Gets a New Name
Margeotes Fertitta Donaher &amp; Weiss in New York said that it was changing its name, effective immediately, to Margeotes/Fertitta &amp; Partners.
The change is being made to coincide with the resignation of Paul Donaher, a partner and strategic planning director, in addition to several other organizational changes at the agency.
"I'm looking at this as an adventure," Mr.
Donaher, 39, said on Friday, adding that he was leaving the agency after 12 years to look "at a bunch of options." He said that he was planning to stay in marketing, outside the agency world or within.
Mr.
Donaher's responsibilities would be reassigned among several employees, after his departure, which is effective Sept. 1.


Mets Still In Search Of One Clutch Play
If it's not a bad pitch, it's a mental lapse.
Or it's a clutch hit that doesn't come.
As has been the case for much of 1995 for the Mets, it was all of the above yesterday.
"We're playing up to the hilt and we just don't crack it," Manager Dallas Green said.
"We need a hit here, a pitch here, a defensive play, and we're just not getting it. And that's a telltale sign that you're going to lose."


Islanders and Milbury Wait for Wednesday
The Islanders are expected to hold a news conference Wednesday morning to name MIKE MILBURY, the former Boston Bruins coach, as their new head coach.
"It's fair to say that there are serious discussions taking place with Mike Milbury, his agent and DON MALONEY," the Islanders' co-chairman and chief executive officer, ROBERT ROSENTHAL, said from his Long Island home last night, referring to the team's general manager.
Milbury said his agent, MARK PERRONE, and Maloney met briefly yesterday and had set up another meeting for today.
Milbury is expected to sign a four-year contract for just under $3 million, which would make him one of the highest-paid coaches in the National Hockey League.
Milbury reportedly has been asking for a five-year deal, however, and that might be what has been holding up the negotiations.


CHRONICLE
It may have been a royal wedding, but the event was certainly nontraditional.
When PRINCESS STEPHANIE of Monaco arrived for her wedding to her former bodyguard, DANIEL DUCRUET, she was clutching in her arms the couple's second child, 13-month-old PAULINE.
The ceremony in Monte Carlo on Saturday was closed to all but immediate family, the Reuters news agency reported.
A crowd waited in the tiny streets next to the Royal Palace, but onlookers got no more than a fleeting glimpse of the bride in her lace dress.


Credit 'Special Partners' With a Deserving Assist
When Scott Brown fired a pass to his Team Connecticut teammate Kester Hernandez on the field at the vast Yale sports complex today, it was more than a routine soccer maneuver.
For Hernandez, 14, who is from Waterbury, Conn., is mentally retarded, while Brown, a 30-year-old banker from Farmington, is not.
A little earlier on an adjacent field, 19-year-old Joey Swanson of Team Colorado deftly handled a cross-field pass from 39-year-old Tom Faber, who usually plays in soccer's "mainstream" because he is not retarded.


Behind Smiles, Egyptians Tell Mubarak to Shape Up
In the sweltering heat of Cairo, Egypt's President, Hosni Mubarak, is going through his hottest political summer since he stepped in to fill the void when Anwar el-Sadat was assassinated 14 years ago.
When President Mubarak took office in October 1981, he was seen as a healer for Egypt who was dedicated to eliminating layers of repressive measures taken by his predecessor.


Bombing Bosnia Will Solve Nothing
To the Editor:
Re "Bombs, Not Words, in Bosnia" by Warren Zimmerman (Op-Ed, June 23): None of the errors of analysis and comprehension that have contributed to the debacle in the former Yugoslavia have been more detrimental to development of a sound policy than the belief that only American bombing of Serbs will lead to an acceptable outcome.


Offerings Stolen During Mass
Parishioners had just begun to take communion at St.
Hedwig's Roman Catholic Church yesterday when a man stormed the Mass and stole a collection basket containing $610 in cash.
Within a half-hour of the robbery, Henry J. Baczynski, 23, was arrested in the incident.
The police said the Rev.
Henry F. Schabowski and a few other parishioners recognized Mr.
Baczynski, a former St.
Hedwig's student.


World News Briefs; U.N. and Angola Agree On Resettlement Plan
The United Nations and the Government of Angola have agreed on a plan to return more than 300,000 Angolan refugees who fled during the country's long civil war and to rebuild communities for them, the High Commissioner for Refugees, Sadako Ogata, said today.
Mrs.
Ogata and President Eduardo dos Santos of Angola agreed on the $44 million project last week in a meeting in Addis Ababa, Ethiopia.
It was based on a refugee resettlement model first used in Cambodia in 1993 and expanded in Mozambique, where the refugee agency has helped 1.7 million people to return home.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
9.00
9.00
7.25
DISCOUNT RATE
5.25
5.25
3.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
6.13
6.11
3.82
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.43
5.41
4.18
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.46
5.33
4.64
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.20
6.20
7.32
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.63
6.62
7.60
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.57
7.55
8.44
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.23
6.28
6.48
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Opel Employee Inquiry
The office of the district attorney in Darmstadt, Germany, said yesterday that it was investigating employees and associates of Adam Opel A.G., the German subsidiary of the General Motors Corporation, on suspicion of improper awarding of contracts.
Opel and the district attorney said the police had searched company premises and the office and company car of a board member, Peter Enderle, on Friday.
Opel said it had initiated the investigation itself in September.


VIOLENCE ERUPTS IN ULSTER CITIES
Violent street protests returned to Roman Catholic areas of Belfast and Londonderry today for the first time in 10 months after the authorities released a British soldier who had been sentenced to life in prison for the murder of a teen-aged Catholic girl here in 1990.
The Royal Ulster Constabulary, or police, said tonight that there had been 120 incidents of violence, mostly in Catholic areas of west and north Belfast.
Dozens of cars and trucks were intercepted by masked men, who forced their drivers out, then burned or otherwise vandalized the vehicles.
There were no injuries reported, and no arrests as the police apparently decided to watch the action rather than confront it and risk aggravating the violence.
Tonight, burning cars lit up the Falls Road in West Belfast, and were seen in flames in many other main streets.


MILITARY OFFICIALS SEEK WAY TO SAVE JOBS IN CALIFORNIA
Pentagon officials have crafted a plan with members of the independent commission on the closing of military bases that they hope will save thousands of jobs at a California Air Force base and political face for President Clinton.
After intense negotiations over the weekend involving the commission, the military and the White House, the Pentagon is preparing to recommend that the President reject the panel's suggestion that 11,000 jobs at McClellan Air Force Base be transferred out of state.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball American League  CLEVELAND INDIANS -- Placed Eddie Murray, first baseman-designated hitter, on the 15-day disabled list.
Purchased the contract of Ruben Amaro, outfielder, from Buffalo of the American Association.
National League  FLORIDA MARLINS -- Signed Jaime Jones, outfielder, to a minor-league contract and assigned him to the Marlins of the Gulf Coast League.
NEW YORK METS -- Signed Jeffrey Parsons, shortstop, and assigned him to Pittsfield of the New York-Penn League.
Northern League  SIOUX CITY EXPLORERS -- Returned Fumiya Nishiguchi, pitcher, to the Japanese minor league.
Activated Hisaki Tomioka, pitcher.
Basketball  United States Basketball League  ATLANTA TROJANS -- Activated Lavell Owens, forward, from the taxi squad.
Placed Robert Martin, forward, on the taxi squad.
Atlantic Basketball Association  DELAWARE BLUE BOMBERS -- Signed Greg Black, guard, to a one-year contract.
Football  Canadian Football League  SASKATCHEWAN ROUGHRIDERS -- Waived Dallas Rysavy, safety, and Wolf Barber, running back.
Horse racing
BELMONT PARK STEWARDS OFFICE -- Suspended John Velazquez, jockey, for 10 days for careless riding in Monday's sixth race.
Announced Velazquez will appeal the ruling.
College
ELON -- Announced the resignation of Larry Stephens, assistant football coach.
GEORGIA STATE -- Named Jodie Smith women's soccer coach and Keith Walton wrestling coach.
WASHINGTON -- Named O.D. Vincent men's golf coach.


Miss Liberty Shoos Blades Trying to Get Close
Helen had the face that launched a thousand ships, but Lady Liberty's has launched even more helicopters; they buzz round her, two or three at a time.
Now she'd like some personal space.
Five hundred feet, to be exact.


Finish Line Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


By Design; Forever in Bloom
Floral prints are a natural for summer, and this year they have taken off like weeds.
But they won't stop blooming come autumn.
Flowers cropped up rather unexpectedly in the fall collections of Prada and Comme des Garcons, so it's a good bet flowers will be cheering us all year round.
Many of the summer florals now in stores should make the seasonal transition easily, especially those with dark backgrounds.
Henri Bendel has black-ground dresses in crepe, satin and georgette ($150 to $200), and georgette skirts with miniprints ($109) or oversize blooms ($128).


Rubin Blanck, 81, Psychology Theorist
Rubin Blanck, an author and theorist in the field of ego psychology, died on Wednesday in Durham, N.C., where he had lived for the last two years.
He was 81.
The cause was cancer, said Pam Rhodes, assistant manager at the Cape Fear Crematory in Fayetteville, N.C.


E.S. Naumburg, 92, A Patron of Music In Family Tradition
Edward S. Naumburg Jr., a stockbroker who carried on his family's patronage of music through his work with the Naumburg Orchestral Concerts and the international Naumburg competitions, died on Wednesday at Greenwich Hospital in Greenwich, Conn.
He was 92.
He lived in Manhattan until eight months ago, when he entered the Greenwich Woods Health Care Facility, a nursing home in Greenwich.


Farm Fresh Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Jun 17


METRO DIGEST
MODEL TEXAS DRUG PLAN, TRIPPED AT POLLS
Four years ago, the Texas Legislature approved what was to be the largest, most aggressive drug treatment program of any prison system in the world.
But when the state changed governors, Texas's vanguard program went into a stall.
And with it went the state's bid to be the model that would transform the nation's attitude toward drug-addicted criminals.
Many experts believe that intensive treatment is the most effective way to prevent inmates from returning to prison.
The experience of Texas shows how difficult it is to keep this thought alive on a local level, much less move it onto a national stage.  [ Page 1. ]
A TOLL STRIKE, AND A SECOND ONE LOOMS
A strike by toll collectors threw operations on the New Jersey Turnpike into confusion, forcing officials to allow tens of thousands of motorists to ride free for eight hours.
The strike led to a tumultuous day, and it was unclear what effect the walkout would have for drivers as the holiday weekend comes to an end.
The possibility also loomed of a walkout on the Garden State Parkway.  [ 1. ] NEW YORK CITY PERHAPS A COURSE IN HUMAN EVENTS?
On the ferry headed to Liberty Island, Niki Woo said she was excited to be in New York for the Fourth of July fireworks.
But she was confused about one thing.
"I don't even know what July Fourth is," said Miss Woo, 17, a high school senior from Hawaii.
Many American youths know that on July 4, 1776, the Continental Congress adopted Thomas Jefferson's Declaration of Independence proclaiming the Colonies free of Britain.
But some do not.
Although there are no official statistics, a sampling of dozens of young people in New York City -- native born, immigrants and tourists -- reveals that Miss Woo is not alone.  [ 35. ]
The Federal Government has agreed to keep tourist helicopters at least 500 feet from Liberty and Ellis Islands.  [ 35. ] REGION LABOR ACCORD IN NEW JERSEY
Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman stitched together one patch in the blanket of labor woes facing New Jersey, announcing that a union representing 8,400 state workers has agreed to a contract that includes a two-year salary freeze.  [ 36. ]
MAKING A MINE OUT OF A MOUNTAIN
To the people who live and work in the hamlets around its slopes, Snake Mountain has for decades been little more than a wooded, double-humped bulge in the bucolic checkerboard of farms and forest east of Albany.
To the Lane Construction Company, which has owned Snake Mountain for 50 years, it is a valuable hunk of Rensselaer graywacke and Metawee argillite, just the right kind of rock for blending with asphalt or cement.
Proposing one of the most ambitious mining projects in New York in this decade, the company has applied to environmental officials for permission to blast, crush and cart away much of the mountain over 150 years.
Horrified, hundreds of residents have mobilized to stop the plan.  [ 34. ]
A U.S. WINNER FOR A CROATIA PAGEANT
Although war in the former Yugoslavia rages over the horizon, a woman from New Hyde Park, L.I., is traveling to a beauty contest in Croatia.
Natalie Verbanac, 18, will compete for the title of Miss Istria.  [ 34. ]
Chronicle 60
Holiday schedule 35


Science Times E-Mail
Science Times has an electronic mail address for comments from readers about published articles and suggested areas of coverage:
scitimes@nytimes.com.


Empire Co. reports earnings for Year to Apr 30


American Rice Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


6 Sign Up for New AT&amp;T Printing Service
Moving to grab a share of the growing market for computer-controlled printing, the AT&amp;T Corporation has announced agreements with six printing and software companies to use its new Network Demand Printing service.
Participating with the big long-distance carrier in what is known as distributed digital printing are: the Agfa-Gevaert Group, a unit of the Bayer Group; the Eastman Kodak Company; Indigo N.V., and the Scitex Corporation -- all manufacturers of machines that can receive digital files from remote locations and print without conventional plates.
Adobe Systems Inc. and Quark Inc., also part of the agreement, produce software that allows users to compose documents on computer screens.


Jersey Turnpike Strike May Spread to Parkway
A strike by toll collectors threw operations on the New Jersey Turnpike into confusion today, forcing officials to allow tens of thousands of motorists to ride free for about eight hours, until supervisors, part-time workers and people hired on the spot replaced them for part of the afternoon and evening.
Some members of the union attempted to return to their jobs late tonight in compliance with a superior court judge's order to end the walkout.
But they were turned away by New Jersey Turnpike Authority officials, although the agency was unable to muster enough replacement workers and had to leave the tollbooths empty again overnight.


After Playwright, An Actress Still
"Sit anywhere you like; it's all cheap," said Anne Meara, showing a visitor into her very nice apartment on the Upper West Side of Manhattan.
At the age of 65, Ms.
Meara has had her first play produced, and it is a big critical success.
The visitor mentioned Ms.
Meara's youthful appearance.
Her skin is smooth and creamy, her eyes bright blue, her looks softer in person than the strong-jawed figure she has projected all these years on television as half of the husband-and-wife comedy team Stiller and Meara.


Exuberance and Energy In Honor of Talley Beatty
The Nanette Bearden Contemporary Dance Theater had boundless energy on Friday night at the Marymount Manhattan Theater when it honored the influential jazz and modern-dance choreographer Talley Beatty, who died on April 29.
The troupe gave high-powered performances of three of his works.
An excerpt from "A Rag, a Bone and a Hank of Hair" resembled a wild romp.
"Congo Tango Palace," which evokes the atmosphere of a dance hall, received an appropriately frenetic interpretation.
In the poignant "Mourners Bench," Gregory Hinton cringed in recognition that the man he portrayed was a sinner, and then stretched toward God, looking penitent and vulnerable.


Independence Day
NEW YORK
FIREWORKS Two shows: downtown, 9:15 P.M., south of the Brooklyn Bridge; midtown, 9:30, 25th to 42d Streets in the East River.
Franklin D. Roosevelt Drive closed from the Battery to 96th Street from 6 P.M. to 1 A.M.
GOVERNMENT OFFICES All Federal, state and city government offices closed.
POST OFFICE Express Mail and special delivery only.
Main post office open at 33d Street and Eighth Avenue.
BANKS Closed.
PARKING Sunday rules in effect.
SANITATION No collection and no street sweeping.
FINANCIAL MARKETS Closed.
TRANSPORTATION Buses, subways, L.I.R.R. and Metro-North on holiday schedule.
NEW JERSEY
GOVERNMENT OFFICES All Federal, state and municipal government offices closed.
POST OFFICES Express Mail and special delivery only.
BANKS Closed.
TRANSPORTATION New Jersey Transit trains on Sunday schedule. Buses on holiday schedule.
CONNECTICUT
GOVERNMENT OFFICES All Federal, state and municipal government offices closed.
POST OFFICES Express Mail and special delivery only.
BANKS Closed.
TRANSPORTATION Metro-North on holiday schedule.


Iran Must Get Rushdie Off the Agenda
To the Editor:
Your June 23 news article on Iran's "rejection" of the demand to lift the "death edict" against the novelist Salman Rushdie brought home how far liberal Westerners and champions of Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini's ruling must each travel to be within hailing distance.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  *
Developers Diversified Realty Corp., Moreland Hills, Ohio, filed a shelf registration statement with the Securities and Exchange Commission to sell as much as $150 million of securities.
*
Federal Home Loan Bank is selling $27.5 million of debentures due in 2000 through Morgan Stanley.
The noncallable issue is priced at par to yield 6.11 percent.


Change-Minded Voters of '94 Find That Unease Remains
The Republican tide last year swept across no state more forcefully than this sprawling one, and it was unwittingly fueled by voters like 46-year-old Michael Henderson.
Traditionally, Mr.
Henderson supported Republicans and Democrats alike.
But last year, he and his fellow Tennesseans saw to it that the state's two Senate seats and the governorship turned Republican.


Amerco reports earnings for Year to Mar 31


Whitman Announces Pact With State Workers
Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman today stitched together one patch in the blanket of labor woes facing New Jersey, announcing that a union representing some 8,400 state workers has agreed to a four-year contract that includes a two-year salary freeze.
Workers represented by the American Federation of State, County and Municipal Employees, who work chiefly in state-run hospitals and institutions, will pay contributions for medical benefits if they do not elect to join free managed-health-care plans offered by the state, the Governor said.


At Belmont, a Trainer Turns a Double Play
Belmont Park will fire the final salvo in its four-day holiday weekend today when the Suburban Handicap is run for the 109th time.
But the trainer Allen Jerkens, who won the race the last two years with Devil His Due, did some early stirring yesterday when he entered horses in two smaller stakes with widely differing conditions, and won them both.
Jerkens has won as many as three stakes in a day, and is renowned for upsetting Kelso three times and Secretariat twice.
But, in its own small way, there was nothing shabby about what he accomplished in consecutive races yesterday.


Hamlets Are Fearing Worst If Mountain Is to Be Mined
To the people who live and work in the hamlets around its slopes, Snake Mountain has for decades been little more than a wooded, double-humped bulge in the bucolic checkerboard of farms and forest east of Albany.
To the Lane Construction Company, which has owned Snake Mountain for 50 years, it is a valuable hunk of Rensselaer graywacke and Metawee argillite, just the right kind of rock for blending with asphalt or cement.


Yugoslavs Celebrate Sports Victory With a Political Echo
Celebrating not just a sports triumph but what they hope is the beginning of their emergence from more than three years of international isolation, thousands of jubilant Serbs poured into the streets Sunday night and this morning after the Yugoslav national team won the European basketball championship.
Even larger crowds turned out this afternoon to welcome the victorious players home from the Athens tournament.


This Summer, Off Time in July Seems as Likely as Ice in July for the N.H.L.
Traditionally, the month of July used to be a blank page in the hockey calendar, a 31-day break for fishing and boating in Canada.
This summer, partly because of the lockout that delayed the season, July is busy, beginning with the awards ceremony on Thursday in Toronto and continuing with the entry draft on Saturday in Edmonton.


Bear Kills Woman and Her Son in Alaska
A bear, possibly a grizzly, attacked and killed a 77-year-old woman and her 45-year-old son on Saturday as they hiked on a popular park trail 20 miles south of downtown Anchorage and within earshot of a major highway, officials said today.
The State Medical Examiner, Michael Propst, said in a statement after autopsies were performed that the victims, Marcie Trent and Larry Waldron, had suffered wounds consistent with a bear attack.
A state trooper, Lee Oly, who was a member of the search party that found the bodies, said Mrs.
Trent had suffered massive injuries to her head and chest, while Mr.
Waldron had apparently bled to death from a severed artery in his leg.


Algeria's Morceli Sets Another World Record
There have been two great North African runners in the last decade.
Said Aouita of Morocco was the first.
Nourredine Morceli of Algeria is the second.
Tonight in the Paris Grand Prix meet at Stade Charlety, Morceli made the changing of the guard complete by taking away the last world record that Aouita still had on the books: the 2,000 meters.


Russian Tycoon Finds Politics Good Business
Standing in front of his office window overlooking the Kremlin, Oleg Boiko was contemplating whether he should acquire a new license plate for his limousine.
At 30, Mr.
Boiko, one of Russia's richest businessmen, had in mind a special plate with a tricolor flag indicating that the driver is a high-level Government official immune fromordinary traffic regulations.
Only 500 such plates are supposed to be issued for all of Russia.


Let Mothers and Newborns Recover in the Comfort of Home; Time for Genetic Tests
To the Editor:
Your report on New Jersey's law requiring insurers to pay for a second day of hospital care for mothers and their newborns did not point out one of the chief casualties of the trend toward "drive-through deliveries" -- the ability to screen newborns for serious, but treatable, genetic disorders.


Fuller-O'Brien Is Sold
Imperial Chemical Industries of Britain said yesterday that it had purchased Fuller-O'Brien Paints, a unit of the privately held O'Brien Corporation.
I.C.I. did not disclose the purchase price but said the value was less than 1 percent of I.C.I.'s net assets.
It reported assets of $:3.7 billion ($5.92 billion) last year, indicating a transaction value of $:37 million or less.
Fuller-O'Brien Paints, based in South San Francisco, Calif., reported sales last year of about $80 million.
(Bloomberg Business News)


Observer; Dog Bites Man in L.A.
Really out of it.
That's what the old-timer was when the Hugh Grant story drove the press -- oops, the media -- half-crazy with delight.


BE Aerospace Inc.(BEAV,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to May 27


Hopes are Slim in Search for Survivors in South Korea


Strike Leads to Turnpike Chaos
A toll collectors' strike threw operations on the New Jersey Turnpike into chaos yesterday, forcing officials to allow motorists to ride free for eight hours, until supervisors, part-time workers and people hired on the spot replaced the collectors for part of the afternoon and evening.
But officials were unable to muster enough replacment workers and had to leave the tollbooths empty again overnight.


With Marilyn Monroe, Alone on Virtual Beach
THIS is not a real beach.
If this were a real beach, we would need a very large umbrella to make enough shade to let us hope to squint at the dim screen of our laptop computer.
This is a virtual beach, where heat and humidity conspire against productivity, and brains, like computers, are most often in slumber mode.
Here at Virtual Beach, the Sloth Police have banned all useful programs in the interest of assuring absolute nonproductivity.
The only acceptable software here is the digital equivalent of "beach books," mindless, trashy and irrelevant.
Much of the World Wide Web would fill the bill, but it has been posted as off limits on the ground that surfing there would court the slight but growing danger of colliding with something useful.


Reflecting On the 4th, Many Draw A Blank
On the upper deck of the ferry headed to Liberty Island yesterday, Niki Woo said she was excited to be in New York for the Fourth of July fireworks.
But she was still confused about one thing.
"I don't even know what July Fourth is," said Niki, 17, a high school senior at Castle High School on the Hawaiian island of Oahu.
Her friend Erin Chang, 17, tried to help.
"We were freed from the Mother Country, from the British, weren't we?" Erin said.
"Wasn't it the end of the war?"


Kasler Holding Co.(KAS,N) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Q&amp;A
Snoring Animals
Q. Do any animals besides people snore?
A.
Yes, some animals do snore, according to anecdotal reports and personal observations, said Penny Calk, manager of the mammal collections of the Bronx Zoo.


Colleges Are Told Full Recovery of Losses Is Unlikely
The Common Fund, which invests a $20 billion pool of university endowments, told its investors yesterday that there was little hope of recovering all the $128 million that the fund lost because of unauthorized trading by First Capital Strategists, its investment adviser.
"It appears highly unlikely that there is any significant possibility of recovering the full loss," David K. Storrs, president of the fund, said in a conference call with schools that have invested in it.
Addressing the issue of whether First Capital could make good the loss, Mr.
Storrs added, "We do not believe First Capital has substantial assets."


University Comes Down Hard on Bias, Setting Off a Debate Across Canada
Taking extraordinary action to counter charges of sexism and racism in the classroom, the University of British Columbia has halted admissions to its graduate political science program until it can improve the department's social climate.
The action has touched off a rousing debate in Canada about harassment and academic freedom.
It was applauded by women and minority groups but seen by some others as defaming an entire department and chilling academic discourse.


Chechen Offers to Resign if Russia Grants Independence
Adding his own defiant twist to fragile peace talks, Dzhokhar M. Dudayev, the rebel president of Chechnya who remains in hiding, has told a top Russian negotiator that he would step down, but only if Russia recognized the region's independence.
A senior member of the Russian delegation to peace talks in Grozny, the Chechen capital, went to a secret location in rebel-held territory on Sunday to hear Mr.
Dudayev's position.


Mayor Assails Critics Of Labor Agreement
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani lashed back at critics of his new labor agreement with municipal unions, denouncing suggestions from fiscal monitors that he should have extracted more concessions as "crazy" and "off the wall." City workers have made enough sacrifices, he said, and those who suggest otherwise have a "political agenda."
Article, page 35.


Patterns
Rowley's Third Big Year
For Cynthia Rowley, 1995 is fast becoming the capstone to three years of remarkable growth.


Paul Nguyen Van Binh, 84, Catholic Archbishop in Vietnam
Archbishop Paul Nguyen Van Binh, who led the Archdiocese of Ho Chi Minh City, formerly Saigon, for 35 years, died on Saturday.
He was 84.
Official Vietnamese newspapers, according to The Associated Press, did not say where he died.
His health had been poor for some years, but he remained the spiritual leader of Vietnam's largest Catholic community.


Networks Offer Wimbledon, Doubled
Yes, it was absolutely fabulous that NBC and HBO carried Wimbledon simultaneously from noon to 3 P.M. yesterday, but flipping between them could get you unstuck in time, endeavoring to discover what's live, almost live or taped.
To their credit, the networks chose not to compete when both were on.
So NBC was on tape at noon with the Pete Sampras-Greg Rusedski match while HBO focused on live coverage of Goran Ivanisevic playing Todd Martin.


George's Red Glare: An Owner's Birthday
Happy birthday to you, happy birthday to you, happy birthday, dear George, happy birthday to you.
Yes, today is George Steinbrenner's birthday, and the old Yankee Doodle Dandy is a sparkling 65 years old.
He has spent the last 23 of those years -- with time out for suspensions now and then -- owning the Yankees, and that certainly is long enough to ask anyone to carry such a weighty burden.


Forecast on Lufthansa
The German Government will receive about 1.6 billion marks ($1.16 billion) in 1996 from the proposed sale of its stake in Lufthansa, the former state-owned airline, Government sources said yesterday.
The amount expected from the sale was discussed in a draft proposal for the 1996 Government budget, they said.


Protein Labs' Stock Slides After Setback
Shares in Protein Design Labs Inc. lost one-third of their value today following the company's announcement late Friday that its lead drug had failed in advanced clinical trials.
Protein Design shares tumbled $6.875, or 33 percent, to $13.875 in Nasdaq trading.
The stock had reached a 52-week high of $26.75 earlier this year.


Credit National Starts Corporate Finance Move
Credit National S.A. of France formally began its bid of 1.24 billion francs ($257 million) for Investissement, Finance et Developpement S.A. as the first step toward redeploying its business toward fee-earning corporate finance.
Credit National developed the strategy after its profit slumped to 67 million francs in 1994 from 330 million in 1993.


Tarango's $15,500 Fine Is a Wimbledon Record
The infamous Tarangos, tennis-menace Jeff of the self-inflicted Wimbledon default and his French bride, Benedicte, of the double slap to the face of the chair umpire Bruno Rebeuh, discovered today that they will be $15,500 poorer when they celebrate their first wedding anniversary on Tuesday.


Man Dies in Boating Accident
A passenger in a 24-foot catamaran was killed and the operator critically injured after the boat flipped over in Barnegat Bay on Sunday afternoon.
The boat was traveling more than 70 miles an hour in choppy water.
The passenger, Joseph Stankunis, of Bensalem, Pa., was killed when he was trapped under the overturned boat, the New Jersey state police said.


COMPANY BRIEFS
ALUMINUM COMPANY OF AMERICA, Pittsburgh, has bought Discovery Industries, a chemical company.
Terms of the deal were undisclosed.
ESSEX BANCORP INC., Virginia Beach, Va., reached a definitive agreement to acquire Home Bancorp, Inc., the privately held holding company of Home Savings Bank F.S.B., in a stock deal worth more than $15 million.


On My Mind;
Spent weekend reading great yarn of international intrigue reaching into high places, very high.
Stakes of billions of dollars, manipulation of governments, that kind of thing.
Bit long -- 748 pages -- but moves right along; highly recommended.
Only two things may spoil reader enjoyment.
Perpetrators win and justice is not done -- that's one.


Let Mothers and Newborns Recover in the Comfort of Home
To the Editor:
Pregnancy is not a disease, although it has become "medicalized" into an entity using fetal monitoring, anesthesia, hospitalization and operative interventions, few of which have been proved necessary in normal pregnancies.
Now we have a law requiring insurers to cover a minimum 48-hour hospitalization, on request, for a normal delivery in New Jersey (news article, June 29).


Al Jarreau, Happy and Ready to Prove It
Vocal improvisers like the jazz singer Al Jarreau and the female Belgian-African quintet Zap Mama, who appeared together at Carnegie Hall on Thursday and Friday nights, are a reminder that the human voice has always been the most versatile musical instrument.
The range of sounds that the mouth, throat, tongue and voice box can produce by themselves puts the synthesizer to shame.
And when you bring in hands, knees, chest and elbows and then add microphones, the sonic possibilities multiply exponentially.
The endless possibilities can also lead to rampant self-indulgence, as genuine musical invention is confused with cute, crowd-pleasing sound effects.
At their most annoying, vocal conjurers behave like grown-up babies wallowing in their own spontaneous grunts and gurgles.


Worker Shot in Robbery
A gunman shot an employee of a Bronx check-cashing store during a robbery yesterday just after after the woman arrived at work to open for business, the police said.
The employee, Evelyn de la Hose-White, was shot as the gunman was forcing her and another female employee to open a safe behind the counter at Action Check Cashing, 4729 White Plains Road in Wakefield, the police said.


Plan Could Again Delay the Electric Car
After years of arguments between state officials and the auto companies about whether electric cars are ready for the mass market, the Governor of Massachusetts, a state that has been pushing for the new cars, has offered Detroit a compromise: the state will delay requiring car makers to build electric cars until two years after any manufacturer, anywhere in the world, builds one that meets a set of criteria on performance and price.
If the proposal is accepted, it could significantly delay the introduction of electric cars.
Even advocates of electric cars now believe that some kind of delay or other weakening of the standards seems likely in all the states that plan to require them -- New York, California and Massachusetts.


Defense Lawyer Pleads Guilty to Aiding Cartel
A former prosecutor-turned-defense-lawyer pleaded guilty in Miami yesterday to aiding Colombian cocaine traffickers in a case that raises questions about how much an attorney can do for a client without becoming a criminal himself.
Donald L. Ferguson, who was an assistant United States attorney in Miami in the mid-1970's, pleaded guilty to reduced charges of conspiring to obstruct justice and money laundering and agreed to testify against two other lawyers who also defended drug traffickers.


McDowell Hangs On Against His Old Team
The largest crowd of the season at Comiskey Park came to see Jack McDowell and the fireworks show today.
They came to boo McDowell, who used to be one of their own White Sox, and cheer the special effects in the sky.
At least the fireworks did not disappoint them.
McDowell did.
Pitching the sort of gritty game that helped establish his reputation in Chicago as a pitcher who simply won while not worrying about how picturesque his performances were, McDowell did not crumble when the White Sox blistered him for three runs in the first inning.
He kept throwing hard, stopped his former teammates on four hits for the next eight innings and enjoyed his homecoming as the Yankees won, 8-4, before 36,346 fans.


University to Display Tobacco Documents
The University of California at San Francisco has said it will make available hundreds of documents showing that the tobacco industry concealed its knowledge of the addictive nature of nicotine and other harmful effects of smoking.
The university said on Friday that it would display the documents in its library and publish them over the Internet.
The announcement followed a ruling late Thursday by the California Supreme Court rejecting a request by the Brown &amp; Williamson Tobacco Company to block publication of the documents.


Court Face-Off Postponed
The courtroom face-off that was scheduled yesterday between the Devils and the New Jersey Sports and Exposition Authority was postponed until July 11 as both sides continued talks to keep the Stanley Cup champions in New Jersey.
The authority was scheduled to press its case in Superior Court for a temporary restraining order to keep the team from following through on its threat to terminate its lease at Byrne Meadowlands Arena on Thursday.


Rounding Up a U.S. Winner For a Croatia Beauty Contest
Although war in the former Yugoslavia rages over the horizon, a young woman from New Hyde Park, L.I., is traveling to a beauty contest in Croatia this summer.
"The war is horrifying, and I feel complete sadness about it," said 18-year-old Natalie Verbanac, who will compete for the title of Miss Istria on July 23.
"But it's good for people if they can still see life going on."
Istria, a peninsula tucked away in the northwest corner of Croatia, is known for its turquoise blue waters and aversion to nationalist politics.
Nearer to Trieste than to Zagreb, the peninsula has so far been spared any fighting in the current war, and daily life -- with its beauty pageant and other traditions -- still proceeds with a measure of peace.


Keeping the Peace
To the Editor:
It was refreshing to read A. M. Rosenthal's column "Reviewing Civilian Conduct" (June 16) about the police action taken in the Bushwick section of Brooklyn after the Puerto Rican Day parade on June 11.
The column reveals a clear understanding of what police officers must often contend with in policing a large city.


Europe-U.S. Team Bids on Rocket Designs
Taking advantage of the United States Government's new willingness to allow greater foreign participation in building its rockets, the European consortium Arianespace is bidding with an American partner on a $2 billion contract to design a new family of rockets.
The launching vehicles, which will be constructed for the United States Air Force, are designed to lift spy satellites and other payloads into orbit for the Government.


On Fire Island, Sometimes the Share Goes Out of Sharing
KENNY FUNK'S last three summers passed in a whir of beach days and kamikaze nights.
There were Grateful Dead marathons and parties with 200 happy-houred guests stuffed onto decks made for 20.
"The best times," he said.
He blames himself for this year.
Instead of renting space in a beach share as usual, he and two friends decided to run a share house.
This is like going from happy camper to camp counselor, or Eagle Scout to den mother.
It's sobering, anyway.
"The most overwhelming experience of my life," Mr.
Funk said.


American Homestar reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Chess; Kasparov captures the second part of the Intel Grand Prix, but not easily.
Gary Kasparov of Russia won the second installment of the 25-minutes-per-game Intel World Chess Grand Prix at the Tribeca Performing Arts Center, June 20-23.
But it did not come easy for the Professional Chess Association's world champion.
He handily defeated his chief rival, the Ukrainian grandmaster Vasily Ivanchuk, 2-0, in the two-game knockout final, but he had trouble getting there.
He drew twice with the grandmaster Vladimir Kramnik of Russia, in the semifinal round, then qualified for the final in their five-minute playoff game.
Moreover, he had earlier met stubborn resistance from the California grandmaster Nick Defirmian, who had drawing chances before he incorrectly sacrificed a pawn in the endgame.


Walter Lineberger, 82, Banker And Ex-Defense Dept. Official
Walter F. Lineberger Jr., a Cleveland banker who was an Assistant Secretary of Defense in the early 1960's, died last Thursday at University Hospital in Cleveland.
He was 82.
The cause was complications from pneumonia, his family said.


With a Voice Euphoric And Strong
Halfway through her set on Saturday night at Carnegie Hall, Celia Cruz performed a song, "Yerbero Moderno," from her days in the 1950's as the singer for the Cuban band Sonora Matancera.
The song has the singer advertising her wares; she's an herbalist.
Ms.
Cruz took the piece at a medium tempo, and proceeded to nudge the melody into new meaning, using just a few notes.
Her improvisations were based on a percussive sense of rhythm.
And she infused the piece with a glorious generosity -- the improvisation seemed less for her benefit than for the audience to savor -- that made the music transcendent.
It wasn't the only moment reaching that level of beauty; Ms.
Cruz knows her way around the transcendent.
She might just be the last of the great pop singers who sound as if they had learned to sing without a microphone.
And as she improvised, her voice, magnificent in its heft and intensity, ripped through the backdrop provided by her band.
Ms.
Cruz shouted and called; her voice sounded as if it were made of cast iron, durable and pure.
And she is close enough to the ecstatic religious music of Afro-Cuban Santeria to bring to all her performances the deep euphoria that most religious-based music uses, regardless of the outer manifestations in the pop world.


What a Day to Toast New York Drinking Water!; Puzzling Sale Plan
To the Editor:
Re your June 28 news article on Comptroller Alan G. Hevesi's rejection of the sale of New York City's water system to the New York City Water Board:


In a Change of Policy, and Heart, Colleges Join Fight Against Inflated Grades
A year after Stanford University and Dartmouth College announced changes in their grading policies designed to stem a 30-year trend of grade inflation, a number of other elite colleges say they are considering making high grades the exception rather than the rule.
At Dartmouth, where the average grade increased last year to a B-plus from a B in 1973, transcripts now include not only grades, but also their context -- the class size and class average.


CHRONICLE
If 36 people board boat (a) at point (b) for a cruise in harbor (c), what is going on?
JUDITH ENGEL, a mathematics teacher at the Bronx High School of Science, refrained from asking brain-teasers like that one yesterday.
But she did take 36 friends and former students on a cruise around New York Harbor.
They boarded the Amberjack V -- which Ms.
Engel had rented for the day, complete with captain and crew -- at Pier 17 at the South Street Seaport.


In Income-Strapped Washington, Traffic Squads Are a Godsend
Her first target was a white Chevrolet Camaro from Pennsylvania, parked just off the corner at 11th and H Streets, a busy downtown intersection.
The parking meter had expired.
In less than 30 seconds, Jennifer Moorer issued a summons that carried a $15 fine.
Over the next two hours last Wednesday, what Ms.
Moorer described as a typical midweek morning for traffic and illegally parked vehicles, she wrote 34 more tickets, worth a total of $1,160 to the District of Columbia.
And her shift had six hours to go.


Benjamin S. Kalnick; Lawyer and Accountant, 84
Benjamin S. Kalnick, a New York lawyer and accountant who served as Mayor of Kings Point, L.I., died on June 24 at New York University Medical Center.
He was 84 and lived in retirement in Palm Beach, Fla.
Mr.
Kalnick was a former national vice president of the American Jewish Congress and a founder and chairman of the American Association for Jewish Education.
He was Mayor and trustee of the Village of Kings Point, his former hometown, for more than 20 years.


Parks in Peril
This is the time of year when Americans begin flocking to their national parks.
Some will find what they were looking for: vistas of spectacular beauty, hours of restorative silence.
But others may find themselves wondering whether they have traded one rat race for another.
The national parks contain most of America's greatest scenic wonders.
They also suffer from the urban nuisances vacationers had hoped to leave behind: traffic jams, noise, dirty air and garbage.
There is, as Representative Bill Richardson of New Mexico notes, "trouble in paradise." If past experience is any guide, for example, there will be gridlock today in Yosemite.
By one estimate, the Grand Canyon alone needs $350 million to repair roads, sewers and water systems.
Many of the park system's 22,000 historic buildings, as any visitor to Ellis Island can confirm, are simply falling apart.


Tories Vote Today on the Future Of Both Major and the Party Itself
The contest for leadership of the Conservative Party lurched into its imponderable end game today with both candidates -- Prime Minister John Major and his challenger, John Redwood -- warning that he alone could rescue the party from a Labor landslide.
The vote on Tuesday by up to 329 Tory members of Parliament will determine whether Mr.
Major, in office since November 1990, survives as Prime Minister.


Vaccine Program Reaches Children of the Poor
To the Editor:
Re your June 25 front-page article on the Republican plan to scrap the free-vaccine program:


Bridge Team Trials Won by 6 Women
Six stars in women's bridge scored a victory in the International Team Trials here this afternoon, with a trip to Beijing for world championship play in October as their reward.
The team, Kitty Munson, Judi Radin and Sue Picus, all of Manhattan; Rozanne Pollack of Warren, N.J.; Carol Simon of Summit, N.J., and Karen McCallum of Exeter, N.H., won the final playoff match by 16 imps.
Their opponents were Judge Amalya Kearse and Jacqui Mitchell, both of Manhattan; Tobi Deutsch Sokolov and Mildred Breed, both of Austin, Tex.; Joyce Lilie of Las Vegas, Nev., and Jo Morse of Tucson, Ariz.


David H. Sawyer Dies at 59; Innovator in Political Strategy
David H. Sawyer, a pioneer in the field of political consulting that burgeoned in the 1970's and 1980's as party machines lost their clout in choosing electoral candidates, died on Sunday in New York Hospital.
He was 59 and lived in Manhattan.
He had been under treatment for several weeks for a brain tumor, his family said.


Marching to a Differentiating Drum; A Bronx Bugle Corps Samples a World Outside the Inner City
As they rehearsed far beneath the amber lights of the Triborough Bridge, Morriah Christian, 17, and her sweat-soaked friends stopped marching briefly Friday night to watch the holiday world whir by above them -- vacationers in cars and vans and Land Rovers headed off to Connecticut or Long Island.
But there was little time for summer reveries for Morriah or Kamari Daniels or Dorena Ruiz, among the 55 determined teen-aged members of the Kips Bay Knight Club, a traveling drum and bugle corps from the Bronx.
What a weekend of marching: Saturday, Levittown, Pa.; Sunday, Clifton, N.J., and this morning, July 4, parades in Needham and Stoughton, Mass.


In Tropical Forests, Arboreal Mating Is a Long-Distance Affair
IN the world's highly diverse tropical jungles, where 300 tree species can be packed into a few acres, a particular tree can easily find itself far from another member of its species.
Biologists, long puzzled by where such trees find mates in this flowering profusion, have at last begun to get some answers.
As biologists piece together the evidence, they are finding that these giants are not so isolated after all.
In fact, they send their pollen far and wide, pairing up with distant trees all over the forest.
Researchers are also finding that in some species, when the number of flowering trees in an area is reduced, as through selective logging, this long-distance mating can be disrupted.
Trees instead use more of their own pollen and the result is a greater proportion of self-fertilized seeds, producing inbred offspring that are often not as hearty as their outbred counterparts, which are more genetically diverse.


Goal: Three Heavyweight Titles Into One
George Foreman's abdication has shaken the world of boxing.
And it may be changed in profound ways.
In the wake of Foreman's decision, HBO has joined the alphabet-soup war with the W.B.A., I.B.F. and W.B.C.


Shell Game: Picking State Favorites
For more than a decade, State Senator James S. Cafiero pulled strings and twisted arms, trying in vain to get a certain bill passed.
This spring, he finally tasted victory: New Jersey designated the knobbed whelk -- also known as the conch, or scungilli -- the official state shell.
It wasn't easy.
One year, Mr.
Cafiero handed out a shell and a can of scungilli to each senator.
"When I stood up to move the bill," Mr.
Cafiero recalled, "I said, 'If you put this shell to your ear, it's specially programmed so you hear: Vote for this bill. Vote for this bill.' "


Van Morrison, No Frills, Leaves 'em Wanting More
"I don't fade away," the enigmatic Irish songwriter Van Morrison sang in a new song on Saturday night here at Jones Beach, adding after a short pause, "unless I choose." He and his nine-member band followed that principle throughout the 140-minute concert, which never waned but built to a soulful climax with a long, lustrous version of James Brown's "It's a Man's, Man's, Man's World." But then Mr.
Morrison decided to fade away: instead of performing a second encore, as his set list called for, he left the audience on its feet cheering for nearly 10 minutes before the house lights went on.
The crowd left a song or two short.
Dressed in a black-and-white suit and sunglasses, Mr.
Morrison belted out 22 songs and medleys with his usual showmanship: none.
He moved little except to waddle in place like a penguin, and his stage patter consisted solely of incoherent mumbles as he announced the title of each song before performing it.
Mr.
Morrison's other idiosyncrasies were apparent in small bursts.
These ranged from a fit of off-rhythm scat singing in "Perfect Fit," from his new album, "Days Like This" (Polydor), to letting his over-emoting backup vocalist Brian Kennedy sing (and murder) the first half of "Tupelo Honey."


All Types Of Music Turned Solidly Into Jazz
No matter how fervently some jazz aficionados may believe that the music has evolved into an ivory tower form whose vitality no longer depends on close interaction with other nonclassical styles, it is just not so.
As evidence, one need look no further than to the artistry of Cassandra Wilson.
This 36-year-old singer who appeared at the Summerstage concert series in Central Park on Sunday afternoon is regarded by many as the most important American jazz vocalist to emerge in the last decade.
As Sunday's concert showed, a major reason for that acclaim has to do with the way she brings other genres into her music and transforms them from the ground up into something strikingly original but securely jazz-oriented.


CHRONICLE
BEVERLY SILLS is going back on stage -- but this time to talk, not to sing.
She will narrate the concert version of Johann Strauss's operetta "The Gypsy Baron" during the New York Philharmonic's "Mostly Vienna" series on July 13, 14 and 15.
The operetta's cast -- which will sing in German, while Miss Sills delivers her narration in English -- will be the soprano Julia Migenes, the mezzo-soprano Rosalind Elias, the tenor Stanford Olsen and the bass-baritone Jan Opalach.
Miss Sills maintains that her stint as a narrator is a one-time thing.
"I thought it would be fun to put on a pretty dress and some makeup again," she said.
"I am not getting paid for this. Just because my price is right doesn't mean that I'm going to be available for every engagement that comes along."


R. W. Redington; Physicist, 70, Was Leader in Imaging
Rowland Wells Redington, a General Electric physicist who helped the company, and the country, gain a leadership role in modern diagnostic imaging, died on June 22 at Samaritan Hospital in Troy, N.Y.
He was 70 and lived in Niskayuna, outside Schenectady.
The cause was a heart attack, according to a spokesman for General Electric's Research and Development Center in Schenectady.


Seaman Furniture Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 30


Crews Prepare to Undo Hybrid Home in Space
Ending five days of joint operations some 245 miles above the earth, 10 astronauts bid farewell to one another today in preparation for the disassembly on Tuesday of history's largest spacecraft, an American space shuttle docked to a Russian space station.
"I feel very small because when I look at the earth through the window I see a giant planet," Lieut.
Col.
Charles J. Precourt of the Air Force, pilot of the space shuttle Atlantis, told his Russian colleagues.
"But together we can do almost everything, even fly to Mars."


New Clue to Heart Disease: A Vitamin Lack
COULD a vitamin deficiency be a leading cause of heart disease?
The hypothesis, first put forward nearly three decades ago, sounded flaky to most heart disease experts, and was largely ignored.
But it has recently gained a surprising new credence and is now the subject of the first international meeting devoted to the issue, to be held in Ireland this week.
The vitamin in question is folic acid, a B vitamin.
One of its several functions in the body is to reduce the amounts in the blood of an amino acid called homocysteine.
Researchers say that in recent years they have seen mounting evidence that large numbers of people have especially high levels of the amino acid homocysteine in their bloodstream, and that homocysteine can injure blood vessels, causing atherosclerosis and leading to heart attacks and strokes.
Folic acid, it seems, can reduce such damage by reducing blood levels of homocysteine to a safe range.


Dead-End Jobs? Not for These Three
Mark Ishaya was a toddler in Baghdad when his father died and his mother abandoned the family.
He was a child laborer in a Lebanese oil filter factory when Palestine Liberation Organization guerrillas massacred co-workers as he hid in a cabinet.
Zdenka Bulic was 21 when she emigrated from Bosnia nine years ago, frustrated at the career roadblocks she faced as a Croat.
David Nunez left his home in Mexico at the age of 16 in search of higher wages.


Biomet Inc.(BMET,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Car Crash Leaves 4 Dead
Four women were killed before dawn yesterday when a car being driven the wrong way on the Garden State Parkway collided head-on with the van in which they were riding, causing it to explode, the state police said.
A passerby, Kurt Osuch of Linden, was able to pull a Paterson couple, Matthew B. and Johnnie Ruth Buie, from the burning van.
Mrs.
Buie underwent surgery but remained in critical condition.
Her husband, the driver of the van, escaped serious injury.


U.S. Trade Pullback
President Clinton's credentials as a free-trader seemed substantial.
But now he is in danger of tarnishing his record.
Mr.
Clinton enthusiastically supported the world trade liberalization talks that concluded last year under the auspices of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade, and the creation of its successor, the World Trade Organization.


In a Polish Shipyard, Signals Of Eastern Europe's Revival
With the zeal of a supersalesman, Andrzej Zarnoch walks the blustery piers astride the Baltic Sea, showing off his shipyard's latest prize, a 440-foot bulk carrier destined for Norway.
Mr.
Zarnoch, the marketing director of the yard, has reason to feel buoyant.
Gleaming vessels like the Fossnes Bergen are moving out of the berths here at record speed.
Production time has been cut by half in two years, the order books are filled with contracts from the West, and the Szczecin shipyard, once Poland's poor sister to the fabled Gdansk, is now ranked among the world's top dozen.


Review/Fashion; In Italy, Bad Taste With a Satiric Edge
As subjective a concept as it is, there are a few items the fashion world seems to have agreed are in bad taste for men.
Hot pants, for example.
Hip huggers.
Handbags.
White disco suits.
Printed polyester shirts.
Pointy patent leather shoes (especially in white).
So what were those very tasteless gigolo clothes doing all over the spring 1996 runways of Milan -- home to Giorgio Armani's temple of taste -- along with suits worn shirtless, shoes worn sockless and sandals worn with white socks?


New Dean at Theological School
Dr.
Leonard I. Sweet has been named as the 15th dean of Drew University's 128-year-old Theological School.
Currently, he is the chancellor and chief executive of the United Theological Seminary in Dayton, Ohio.
The Theological School is affiliated with the United Methodist Church.


A Change in Governors Stalls Model Drug Program in Texas
Four years ago, the Texas Legislature approved what was to be the largest, most aggressive drug treatment program of any prison system in the world.
The issue of treating addicts in prisons had no genuine champion anywhere in the nation until Ann W. Richards, the state's new Governor and a recovering alcoholic, made it her cause.
At the time, there was much fervid rhetoric about a revolutionary change in Texas's attitude toward criminals.
State Senator Ted B. Lyon, a Democrat and a prime sponsor of the bill, proclaimed: "If we can break the cycle of addiction, we can break the cycle of crime." Governor Richards, who visited prison therapy sessions and afterward sent inmates handwritten notes, felt strongly that Texas could someday show the nation how to use the prisons to break the cycle of drug use.


Fixing America, Step by Step, No Grays Allowed
TO RENEW AMERICA
By Newt Gingrich
260 pages. HarperCollins. $24.
Several Newt Gingriches are on display in his new book, "To Renew America." There's the Speaker of the House, trying hard to sound statesmanlike as he articulates his vision of America.
There's the Republican "bomb thrower," as he was often called during his days as the House minority whip, slipping in mean little asides about Democrats and liberals.
And there's the "happy 4-year-old who gets up every morning hoping to find a cookie that friends or relatives may have left for me somewhere."


INSIDE
Hotel Strike Averted
Hotel workers in New York City reached a tentative agreement on a new contract, averting a strike set to begin at midnight tonight.
Page 33.
Next Trade Battlefront: Film
The United States will investigate Eastman Kodak's charges that Fuji Photo Film tried to deny it access to the Japanese market.
Page 45.
Guilty Plea in Cocaine Case
A defense lawyer pleaded guilty in Miami to aiding Colombian cocaine traffickers and agreed to testify against two other lawyers.
Page 8.
New Look at an Old Scene
The huge frieze from the Parthenon may not depict a solemn celebration, as has long been believed, but something more sinister.
Page 11.


Key Is Out for the Season, and Possibly Longer
The news that had seemed inevitable was finally announced today: Yankees pitcher Jimmy Key will undergo surgery to repair a torn rotator cuff in his left shoulder Wednesday.
He will miss the rest of this season and might not pitch again.
Ever since the 34-year-old Key was unable to toss 10 pitches without pain in a workout last Monday and then couldn't even make it to the practice mound last Friday, it had become obvious that New York's best left-hander since Ron Guidry would be watching more baseball than he played this season.
Because it will be the second time in nine months that Key's shoulder has required surgery and because this surgery is more serious, there is reason to wonder if he will be able to return.


Deal Averts Hotel Strike In New York
Hotel workers in New York City reached a tentative agreement with hotel owners yesterday on a new six-year contract, averting a strike that had been threatened for midnight tonight.
Exact terms of the agreement were not disclosed, and they must be ratified by the 22,000-member New York Hotel and Motel Trades Council as well as the Hotel Association of New York, which represents 79 hotels.
Members of both groups were to be presented with the agreement and asked to vote on it tomorrow night.


BUSINESS DIGEST
European Group Bids To Build U.S.
Rockets The European consortium Arianespace is bidding with Alliant Techsystems of Minneapolis on a $2 billion contract to design a new family of rockets for the Air Force.


Corrections
Corrected net asset value figures for 12 mutual funds of Fidelity Investments from tables in Business Day on Saturday and in Money &amp; Business on Sunday.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, the Technology column in Business Day yesterday about an on-line survey of World Wide Web users misstated the electronic address where the survey results can be found.
It is http:// www.umich.edu/sgupta/hermes/


Corrections
An article in Business Day yesterday about a business group's plan to introduce technology that would let people screen violent or sexually explicit material carried on the Internet's World Wide Web computer service referred incorrectly to a company that already offers a similar product.
It is Surfwatch Software Inc., not Softwatch Inc.


Burning Flags and Barbaric Yawps
To most of us the Fourth of July is a time for patriotric revelry, outdoor barbecues and windy speeches.
It is a time to enjoy a few days off, to put aside intellectual challenges without feeling guilty.
Yet history reminds us that for those shrewd enough to grasp the potential uses of Independence Day, it once served as a platform for extraordinary polemical gestures -- a moment not to escape the nagging problems of society but to engage them.
On July 4, 1854, at an abolitionist rally in Framingham, Mass., William Lloyd Garrison burned a copy of the Constitution to demonstrate bitter disillusionment with a nation, supposedly founded on the ideals of justice and liberty, that had enslaved four million blacks.
The crowd of 3,000 let out a tremendous "Amen!"


Tap Rigor With Room for Personal Touches
Two New York premieres added a little extra pizazz to the Sunday matinee performance by the Jazz Tap Ensemble at the Joyce Theater (175 Eighth Avenue, at 19th Street, Chelsea).
"Swingin'," choreographed and performed by Lainie Manning, was a charmingly natty, sharp-edged response to a buoyant amble of a jazz score by Jerry Kalaf.
"New Trio," choreographed and performed by Derick Grant, Dormeshia Sumbry and Mark Mendonca to music by Hank Jones, sent its dancers through clusters of more gravity-bound footwork separated by moments of stillness and a skimming motif in which the three appeared to slide across the floor without touching it.
The Los Angeles-based group has managed to bridge the gulf between the traditional soloists that epitomized the art of tap in a revival in the 1970's in New York and the orchestral approach that is increasingly popular today, in which the dancers are seen as members of an orchestral or chamber-music tap ensemble.
The Jazz Tap dancers perform as a smoothly synchronized group without losing the distinctive presences and styles in numbers like "Jerry's Songs," choreographed and performed by Sam Weber, Lynn Dally and Mr.
Grant and Ms.
Sumbry, and "Tribute: Tap Dancin' at the Movies," choreographed and performed by Ms.
Manning, Mr.
Weber and Ms.
Sumbry.


Sports of The Times; 'Oh, By The Way, We Won'
ON the sunny soccer field outside Yale Bowl, the South African coaches were exhorting their players at halftime in four languages: Zulu, Sotho, Afrikaans and English.
But one word didn't need any translation.
"Shoot," one coach was saying. "Shoot."
Minutes later, 22-year-old Brian Mosi, known as Jomo, scored and flopped backward onto the grass in joy.
South Africa would defeat South Korea, 2-1, and now, in the small bleachers, Kate Rivers's cellular phone rang.
As the national director of South Africa Special Olympics, this middle-aged blonde in a flowered dress was discussing some details with another member of the delegation.


Slap Hitter Deflates Pulsipher And Mets
One big mistake.
Just enough to ruin an otherwise outstanding performance by Bill Pulsipher on a beautiful evening at Shea Stadium.
The 21-year-old rookie left-hander owned the Chicago Cubs last night.
Owned them, that is, until Rey Sanchez hit his first home run in nearly three years (and just his second in 1,171 major league at-bats), a two-run, opposite-field shot to right with two out in the eighth that propelled the Cubbies to a come-from-behind, 4-2 victory and left Pulsipher (1-3) muttering to himself.


Chemist Adds Missing Pieces To Theory on Life's Origins
NO one has yet shown how life originated on Earth, and the chance that science will ever unlock all the details of the process seems vanishingly small.
But as molecular biologists discover how nature may have built unaided the maze of tiny bridges that led from inanimate chemicals to living creatures, hopes brighten that the ancient pathway to life may one day be at least dimly revealed.
The latest news about the quest comes from Dr.
Stanley L. Miller of the University of California at San Diego, a pioneer in the reconstruction of "prebiotic" chemical reactions -- the primeval chemistry of the young Earth that is presumed to have given rise to life.
Dr.
Miller and a colleague, Dr.
Michael P. Robertson, report in a pair of papers that they have found a way that nature could have created several vital building blocks that had seemed beyond the reach of prebiotic chemistry.


Uh One, Uh Two


Transform Your Image In Easy Stages
MORPHING is everywhere.
We see it on movie and television screens, and on the monitors of well-equipped computers operated by people willing to invest time, effort and expense in advanced equipment and complex programs.
When Apatosaurus (formerly Brontosaurus) transforms itself in stages into Tyrannosaurus rex (formerly a standup guy), that is morphing.
When a mild-looking man becomes a predatory terminator, that is morphing.
Morphing is suddenly easy.
Well, not exactly easy, but not that difficult either.
With Morphstudio, from Ulead Systems of Torrance, Calif., this totally inexperienced morphist made, in a few minutes, a one-second video sequence transforming the face of a pretty blondish woman into the face of a handsome blondish man.
In all honesty, I had meant to morph in the opposite direction, from handsome to pretty, but that is not the program's fault.


Dodgers Are a Hit in Any Language
They are capable of seeing their name in lights or losing a fly ball in the lights.
The National League pennant may be about to hit the Los Angeles Dodgers in the hands, and the question is whether they will drop it.
Their owner should go down as scout of the year, their manager had better be trilingual and their pitching ace has the perfect antidote for their Swiss-cheese defense: strikeouts.


Treasury Securities End Mixed In Light Day
Prices of Treasury securities ended mixed yesterday after several economic reports produced no surprises.
Trading was light in the shortened session.
While many traders were off yesterday ahead of the Fourth of July holiday, the session still had the potential to be volatile after the turmoil of last week.
On Thursday, Treasury prices fell sharply after the May new-home sales report showed expected strength in the economy.
The report raised fears that the Federal Reserve would not, as expected, reduce short-term interest rates when its policy-making committee meets tomorrow.
On Friday, Treasury prices seesawed on expectations, later confirmed, that the Chicago purchasing managers' survey would show weakness, which helped the case for a Fed rate cut.


METROPOLITAN GOLF REPORT
U.S. Senior Open
Bob Housen has once again solidified his reputation as one of the top amateur players in the metropolitan area.
Housen, 56, captured the low-amateur medal in the United States Senior Open on Sunday with a 72-hole total of 296, good for 38th place over all.


Mr. Mubarak: Valuable and Vulnerable
Fortunately for the Middle East, Egypt's President, Hosni Mubarak, escaped assassination last week in Addis Ababa, Ethiopia.
Cairo alleges, without hard evidence, that Islamic-ruled Sudan was involved either through its Government or through the Islamic National Front, led by its most powerful politician, Hassan al-Turabi.
In response to the assassination attempt Mr.
Mubarak urged Sudan's people to overthrow their Government, and at midweek the two countries briefly skirmished over a disputed border area.
Without more data, outsiders cannot be sure about Sudan's involvement.
But whoever set up the ambush, it was a reminder that the Mubarak regime, a valuable contributor to the Mideast peace process, remains vulnerable to violent assault.


Congressional Memo; Republicans Linger Over Words, Delaying Real-Life Choices
Newt Gingrich, the Speaker of the House, held a news conference last Thursday to discuss a Republican plan for Medicare.
It was a one-page list of six principles, beginning with "We must act immediately to preserve Medicare" and going on to commit to "choice," an unfettered doctor-patient relationship and an end to "waste, fraud and abuse."
But these six principles did not address the most burning real-life question about Medicare these days: just how the Republicans intend to extract $270 billion in savings from the program in seven years, which their budget resolution commits them to do.


'. . . And Called Him Macaroni'
"Yankee Doodle" is the unofficial anthem of the Fourth of July.
It was introduced to colonial America by British troops, mocking the roughneck Yankees, but the colonials soon appropriated it as their own.
Quite unintended by the composer, whoever that may have been, it captured the cocky spirit of a nation about to be born.
Little is certain about the origins of this delightful air.
Who wrote the words?
When?
Does the tune really date from the Middle Ages?
Is a macaroni an "it" or a "him"?


F.B.I. Reveals A Man's Plan To Blow Up A Courthouse
Federal agents say that they have uncovered a plot to use a fertilizer bomb to destroy the United States Courthouse here, but that the conspiracy appears to have no connection to the bombing of the Federal Building in Oklahoma City.
According to newly released court documents, the Federal Bureau of Investigation learned about the Spokane plot from an informer eight days after the April 19 Oklahoma City blast, which killed 167 people and injured more than 400.


Search Intensifies in the Unabom Case
A flurry of activity in the case of a notorious serial mail bomber -- a new package of his writings, word of a mysterious photograph of a possible suspect, visits by Federal agents to California scrap-metal dealers who might have sold him materiel -- has arisen in recent days as the search intensified for the self-described anarchist known as the Unabomber.
Scrap-metal dealers said F.B.I. agents showed them a grainy, black-and-white photo of a man, perhaps caught by a surveillance camera, who seemed heavier than the hooded figure in a well-known composite sketch made from the single known sighting of the bomber in 1987.
They said they were also questioned about sales of magnesium, a metal used in incendiary bombs.


Market Holiday Has Early Start
The major stock exchanges and the cash market for Treasury securities closed early yesterday ahead of the Fourth of July holiday.
The New York and American stock exchanges and the Nasdaq market stopped trading at 1 P.M., Eastern time, while the Treasury market ended at 2 P.M.


CHRONICLE
JIM B. MILLER has received 2,400 nominations for candidates for his third annual worst-boss-of-the-year contest.
Mr.
Miller, a co-author of "The Corporate Coach" (St. Martin's Press, 1993), set a June 30 deadline to choose the nation's best and worst bosses.
In the "worst" category, which draws about four times as many nominations as the "best" category, one boss thanked employees for a 92-percent increase in production not by handing out raises but by passing out moldy food and canned goods whose expiration dates had long passed.
Another ordered his assistant to dismiss anyone who called in sick.


What a Day to Toast New York Drinking Water!
To the Editor:
The Fourth of July would be an appropriate time for the state to act to protect New York City's drinking water supply as you urge in "Governor Pataki's Watershed" (editorial, June 26).


Economist Is Said to Enter A Six-Month Drug Program
Lawrence A. Kudlow, the former Wall Street economist, went to Minneapolis yesterday to check into a long-term, residential drug treatment program at Hazelden Foundation, his wife, Judith, said.
Mr.
Kudlow, 47, agreed to undergo the six-month Hazelden program, where Kitty Dukakis, Eric Clapton and other well-known people have sought help, after three shorter treatments in the last two and half years for cocaine and alcohol habits, his wife said yesterday.


Corrections
A picture caption yesterday with an article on summer jobs for youth incorrectly identified a man who was accompanying two teen-agers in search of jobs.
The man, Albert Randolph, is not with the New York State Department of Labor; he is the cousin of one of the teen-agers, Najeebie Johnson.


Victors in Thailand, Linked to Vote-Buying, Seek Coalition
A party long tied to the most unsavory elements of politics in Thailand moved quickly yesterday to form a coalition Government after it won national elections last weekend, apparently sweeping Prime Minister Chuan Leekpai from power.
The victorious Chart Thai, or Thai Nation Party, announced that it hoped to line up a six-party coalition by the end of the week, with the Chart Thai leader, Banharn Silpa-archa, as the new Prime Minister.


Corrections
The tables on Friday's trading in mutual funds in Business Day on Saturday and in Money &amp; Business on Sunday included incorrect net asset value figures for 12 mutual funds of Fidelity Investments.
A corrected table appears today on page 46.


NEWS SUMMARY
". . . and called him macaroni."  Mubarak: valuable, vulnerable.
Letters  A. M. Rosenthal: $20 billion thriller.
Russell Baker: Dog bites man in L.A.
David S. Reynolds: Burning flags and barbaric yawps.
Daniel S. Greenberg: The vanishing heroes of science.
Chronicle 60  Chess 17  Crossword 26


A New Passport Doesn't Help Rusedski at All on Center Court
He put on a happy face, but that turned out to be a most unwise strategy once his opponent made it his main order of business "to wipe the smile off" the face of giddy Greg Rusedski, the man who decided to forsake his native Canada on the premise that a British passport would guarantee him instant fame in his mother's homeland.
Rusedski's defection did make him a celebrity, but it didn't guarantee him smooth sledding at Wimbledon, where he and his 100-watt grin were summarily extinguished on Center Court today by the two-time defending Wimbledon champion, Pete Sampras.


Regent Buys Apollo Radio
Apollo Partners Ltd. has sold the Apollo Radio Holding Company, a New York company consisting of seven radio stations, to Regent Communications for $50 million.
Apollo Radio was owned by Apollo Partners Ltd., Chemical Venture Partners and Equitable Capital.
Regent, a privately held company in Covington, Ky., already owned nine stations in three markets.
After this latest deal, Regent expects to be ranked among the top 35 radio groups in advertising revenue.
The radio stations involved in the sale of Apollo Radio are KALL-AM, KKAT-FM and KODJ-FM in Salt Lake City; KMXV-FM and KUDL-FM in Kansas City, Mo., and WEZL-FM and WXLY-FM in Charleston, S.C.


More Open Latin Borders Mirror Region's Freer Markets
Latin America's free-trade mood, though overshadowed by the Mexican financial crisis and war between Peru and Ecuador, is expansive, reflected best perhaps by the new express lanes at Brazil's international airports.
With cursory nods, the police wave through thousands of passport bearers from the nations of Mercosul, the common market of the South -- Argentina, Brazil, Paraguay and Uruguay.


Morrison Restaurants Inc.(RI,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Jun 3


A Balance Of Unknown And Familiar
The State Philharmonic of Bialystok is the second of two orchestras whose New York performances have been protested by the local musicians union, which argues that Mid America Productions has imported the ensembles because they are less expensive than American musicians, not because they are particularly good.
In the case of the first ensemble, the Bohuslav Martinu Philharmonic, an undistinguished performance of the Verdi Requiem in May suggested that the union had a point.
But on purely musical grounds, the aggrieved union can have no complaint about the Bialystok orchestra, a Polish ensemble founded 41 years ago and conducted by Miroslaw Jacek Blaszczyk since 1990.
The orchestra's playing was polished and energetic, its wind and string timbre was beautifully focused, and its program was a good balance between the familiar and the unknown.


Anthoupolis Journal; War's Dark Secret, Kept Alive by Women in Black
Since 1974, when her son and husband disappeared during the war, Maria Theodoulou has doggedly implored the Virgin Mary for help.
When she wakes up and when she goes to sleep she kneels before the Virgin's image.
She has twice made pilgrimages to a shrine on the Greek island of Tinos.
"A few days ago the Virgin appeared to me in a dream," she said, seated in her small house five miles west of Nicosia.
"She was in a boat coming in from the sea. She told me my husband was dead. She told me my son had gone to America. Wait, the Virgin told me, wait for your son to come home."


No Headline
"The Conservative Party has looked into the abyss. Tomorrow it has a clear choice. It can jump into the abyss or it can finish this business." BRITISH PRIME MINISTER JOHN MAJOR.  [ 1:4. ]


Mayor, Assailing Critics of Union Accord, Dismisses Need for More Concessions
Lashing back at critics of his new labor agreement with the municipal unions, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani yesterday denounced suggestions from fiscal monitors that he should have extracted more concessions as "outrageous," "crazy" and "off the wall."
City workers, he said, had made more than their share of sacrifices to help balance the budget, and those who maintain otherwise have a "political agenda," though he did not spell out what that agenda was.


Supply Exceeds Demand for Ph.D.'s in Many Science Fields
THE holder of a doctoral degree in science or engineering would probably make a better taxi driver or bank teller than someone without a Ph.D.
But if a newly minted doctor of science is hoping for a permanent, full-time job in his or her specialty, there is a 1-in-4 chance of being disappointed, according to a recent survey.
As if that were not bad enough news for young scientists, the authors of the report have concluded that increased government spending for scientific research, even if it were granted, would eventually make the job situation even worse.


U.S. Post for Rights Lawyer
Greg Stewart, a New Jersey civil rights lawyer, has been confirmed by the United States Senate to become general counsel to the Equal Employment Opportunities Commission.
Mr.
Stewart is currently the director of civil rights in New Jersey's Department of Law and Public Safety.


U.S. to Assess Kodak's Case Against Fuji
In what is shaping up as the next focus of trade friction with Japan, the Clinton Administration announced today that it would investigate charges by the Eastman Kodak Company that its rival Fuji Photo Film had conspired to deny it fair access to the Japanese market over the last 20 years.
The American move, made less than a week after the two countries pulled back from the brink of sanctions and settled a bitter automotive-trade dispute, was based on a 275-page complaint filed by Kodak in mid-May, contending that the Japanese Government had helped Fuji create an anticompetitive market, costing it $5.6 billion in sales.


Milltown Picked for Signing
Visitors to the Middlesex County borough of Milltown are greeted with a sign that boasts, "Welcome to Milltown -- A Friendly Community."
One of today's visitors is to be Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman, who has chosen the working-class town as the setting for signing her latest 15-percent tax-cut measure into law.
The ceremony will take place after the local Fourth of July parade.


Workers' Benefits Cost More, but Less So
After spiraling upward for years, the cost of employee benefits is flattening out.
The soaring costs of health care -- the biggest and fastest of the runaway horses -- have been growing at a slower rate.
Workers' compensation claims have been reined in.
And the buoyant stock market, by producing substantial gains on investments, has allowed corporations to meet their pension obligations with only minimal extra contributions.


Russians Inspired By America
A long-running rock band and a reunited jazz sextet, both from Russia, performed on Saturday night in a JVC Jazz Festival concert at Avery Fisher Hall.
All they shared musically was a lack of audible Russian roots.
Mashina Vremeni (Time Machine), the rock band, was founded in 1969 by Andrei Makarevich and survived varying degrees of Communist disapproval.
Last year it celebrated its 25th anniversary performing for 50,000 fans in Red Square.
According to Artemy Troitsky's "Back in the U.S.S.R.," a history of Russian rock, Mr.
Makarevich's lyrics didn't reflect official optimism.
The songs, couched in metaphor, were hopeful but disillusioned; they decried conformism and passivity to encourage more ethical behavior.


New Analysis of the Parthenon's Frieze Finds It Depicts a Horrifying Legend
STANDING in columned splendor atop the Acropolis of Athens, the Parthenon is the paragon of classical architecture and has long been a shrine of Western civilization.
The Greeks built this temple to the goddess Athena in the fifth century B.C., in the golden age of Pericles.
Marble statues portrayed the mortal and immortal greats, and at the center was a huge cult statue of Athena.
Set high above, on all sides in the shadow of the exterior colonnade, was a 524-foot-long frieze in low relief depicting various stages of what appeared to be a single solemn ceremony.
A cavalcade of mounted soldiers was followed by people bringing animals to sacrifice and bearing offerings by musicians, maidens and elders.
They approached a central scene above the east entrance, where among other figures, a man and child held a large cloth.


Diana Corp.(DNA,N) reports earnings for Year to Apr 1


Plea in Murder Trial in Jordan
A Jordanian-American accused of killing his American wife in Parsippany-Troy Hills last summer asked a Jordanian court on Monday to reduce his charge of premeditated killing to second-degree murder, The Associated Press reported.
The court said it would hand down a decision next Monday.
Mohammed I. Abequa, 47, has confessed to killing his estranged wife, Nihal, 40.
He fled to Jordan afterward and was arrested by the Jordanian police.


Matsuoka, Not So Reverent Now, Is Ready for Sampras
What has become old hat for the likes of Andre Agassi and Pete Sampras, surviving into the quarterfinal round at a Grand Slam tournament, represents the chance of a lifetime for a tall Japanese player who first fell on his back and then leapt up and did a victory lap around the Wimbledon hintercourt that provided his rite of passage on Monday.
Shuzo Matsuoka's father, Isao, could get his son into pictures, but that has never been the son's goal; instead, the best and only male Japanese prospect has pursued the same career his father pursued before becoming a film company executive in Tokyo.


Clean Water: A Midstream Approach
Within the year, the 104th Congress may rewrite the Clean Water Act, the Superfund program, the Endangered Species Act, the Safe Drinking Water Act and portions of the Clean Air Act.
In short, it may redesign the entire framework of environmental protection that has been developed over the past 25 years.
That could have salutary results.
The laws need to be redrafted to prune red tape, cut back the natural accretion of bureaucracy and, most important, reflect the findings of the latest scientific and economic research.
Unfortunately, Congress seems poised to leap far beyond such level-headed revision and instead reverse more than two decades of environmental progress.


Market Place; A selloff by Microsoft executives may be fallout from a failed deal.
MANY of the top executives of the Microsoft Corporation seem to be very eager to sell shares of the software giant as the introduction of the company's Windows 95 operating system nears.
At the same time, as Microsoft's stock price has soared the company has cut back on purchases of its own stock.
Figures released on Monday by the company showed that during the three months that ended June 30 it spent just $34 million on share repurchases.
That was down from $104 million in the prior quarter and from a record $318 million in the last three months of 1994.
It was the lowest figure for any quarter since the final three months of 1992, when the company did not repurchase any shares.


International Briefs; Credit Lyonnais Sells Brazilian Unit to Itau
Credit Lyonnais said yesterday that it had sold its Brazilian retail banking subsidiary, B.F.B., to Banco Itau S.A., Brazil's second-largest private bank, for 1.6 billion French francs, or $335 million.
The sale included Credit Lyonnais' 53.9 percent stake in B.F.B. and its 100 percent stake in B.F.B.
Leasing.
With 45 branches and 2,900 employees, B.F.B. was Credit Lyonnais' largest retail network in South America.
The French banking company bought it in the late 1940's.
A Credit Lyonnais spokesman, Olivier Perrain, said B.F.B. was sold to Itau "slightly above its asset value." Credit Lyonnais has been rapidly shedding assets in an effort to become profitable before the French Government sells it to the public.
The company will maintain a presence in Brazil geared toward large companies. (Bloomberg Business News)


Fed Rate Step Won't Ignore Bond Market
Speculation has been building for weeks about whether signs of an economic slowdown will lead Federal Reserve policy makers to reduce short-term interest rates when they meet here Wednesday and Thursday.
But the key question before the central bank's officials may lie in how well financial markets would withstand a decision not to cut.
The Federal Reserve prizes its independence from Wall Street and from the White House: "No one forces our hand," a Fed Governor, Lawrence B. Lindsey, said in an interview last week.
Still, the Fed's leaders take many of their cues from the bond market.


Traffic Moves Despite Strike
Toll collectors on both the New Jersey Turnpike and the Garden State Parkway were returning to work yesterday, to the great relief of motorists and others who had worried about a nightmarish, traffic-clogged end to the Fourth of July.  [ Page A1. ]


THE GUN NETWORK: McVeigh's World -- A special report.; Bomb Suspect Felt at Home Riding the Gun-Show Circuit
The Mossberg shotguns, the Ruger Mini-14 semiautomatic rifles with fiberglass folding stocks, the stubby Mac-10's, and the Beretta and Glock 9-millimeter pistols were laid out in neat rows in the hall of the Holiday Inn here this weekend.
There were piles of holsters, camouflage clothes, shells for reloading and, as at gun shows around the country, a booth with the latest issue of The Spotlight, the newspaper of the extremist anti-Semitic group Liberty Lobby -- its banner headline warning "Clinton Plans for Mideast War" -- and stacks of defiant bumper stickers, including one depicting a red, horned President and the words, "Clinton is the Anti-Christ."


Record Deal in England
STAN COLLYMORE became the most expensive player in British soccer history yesterday when he completed his $13.6 million transfer from Nottingham Forest to Liverpool.
The deal for the 24-year-old striker broke the English record of $11.2 million paid by Manchester United for Newcastle's ANDY COLE in January.
It also broke the $12.8 million paid by Internazionale of Milan last month for Manchester United's PAUL INCE. (AP)


China Knows Costs Of Birth Control
To the Editor:
Your article about the Chinese people's responses to the country's birth control laws (front page, June 25) presented examples of "coercion and evasion" in China's family-planning effort in Hunan and Anhui.
Such problems are also the focus of concern in China itself.


METRO DIGEST
DESPITE TOLL STRIKE, TRAFFIC MOVES WELL
The combination of a toll collectors' strike and hundreds of thousands of holiday motorists was widely expected to bring congestion of historic proportions to New Jersey's busiest highways, but things were surprisingly smooth, with fewer traffic problems than on many other holidays.  [ Page A1. ]
TAX BREAKS: POORER PETER, RICHER PAUL?
At a time when the New York City and State governments are cutting sharply into spending for schools and social services for the poor, they are providing hundreds of millions of dollars in tax breaks and other benefits to big businesses.
The Pataki and Giuliani administrations say the tax breaks are part of a long-term strategy to shore up the local economy by keeping big employers from leaving New York.
In other states, they say, such enticements abound.
But a growing number of critics question whether a strategy of broadening tax breaks to business makes sense while cities and states are doing some of the most far-reaching budget cutting in decades.  [ A1. ]
After marching down Main Street in Milltown, N.J., Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman signed into law the second half of her promised 30 percent income tax reduction.  [ B2. ] NEW YORK CITY ARREST IN SUICIDE
A man who helped his gravely ill wife commit suicide with a drug overdose in their Upper West Side apartment was charged with manslaughter, the police said.  [ B3. ]
AS CHILDREN PLAY, COURTYARD COLLAPSES
As several children played a few feet away, a section of the courtyard of a city-owned apartment building in Harlem collapsed.
No one was injured, but the six-story building was sufficiently undermined that city officials evacuated all 30 families, the police said.  [ B3. ]
A PHOTO OPPORTUNITY FOR THE I.N.S.
If the Immigration and Naturalization Service in New York City gets its way, those huddled masses yearning to breathe free who turn up at its offices at 26 Federal Plaza will have to cope with market forces.
The I.N.S. is taking on a 63-year-old nonprofit group authorized by Federal law to help newcomers obtain identification photographs at low cost.
About New York by Michael T. Kaufman.  [ B3. ] REGION A FINE DAY FOR THE FOURTH
Across the New York metropolitan region -- from the Jersey Shore to the Bronx to Long Island to the Rockaways -- people flocked to parks, beaches and backyards to share food, drink and companionship on the Fourth of July.  [ B4. ]
SHIFT IN STYLE FOR SCHOOL PLAN
The New Jersey State Department of Education, often vilified in Jersey City and Paterson for imposing school takeovers that have failed to improve student performance, is attempting to change its style as it moves toward the takeover of Newark's unwieldy, crumbling school system.  [ B4. ]
300 IN GOUVERNEUR PRISON MELEE
A fight involving 300 inmates, apparently over a stolen gold chain, erupted at the state prison in Gouverneur, N.Y., leaving about 13 injured, one seriously, officials said.
The fight at the medium-security prison, 25 miles from the Canadian border, pitted a group of black inmates against a group of Hispanic prisoners.
But officials refused to characterize the upheaval as racial.  [ B4. ]


Olympic Homecoming
When the United States Olympic soccer team plays the Long Island Rough Riders at Mitchel Field in Uniondale tonight, at least two of its members will feel right at home.
DAMIAN SILVERA, who grew up in Huntington, and MICHAEL PETKE, from Bohemia, will be in the lineup of the national team of players 23 years old and under.


On Not Slighting Italy
To the Editor:
Re "The Italy We Want" by Anthony Lewis (column, June 26):


Lower Budgets Don't Cut Flow Of Tax Breaks
At a time when the New York City and State governments are cutting sharply into spending for schools and social services for the poor, they are providing hundreds of millions of dollars in tax breaks and other benefits to big businesses, including some of the nation's largest corporations.
The Pataki and Giuliani administrations say the tax breaks, which have gone to such corporatons as ABC and Donaldson, Lufkin &amp; Jenrette, the Wall Street brokerage concern, are part of a long-term strategy to shore up the local economy by keeping big employers from leaving New York.
In other states, they say, such enticements abound.


Command Performance for the G.O.P.


TORIES PICK MAJOR AS LEADER AGAIN, BUT SPLIT REMAINS
John Major was easily re-elected as leader of the ruling Conservative Party today, insuring his survival as Prime Minister but not gaining the decisive triumph that would have stamped his authority on a fractious party.
Mr.
Major received 218 votes from the 329 Tory Members of Parliament eligible to vote.
His challenger, John Redwood, a 44-year-old former Cabinet member, received only 89.


Gonzalez Recalled as a Fiery Competitor
With his big serve and fiery competitiveness, Pancho Gonzalez was an emotional and formidable presence in tennis, say those who watched him and played against him.
"He was a super competitor," said Jack Kramer, who induced Gonzalez to turn professional and play on his tour in the 1950's.
"He figured a way to get out of trouble. He seemed to hit his best shots on crucial points.


The Antic and the Archetypal
Intelligence, wit and originality: these qualities stand out in the work of Nathalie Pernette and Andreas Schmid, two young choreographers whose experimental dance troupe from France has just made its United States debut at the American Dance Festival here.
At first glance, the duo, who call themselves the Compagnie Schmid-Pernette, seem to work on a miniature scale.
As things turn out, this is a misleading impression, fueled by the engaging demeanor that Mr.
Schmid, who is Swiss, and Ms.
Pernette, who is French, show off as dancers.


Personal Health
BRAIN tumors are on the rise and no one knows why.
It would be hard to find a family in which at least one member or friend has not had a brain tumor.
Since most brain tumors produce symptoms, like headaches, that are commonly caused by far less devastating disorders, they are often ignored or dismissed as unimportant.
As a result, a correct diagnosis is not made until the tumor reaches a size that may make definitive treatment impossible.
Many brain tumors, if caught early, are curable.
And even those that cannot be cured can often be treated in a way that gives patients years of quality life.
Dramatic improvements in diagnosis and new and improved treatments, including the use of a noninvasive radioactive "knife" and chemotherapy and still-experimental immunotherapy and gene therapy, offer hope for cure or at least long-term control in patients who just a decade ago would have been doomed.


An American Manifesto for a Desirable Future
THE NEXT AMERICAN NATION The New Nationalism and the Fourth American Revolution By Michael Lind 436 pages.
The Free Press. $25
Excepting the immodest few who run for top public office, not many observers of the passing scene would have the audacity to present their ideas for the collective American future as a "manifesto." It is a measure of his boldness that Michael Lind does just that.


Method to End 20-Week Pregnancies Stirs a Corner of the Abortion Debate
A new debate has flared in the long-smoldering fight over abortion, focusing on a rarely used method to end pregnancies that have reached more than 20 weeks of gestation.
It is, both sides agree, a distressingly gruesome process that in its last stages involves removing an intact fetus by suctioning out the brain to make the head fit more easily through the birth canal.


Unlocking the Secret Lives Of Storage Bins
EACH day in New York, countless taxis pull up to the loading docks of self-storage centers, and out of them roll harried apartment dwellers, lugging plastic garbage bags over their shoulders and blowing their bangs out of their eyes.
From the trunk of the cab they pull things they literally cannot live with yet choose not to live without, like sweaters from high school, boxes of photos of people they do not recognize and golf clubs.


Helms Puts the Brakes to a Bill Financing AIDS Treatment
Senator Jesse Helms, the North Carolina Republican who has vigorously fought homosexual rights, wants to reduce the amount of Federal money spent on AIDS sufferers, because, he says, it is their "deliberate, disgusting, revolting conduct" that is responsible for their disease.
Moreover, he argues, AIDS is only the ninth-leading cause of death in America but accounts for more Federal financing than diseases that kill more people (an assertion not supported by Public Health Service figures).


All the Roads Are Straight In Mexico
ROUNDING a blind curve on a one-lane dirt road as it began the plunge to the bottom of a chasm that seemed steeper and deeper than the Grand Canyon, Mike Nelson, a k a Mexico Mike, wanted to clear up a misconception or two about driving in Mexico.
"One misconception is it's unsafe," he said, nonchalantly guiding the steering wheel of his pickup truck with one hand.
"The reality is it's safer than in the United States."


Whitman Signs Second Part Of Cut in State Income Tax
After marching down Main Street in a small-town July 4 parade, Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman signed into law the second half of her promised 30 percent income tax reduction.
The Governor selected this small borough in the middle of suburban Middlesex County because, she said, its own tax cutting efforts symbolized what she was trying to do to bring taxes and government spending under control.


CHRONICLE
Twenty years ago, an ore carrier broke apart in a gale on Lake Superior, carrying 29 crewmen to their deaths and inspiring the GORDON LIGHTFOOT ballad "The Wreck of the Edmund Fitzgerald." Ever since, the ship has lain undisturbed 538 feet below the surface of Whitefish Bay, off eastern Michigan.
Yesterday, the ship's bell was raised, and a dozen relatives of the victims looked on as it was brought aboard the Canadian Navy's ship Cormorant.
"It was quite a cheerful moment," LARRY ELLIOTT, a spokesman for the mission, told The Associated Press.


China's Cloud Over Hong Kong: Is '97 Here?
Day by day, signs great and tiny of Britain's waning colonial presence are becoming more apparent here, as is the looming shadow of China, this territory's soon-to-be master.
A pocket of coins jingles less these days with the image of Queen Elizabeth II than the five-petaled bauhinia blossom, Hong Kong's new official flower, devoid of colonial tincture.


A Coup in Hot Dog Land
Mike DeVito is no longer top dog.
Mr.
DeVito, 33, of Manalapan, was overthrown yesterday as the champion of hot dog eating, when a 350-pound Nynex engineer from Queens beat him by half a wiener in the annual Nathan's Hot Dog Eating Contest on Coney Island.
Mr.
DeVito, a 6-foot-2-inch, 205-pound vice president for Salomon Brothers, had won his fourth state hot dog eating championship in Jersey City on June 24 and was a three-time world champion before meeting his match in Edward Krachie, who had finished second to Mr.
DeVito in last year's world championship at Nathan's Surf Avenue tube-steak mecca.


The Ground Glass of Reality
One of the best-kept secrets in America is that the O.J.
Simpson trial is no longer a disaster.
Another is that television coverage has helped set things right.
Judge Lance A. Ito must feel like the Dan Quayle of the trial bench, condemned by an early negative impression.
Even though Judge Ito has brought the fiasco under control, almost no one has noticed.


Why We Need Student Drug Tests; Unintended Results
To the Editor:
The Supreme Court has ruled that random urine testing of high school athletes is constitutional.
However, this does not mean it is wise.
While drug testing might deter some athletes from using drugs, it may also deter some drug users from participating in organized sports.


Dangerous Nuclear Tests
There is ample time and good reason for France's new President, Jacques Chirac, to reconsider his reckless decision to resume nuclear tests under a coral atoll in the Pacific come September.
Paris invokes the familiar explanation that it needs to conduct a limited number of low-yield underground tests to insure the reliability of its stockpile.
But scientists do not agree that testing is necessary for these purposes and a majority of French public opinion opposes renewed tests.


Pancho Gonzalez Dies


A wisecracking parrot holds sway over a pair's lottery dreams.
HEY, you never know.
But with at least $6 million of television advertising scheduled for this year, you may know more.
Not necessarily about the lottery, which 7 of 10 adults have already played in some form, but about Lotto World, a tiny, two-year-old magazine that comes out every two weeks.


Real-Life Selection of Juries Still Has Far to Go
To the Editor:
James N. Blair's June 27 letter, "Lawyers for Jury Duty," notes that the organized bar vigorously supports legislation eliminating "all occupational exemptions, including those for judges and lawyers."


Prescription Fee of $10 Won't Save Anything
To the Editor:
It would be useful to ask those responsible for a "pilot project" to charge $10 for each prescription at Elmhurst Hospital Center and Queens Hospital Center in New York City as "a cost-saving measure" how much money they propose to save (news article, June 26).


Temple U.'s Dispute With Philadelphia Stalls a Giant Sports Complex
On a Saturday afternoon in June 1994, Temple University's executive vice president, James S. White, was in his office putting the finishing touches on testimony he was to give before the City Council two days later.
After several years of land acquisitions, engineering studies and negotiations with business and civic groups, the university appeared close to breaking ground on an $80 million sports arena and business complex for the blighted inner-city neighborhood surrounding Temple.
Only a few routine city ordinances were still needed, and the mood in Mr.
White's office, as he recalled, "was real high."


Looking at Skin Color, Rather Than Pedigree
To the Editor:
Peter Brimelow ("A White Ethnic Core," letter, June 27) cavalierly waves off suggestions that "Alien Nation," his book, and his anti-immigrant ideas are racist.
He accuses Ira Glasser, executive director of the American Civil Liberties Union (letter, June 16), and A. M. Rosenthal (column, June 20) of attacking his ideas with his own words.


Traffic Moves Surprisingly Well In New Jersey Despite Toll Strike
The combination of a toll collectors' strike and hundreds of thousands of holiday motorists was widely expected to bring congestion of historic proportions to New Jersey's busiest highways today, but into the evening hours things were surprisingly smooth, with traffic problems less than on many other holidays.
By 10 P.M., highway authorities reported no major trouble spots related to the strike on the New Jersey Turnpike and a "sickout" at the Garden State Parkway, and officials at both the turnpike and the parkway said regular employees were returning to their posts.
Traffic was moderate and moving steadily in most places, and the authorities said any delays were caused by the normal tie-ups that come on a holiday, no matter who is operating the tollbooths.


Boeheim Faults Study
Syracuse Coach JIM BOEHEIM says that a National Collegiate Athletic Association study on athlete graduation rates is faulty.
The study, which tracked incoming freshman classes from 1985-86 through 1988-89, showed the Orangemen's basketball team at the bottom of the Big East and more than 20 percent below the national average.


Tenement Is Briefly Seized In East Village
With tactics befitting commandos, a band of squatters briefly took control of a city-owned tenement in the East Village late yesterday, six weeks after illegal occupants were evicted by police in riot gear.
Hundreds of police officers, many wearing helmets and carrying nightsticks, and backed by two police helicopters that swept the area with searchlights, surrounded the building at 541 East 13th Street near Avenue B shortly after the takeover about 10 P.M.


Johnson, Lakers Talk
The Los Angeles Lakers want MAGIC JOHNSON back, and Johnson is getting interested.
"The Lakers have asked me to return," he said in yesterday's editions of The Honolulu Advertiser.
"We're talking about it, so we have to see what happens."


The Anti-Tax Man Cometh
Individual income taxes, Irwin A. Schiff tells everyone who will listen, are voluntary, but almost everyone pays because politicians have enacted complicated laws to trick people into thinking they must pay.
The view might sound absurd, and Mr.
Schiff used to be cursed at when he voiced it.
But some Americans are taking it seriously.


Sponsorship Buys Championship Stake
The Sponsorship Group, a sports marketing holding company in London, said it had acquired 70 percent of the Championship Group, a sales promotion and sports marketing company in Atlanta and Chicago.
The terms were not disclosed.


A New Tune: Freedom Not to Pay Taxes
Twenty-six years ago, Richie Havens opened the Woodstock music festival with his signature anthem, "Freedom," a hoarsely passionate cry of the heart that expressed the rage and defiance of a youthful America against a seemingly monolithic, authoritarian Federal Government.
Some things change; it is now the right that is generally associated with decrying the centralized power in Washington.
But some things don't; Mr.
Havens still does not like the Government.
And he often expresses this in his live performances by telling audiences -- "reminding them," is how he put it in a recent telephone interview -- that paying Federal taxes is voluntary.


International Briefs; CPC International to Buy Dalgety Snacks Business
Dalgety P.L.C. of Britain said yesterday that it would sell its Golden Wonder Instant Hot Snacks business to CPC International Inc. of the United States for $:180 million, or $287 million.
Dalgety put the business, as well as its Homepride unit, for sale in February when it acquired the Quaker Oats Company's European pet foods business for $:442 million.


Sports of The Times; One Friend Explains It: That's Murph
THE missing-persons bulletin makes it official.
This is one of the weirdest Wimbledons ever.
Normally, everybody is on best behavior on these hallowed grounds except for the occasional McNasty, who got away with testiness because he was a genius.
This year, three marginal players have gotten themselves disqualified for eccentric actions through the first eight days.


Man Is Attacked and Burned
A man walking home from church in Newark yesterday was attacked and thrown into the trunk of an abandoned car that was then set on fire, the police said.
Angel Ortiz, 53, was listed in critical condition at University Hospital with burns over 20 percent of his body.


Rivera May Have Said Final Goodbye to Columbus
Mariano Rivera must have imagined he was pitching at Cooper Stadium, not Comiskey Park.
He must have thought he was opposing Class AAA hitters, not Frank Thomas and the White Sox.
No wonder, for Rivera was as cool and confident and commanding in his start today for the Yankees as he has been at Columbus this season.
What a pleasant surprise.


Why We Need Student Drug Tests; The Choice Is Ours
To the Editor:
Amid the alarmist coverage of the Supreme Court's validation of mandatory drug testing for high school athletes (front page, June 27), we must keep in mind the limited scope of the Court's holding.
That holding does not have the power to prescribe mandatory drug testing.


Jockeying for Block Grants
The Republicans act like they want to chop the last four words from President Clinton's pledge to "end welfare as we know it." They propose doing away entirely with the 60-year-old entitlement that guarantees Federal and state money for poor mothers.
Instead, the Republicans want Washington to turn fixed pots of money, called block grants, over to states to spend on the poor, or slash to inconsequence, as they please.
The block grants are being sold as a solution to the Federal deficit and a deterrent to out-of-wedlock births.
Washington would no longer spend more money every time state welfare rolls swell.
Nor could teen-agers count on government to help pay the cost of raising children.
But the G.O.P. is fast learning that block grants are no magic elixir.
The proposal has stalled in the Senate in a battle among states over how to allocate the block grant money.


Lyman G. Parratt, 87, an Expert In Precise X-Ray Measurement
Dr.
Lyman G. Parratt, an X-ray researcher and former chairman of the physics department at Cornell University, died on Thursday at his home in Redmond, Ore.
He was 87 and had lived in Ithaca, N.Y., until last year, having been associated with Cornell for more than six decades.
The cause of death was cancer, his family said.


G.O.P. WOULD GIVE PENTAGON MONEY IT DIDN'T REQUEST
For the first time in more than a decade, the budget being prepared by Congress locks in military spending at much higher levels than even the Pentagon requested and comes close to ending the post-cold-war decline in arms spending.
The Clinton Administration and some outside experts say the Republican spending plans are larded with throwbacks to the era of the Soviet threat, like more B-2 bombers and a potpourri of pork-barrel projects from amphibious assault ships to day-care centers.


A Family Awaits Notification
It was a somber Fourth of July for the Bakes family, awaiting final word on the fate of Frank Bakes of Fort Lee, believed buried in the rubble of a shopping center that collapsed in Seoul, South Korea, on Thursday.
"We still have a shred of hope, and that's what we're clinging to," Mr.
Bakes's son, Peter, of Boston, said yesterday from his mother's home in Northvale.


Professor Asks Bomber to Forgo Violence
In an open letter to the serial mail bomber known as the Unabomber, a professor at the University of California at Berkeley said that he agreed with some beliefs expressed by the self-described anarchist but that he strenuously disavowed the bomber's violent means.
The letter, published today in The San Francisco Chronicle, was written by the professor, Tom R. Tyler, in response to a package he received on Friday.
The package contained a manuscript described by the Federal Bureau of Investigation as similar to a 35,000-word manifesto sent to The New York Times and The Washington Post by the bomber last week.
The professor, who teaches social psychology, had been quoted in an article about the bomber published in The Chronicle in May.


Why We Need Student Drug Tests
To the Editor:
"Unwarranted Student Drug Testing" (editorial, June 28) is wrong in asserting that we have "adequate law enforcement remedies already available" for dealing with adolescent drug use.
Although substantial reductions in levels of drug use occurred during the 1980's, there is powerful evidence of a recent reversal of this trend among young people.


Egyptian Group Says It Tried to Kill Mubarak
A Muslim militant group battling the Egyptian Government for more than a decade took responsibility today for an attempted assassination of President Hosni Mubarak in Ethiopia last week, saying that killing Mr.
Mubarak remained its "sacred duty."
The organization, the Islamic Group, said in a statement that it will stop attacks against Egyptian Government officials and security forces when Mr.
Mubarak releases thousands of Islamic militants, lifts emergency security laws and institutes an Islamic theocracy.


Encountering A Medium, And Others
There is nothing about Rosemary Altea that would suggest she speaks to people "on the other side" -- people who have, in earthly parlance, died.
Ms.
Altea (pronounced al-TEE-ah), a 49-year-old English spiritualist, doesn't look like a fortuneteller or a seer.
She doesn't wrap silk scarves around her head, drape herself in robes or finger crystal amulets strung around her neck.


Food Notes
Where Smokers Can Smoke
Not one but two pocket-size books will be available in bookstores next week to help beleaguered smokers find where they are welcome.
"The Smokers Guide to Dining Out in New York City" by Alan Yeck (Salmeri Publishing, $9.95) gives more than 200 restaurants that allow smoking and includes the number of seats available to smokers in each.
"Lighten Up New York," edited by Michael Leo (Leo Communications, $9.95), lists more than 1,800 restaurants in New York City and the Hamptons that ban smoking, along with those that permit it and where their "smoking seats" are located.
Food ratings based on published reviews and guidebooks are given only for restaurants that allow smoking.
A New Nectarine
For the next few weeks, Balducci's, 424 Avenue of the Americas (Ninth Street), will be selling a new type of nectarine from California with a greenish skin and a deep yellow-colored flesh.
The store is calling the fruit mango-nectarines because they bear a slight resemblance to mangoes even though they taste like very delicious nectarines.
The price is $5.98 a pound.
About New England Cuisine
On July 17 from 6 to 8 P.M., Titus O. Thompson, a chef and teacher, will give a lecture about foods of New England at the Old Merchant's House Museum, 29 East Fourth Street (near Broadway).
There will be a sampling of food and wines after the lecture.
Admission is $25 and must be reserved in advance; (212) 777-1089.
Off the Menu Goodbye to Reidy's
Reidy's Restaurant, 22 East 54th Street, closed permanently last Friday.
The Irish pub, in business since 1947, will be replaced by a brewery-restaurant with Asian food that is being budgeted at $1.5 million.
Bill Reidy, the owner of Reidy's, is retiring.
With an Asian Touch
In about a month, Singapore Sally will be making its debut at 478 Amsterdam Avenue (83d Street).
Etan Nisanov, the owner of Bendix Diner in Chelsea, is opening what he calls "an Oriental restaurant with an American interpretation.
The owners of Aja (pronounced "Asia"), in the Flatiron district, plan to open a cafe in the fall at 200 Madison Avenue (36th Street), featuring interpretive Asian food.
Summer Break
A number of restaurants will be closed for vacation or will follow different schedules during the summer.
Vacation schedules for Le Cirque and Lespinasse will be determined now that hotel workers in New York have reached a tentative agreement with hotel owners on a new contract.


Environment Gets a Push From Clinton
Sensing broad public support for strong environmental protection, the Clinton Administration has begun taking a much more combative stance against a wide array of Congressional proposals that would weaken several major environmental laws.
Administration officials say the more forceful strategy, which includes increasingly frequent threats of Presidential vetoes, reflects new polling data suggesting that the Republican Congressional majorities' current barrage of votes to roll back environmental regulation will return to haunt them.


'Health Food' Good Enough for the Skeptics
Sacred Chow, 522 Hudson Street (near Charles Street), is a new food shop with quite an agenda.
Everything is prepared without animal products, refined sugar or white flour.
But this is no hippie holdover.
Cliff Preefer, the chef and owner, prepares delicious food without the strange flavors often typical of "health food." A richly seasoned tart is layered with soy and fennel "sausage," fresh tomatoes and garlic in a tender spelt and barley pastry, and a whole-wheat crust encloses a stunning fresh peach filling ($4 a slice each, $24 whole).
A lemon-caramel custard of silky tofu and tapioca could satisfy the sweetest tooth.
Salads, like those made with seaweed ($7.25 a pound) and couscous ($5 a pound), are also tasty.
The muffins are a trifle heavy, and the chocolate-chip cookies had a strong dose of mint.


Ultimate Rerun: History
At first glance, it might look as if NBC has caught the public-television bug.
Over the summer, on Sundays at 7 P.M., the network is presenting a documentary series called "Lost Civilizations," the kind of project usually associated with PBS.
What's up?
Well, it's summer, and this acquisition, officially titled "Time-Life's Lost Civilizations," is no doubt considerably cheaper than most television entertainment fare.
Better yet, with two outings so far, the series of 10 hourlong programs is holding its own against competition like ABC's "America's Funniest Videos." History lessons.
What a concept for network prime time!
Time-Life is, of course, in the business of packaging theme sets for distribution through television commercials and in video stores.
Giving the product a television showcase evidently enhances sales prospects.
That's what happened recently with the special syndication arrangement for Time-Life's 10-part "History of Rock-and-Roll." The marketing of "Lost Civilizations" keeps building until late August, when retail sales begin at $19.99 a tape or $159.99 for a complete set.
Dance the synergy shuffle.


Abbott Starts Over In Chicago
Jim Abbott is free.
Free from the criticism about the diminishing speed of his fastball, free from the chatty owner who barked the most about, of all bizarre things, his charity work.
And free from having to read about his trials on the mound.
Abbott, set free from New York when the Yankees failed to re-sign him, said Chicago agrees with him; he is even living in a big city again.


Camden Aquarium Changes Lures; Forget the Local Color, Brighter Fish May Attract Visitors
For years the accepted wisdom about the mad public love for fish under glass meant that anybody could build an aquarium, and people would turn out in the millions.
Then the New Jersey state aquarium tampered with the formula by specializing in local fish.
There are a lot of brown fish in New Jersey waters.
Brown flounder.
Brown cod.
Even much of the water is dun.
The aquarium almost single-handedly brought down the national statistics for aquarium attendance and worse, it failed to prove the engine of redevelopment envisioned for this impoverished city across the Delaware River from Philadelphia.


Israel and the P.L.O. Set Stage for Pullout
Israel and the Palestine Liberation Organization outlined an agreement yesterday on Israeli troop withdrawals in the West Bank that sets the stage for Palestinian elections and expanded self-rule.
The two sides fixed July 25 as the date for signing a completed deal.
But there was no guarantee they would meet that date because many details must still be worked out, including arrangements for troop movements, elections, transfers of civil authority and the release of jailed Palestinians.


A Breach in the Church-State Wall
The Supreme Court has blown a hole through the wall of separation the Constitution was supposed to maintain between church and state.
By a 5-to-4 vote last week the Court held that the University of Virginia must subsidize the publication of a student-run evangelist magazine just as it subsidizes other student-run publications.
The high court's reasoning, faulty in itself, holds the danger that it might later be used to justify government subsidies for other religious enterprises.
The Court's majority ruled that the First Amendment's ban on the establishment of religion was trumped in this case by the same amendment's free speech guarantee.
The state of Virginia through its university is thus required to pay the religious magazine's printing bills once it underwrites other student publications.


CHRONICLE
Her seemingly privileged childhood was not a fairy tale but a dark make-believe, the singer CARLY SIMON says in the current issue of Vanity Fair magazine.
"There was no truth, because we were living this Tennessee Williams play," she says.
"We were responding like an audience to a play, as opposed to living the lives of the characters. It was so convoluted it was unreal."
Ms.
Simon said that her mother, who died last year, had a long affair with a man hired to be the companion of the singer's brother, and that her father, the book publisher Richard L. Simon, had a long liaison with a woman 18 years his senior.
Ms.
Simon said this unsettled home life helped explain her stammer, stage fright, neuroses, obsession with sex, and success in music, The Associated Press reported.


Fight Erupts In Prison, Injuring 13
A fight involving 300 inmates, apparently over a stolen gold chain, erupted on Monday evening at the state prison in Gouverneur, N.Y., leaving about 13 injured, one seriously, officials said yesterday.
The fight at the medium-security prison, about 25 miles from the Canadian border, pitted a group of black inmates against a group of Hispanic prisoners.
But officials refused to characterize the upheaval as racial.
James Flateau, a spokesman for the Department of Correctional Services, said the incident was still under investigation and would not comment on a possible cause.


Sports of The Times; Indians and Fans Help Revive a Sick Game
AT close of day, an attorney for the law firm of Reminger &amp; Reminger shut his office door on the eighth floor of the 113 Building on St.
Clair Avenue in downtown Cleveland Monday, pulled down the window shades, removed his pinstriped suit and glasses and donned his Cleveland Indians cap and Cleveland Indians T-shirt.
Suddenly, Gary Goldwasser, as on numerous other occasions this year, was transformed from a mild-mannered lawyer into, well, SuperFan!
And, with briefcase in hand, off to the ball game he went -- Jacobs Field is just a few blocks away.
He is not alone.
And won't be alone.


Gambling Industry Sees Gains
The gambling industry celebrated the holiday with news that business is up over this time last year.
New revenue figures from the Casino Association of New Jersey show an increase of 11.5 percent over June 1994.
Eleven of the 12 gaming halls saw increases, posting $318.9 million for June.
Caesar's was the only casino to decline.
DAVID STOUT


I.N.S. Withdraws a Helping Hand
IF the Immigration and Naturalization Service in New York City gets its way, those huddled masses yearning to breathe free who turn up at its offices at 26 Federal Plaza will have to cope with market forces.
The I.N.S. is getting tough.
Maybe it is impossible to keep track of green card violations and it is hard to assure humane conditions for people awaiting deportation.
But taking on a 63-year-old nonprofit group authorized by Federal law to help newcomers obtain identification photographs at low cost, that's another matter.


Violence Flares Again on Ulster Streets, Ending Brief Lull
The street violence that raged into the early hours of Tuesday morning in Roman Catholic areas of Belfast and other parts of Northern Ireland resumed Tuesday night, with the police reporting at least 50 incidents involving the hijacking and burning of cars and the hurling of firebombs at vehicles and police officers.
A spokesman for the Royal Ulster Constabulary, or police, said at 12:45 A.M. that there was "general disorder" in Catholic areas in West and North Belfast.
There were no immediate reports of injuries or arrests.
The continuing violence is the first sustained public disorder since the Irish Republican Army began its cease-fire 10 months ago.


Metropolitan Diary
DEAR DIARY:
A silver-haired man boards the Second Avenue bus.
The seats are occupied; standees fill the aisles.
A college-age woman, observing the gent, rises and offers him her seat.
The aged man pauses a moment.
No words are exchanged as he grasps the overhead bar with both hands and "chins up" two times as the student and others observe the muscular scene.
JOSEPH I. MIZER  SUMMER'S BOUNTY  Summer brings us outdoor music:
Beethoven, Bach and Boccherini.
Unfortunately, it also brings
an unstoppable flood
of squash and zucchini. PETER FRIEDMAN Dear Diary:
A Long Island Rail Road train stops at Freeport, and a 20-something couple get on and sit beside me.
He has a resonant voice and is relating his life story and his philosophy of life, including a lot of pop-psych jargon.
I become engrossed in my book and shut out his voice.
But as the train leaves Jamaica, he begins to expound on women, saying that they are essentially inferior and need male guidance, that they really can't function without male assistance.
I close my book and glance across the aisle and make eye contact with another woman.
We both roll our eyes and communicate wordlessly as the diatribe goes on.
When the train slows for Penn Station and everyone stands up, I turn to him and say, "You know nothing about women!" Spontaneous applause -- the car is full of women.
The train stops.
He races to the door, and just before it opens, he leans into the car and shouts, "You are all in denial!" VERA MEYERSON Spotted by C. Wetter of Stamford, Conn. in local newspaper of Sedona, Ariz.:
A SEDONA FIRST  In response to recent proclamations from the offices of the Attorney General, we are proud to announce that for the health of your loved ones, all of our caskets are smoke-free.
Sedona Funeral Home Dear Diary:
I've seen a number of odd sights in my daily walks from the Staten Island Ferry to my office at the World Financial Center -- a gaggle of French and Japanese tourists dancing the hokeypokey while waiting to board the Miss Liberty; a crowd of lethargic Wall Street types lounging around the Battery Park benches (they turned out to be movie extras) -- but nothing beats the sight I saw at the Battery Park City esplanade on a recent June morning.
There was the usual sprinkling of early morning strollers, dog walkers and joggers.
Then, I suddenly realized that a rather large animal was galloping toward me at full speed from the north end of the esplanade.
It was a New York City police horse in full patrol gear, sans police officer.
I and a security guard moved out of harm's way and stared in stunned silence as the chestnut-colored animal ran past us, heading toward the south end of the esplanade.
Apparently making a last-minute, but wise, decision not to charge headlong into the wisteria gazebo, and thence into the drink, the horse made a sharp left, hind legs slipping and sliding and raising a cloud of dust.
Then it disappeared, heading in the general direction of the Brooklyn-Battery Tunnel and perhaps onward to greener pastures somewhere out on Long Island.
I turned to look back in the direction the runaway horse had come from and saw two more police horses approaching -- riders attached -- in hot pursuit.
From this vantage point, of course, the runaway could not be seen.
The first cop looked at us questioningly.
I couldn't resist.
I pointed and yelled, "He went that-a-way!" MARIANNE SCARINO


No Headline
"He was the best player who never won Wimbledon." DON BUDGE, tennis champion, on the death of Richard (Pancho) Gonzalez  [ D9:1. ]


AT THE NATION'S TABLE: Portland, Ore.; An Imaginary Cafe That Serves Real Food
While many people may imagine opening a restaurant, Caprial Pence may be the only chef to list an imaginary one in the telephone book.
The listing is for "Caprial's Cafe," a cooking show, and Ms.
Pence has been its host for the last year on the Learning Channel.
She said that so many viewers called information in Portland, Ore., to make reservations at the cafe that she and her husband, John, decided to list it with the telephone number of the Westmoreland Bistro, the name of the real restaurant and wine shop they run.


Tragic Figure Beneath A Crown Of Fruit
Decades before celebrities were dissected for their iconographic significance, Carmen Miranda rose to become Hollywood's reigning symbol of the Latin American spirit.
Portraying vivacious, fiery-tempered women with names like Rosita and Chiquita in a series of 1940's movies for 20th Century Fox, the star, wearing an elaborate fruit-basket headdress, sang tongue-twisting pop-samba numbers while dancing sinuously and flashing her dazzling smile.
In lavish production numbers imitated by everyone from Esther Williams to Bette Midler, Miranda embodied camp before the concept was invented.
At the same time, her screen image purveyed a garish cartoon of Latin American culture that was condescending for being so relentlessly frivolous.


Portuguese Group Gives Fado a Modern Twist
The hauntingly melancholic music known as fado is as much a part of Portugal's identity as, say, its tawny port wine.
But if wine improves with age, fado has simply been growing old.
Living off its former glory but stuck in its ways, it has become a must for tourists but of little interest to a younger generation brought up on rock and pop.
That, at least, was the view of two young Portuguese musicians in the early 1980's.
In a country that was at last opening up after decades of isolation and dictatorship, fado seemed to represent the past.
So the two men opted for rock, seeking a Portuguese sound through their own compositions.
Yet unavoidably, their music was still derivative of imported rock.


Russia Says It Will Keep Army In Chechnya Permanently
In what served as a rebuke to the Chechen rebel leader's renewed demand for independence, President Boris N. Yeltsin of Russia issued a decree today ordering Russian military units to be permanently stationed in Chechnya.
Moscow has said all along that it planned to keep troops in Chechnya if and when a political settlement to the conflict there is reached.
In exchange for a substantive withdrawal of troops, Chechen negotiators had tentatively agreed to return to what was the military status quo before the war.
But the timing of the decree, set against new obstacles in the peace talks, mainly seemed aimed at reasserting Russian authority over the secessionist region.


A Mussel's Short Trip To a Bed of Linguine
MUSSELS come in at least three different states of preparedness: loose, complete with their grit and dirt; in a plastic bag and very clean, with only their beards intact, and already poached.


Did U.S. See the Light In Japan Trade Talks?
To the Editor:
"Why the U.S. Takes Guff From Weaklings" (Week in Review, July 2) suggests that the United States made concessions in the trade talks with Japan because the Clinton Administration was dealing with a weak coalition Government in Tokyo that could not be pushed too far.


Echoes of the Gilded Age: A Mansion Rises on 72d Street
This is about a New York City mansion with five fireplaces, a swimming pool in the basement and two gardens -- a lower one for post-swim strolls and an upper one reachable by a bridge from the house.
The mansion is not a century old and (surprise) does not have a name like Carnegie, Morgan, Mellon or Rockefeller in front of it.
In fact (bigger surprise), it has not even been built yet.


International Briefs; Abbey National Bids To Buy First National
Abbey National P.L.C. said yesterday that it had offered to buy First National Finance Corporation, a consumer credit company, for about $:285 million, or $453 million.
The deal would double Abbey National's 1.5 percent share of the unsecured lending market in Britain, a market dominated by four big banks: Barclays, National Westminster, Midland and Lloyds.
Abbey is Britain's second-largest mortgage lender and the country's fourth-largest banking company, but it has lagged behind in consumer finance as a result of its origins as a building society, broadly equivalent to a savings and loan in the United States.
Abbey became a bank in 1989.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Fuji Complaint by Kodak Shrugged Off in Japan  To officials at Eastman Kodak, perhaps, their complaint charging Fuji Photo Film and the Japanese Government with conspiring to block Kodak's entry into the Japanese photographic market might be as clear as a well-focused snapshot.
But in Japan, the case seems more blurry than that.


After a 5-Day Linkup, a Flawless Undocking


Bailey Rides an Old Horse And 3 Others to Victory
They have run the Suburban Handicap in New York for 109 years, and it has been won by such heroes as Forego, Foolish Pleasure, Easy Goer and the last two years by Devil His Due.
So it became something of a footnote to history yesterday when the traditional race was won by a 7-year-old retread named Key Contender, who was bought and rejuvenated last November by Carl Lizza and his trainer, Jose Martin.
Key Contender outran a smart but not particularly distinguished field of nine other horses, beating Kissin Kris to the wire by one length, with Federal Funds third.
It was the first time in his career of 48 races that Key Contender had raced a mile and a quarter and the first time he had won a stakes race.
And, yes, he earned $210,000 for winning, which was more than the $170,000 shelled out by Lizza to buy him from Paul Mellon's Rokeby Stable.


INSIDE
Squatters Try to Seize East Village Building
Squatters briefly took over a city-owned tenement in the East Village, six weeks after they were evicted, but police officers regained control of the building early today.
A dozen people were arrested.
Page B1.
Clue in the Mubarak Attack
Muslim militants battling Egypt took responsibility for an attempted assassination of President Hosni Mubarak last week.
Page A3.
Markets Poised for Rate Cut
As the Federal Reserve considers interest rates, the key may lie in how well the markets would withstand a move not to cut rates.
Page D1.


Hudek Needs Surgery
JOHN HUDEK, who had 16 saves in 42 games last year and leads the Houston Astros with 7 saves, needs surgery to correct problems in his right arm and will miss the rest of this season.


Man Charged With Helping Ill Wife Kill Herself
A man who helped his gravely ill wife commit suicide with a drug overdose in their Upper West Side apartment yesterday was charged with manslaughter, the police said.
Myrna Lebov, 52, had suffered from multiple sclerosis since 1973, but her condition had deteriorated rapidly in the last 18 months, finally placing her in a wheelchair, the police and neighbors said.


Excerpts From One Right-Wing Author's Script for the Future
The following are excerpts from "The Turner Diaries," a novel first published in 1978 that has become a textbook for right-wing extremists.
The novel, set in the future as the newly discovered diary of a participant in a race war at the end of the 20th century that establishes a New Era, portrays a revolution pitting the Organization, an underground white group, against a Jewish-dominated Government, blacks and other members of minorities, who are killed or deported.
As the story begins, the Cohen Act has made gun ownership illegal and the Supreme Court has voided rape laws as discriminatory (because men cannot be raped), leading to the widespread rape of white women by black men.
Banding together in clandestine cells, groups of whites establish the Organization, financed by robbing Jewish merchants and counterfeiting.
They blow up the F.B.I. building, stage a mortar attack on Congress, establish a beachhead in California and finally triumph, with the hero perishing in a suicide nuclear-bomb attack on the Pentagon in a light plane.


International Briefs; New Warburg Venture Fires Chief Economist
SBC Warburg, formed at the start of the week by the merger of the investment banking businesses of the Swiss Bank Corporation and S. G. Warburg Group P.L.C., has dismissed George Magnus, Warburg's chief economist, and 40 other Warburg employees, those close to the situation said yesterday.
Spokesmen for Warburg and Swiss Bank declined to comment.
SBC Warburg, which has more than 11,000 employees, is expected to lay off about 1,000 over the next four weeks, with 60 percent of the reductions on the Warburg side and 40 percent at Swiss Bank. (Bloomberg Business News)


Engineer's Ice Plant Helps Power County
In this northern region of San Diego County, residents are accustomed to heat, horses and avocado orchards.
But now they are getting used to an incongruous addition -- a complex that creates electricity, steam and hockey rinks.
Therein lies the tale of a power entrepreneur who understands that business, like hockey, is about playing the angles.
In this case the angles were his technical knowledge of cogeneration power production, the local utility's begrudging obligation to pay him a juicy premium for this power, and Escondido's willingness to grant him tax breaks if he helps revitalize a blighted area.


Three Executives Named at BBDO
BBDO New York, a unit of the Omnicom Group, has made three top executive appointments.
Robert J. McKinley, 50, was named executive vice president and worldwide account director on the Mars Inc. account, assuming responsibilities from Susan Gianinno, who was executive vice president and group executive before leaving to join the J. Walter Thompson New York unit of the WPP Group as executive vice president and general manager.
Mr.
McKinley was previously executive vice president and general manager at the McCann-Erickson Los Angeles unit of the Interpublic Group of Companies.


Markets Closed
All financial and commodity markets in the United States were closed yesterday in observance of the Fourth of July holiday.
Most markets in other countries were open.


Note to Readers
The Op-Ed page welcomes unsolicited manuscripts.
Because of the volume of submissions, however, we regret that we cannot acknowledge an article or return it unless it is accompanied by a self-addressed, stamped envelope.
If manuscripts are accepted for publication, authors will be notified within two weeks.


Milbury To Become Islanders' Next Coach
The Islanders, as expected, have scheduled a news conference this morning at which they will appoint Mike Milbury the sixth head coach in team history.
Although contract terms have not been given, the 43-year-old Milbury, a former defenseman, head coach and assistant general manager of the Boston Bruins, is believed to have agreed to a five-year deal in the $4 million range.
That would put him in the upper echelon of National Hockey League coaches as far as salary is concerned.


Foreign Affairs; Half A Loaf
In trying to determine whether the latest U.S.-Japan trade accord on autos is a good deal or a bad one, I'm reminded of what Chairman Mao reportedly said when asked what he thought of the French Revolution: "It's too soon to tell."
To be sure, it is troubling to note how happy the Japanese are with this deal.
Any deal Japan is happy with is a deal the U.S. should worry about.
Japan is a country with structurally closed markets and a $130 billion global trade surplus.
If your negotiating outcome with Japan is "I'm O.K., you're O.K.," then you're probably not O.K.


A Rough Year For Farmers Appears Likely
Cold, wet spring weather across much of the Midwest, followed by a searing dry spell in early June, has set the table for what could be a rough year for many farmers.
An average or even slightly better than average grain and soybean harvest is still possible, analysts say, but shortfalls seem more likely.
Problems with this year's crop already are translating into higher prices for livestock feed, costlier ingredients for food and beverage companies and higher prices for industrial consumers of agricultural products.
Little of the expense has filtered through to consumers, but that could change if continued weather problems hamper the current harvest of winter wheat and the progress of crops planted this spring.


Device Transforms Brain Surgery
TO Christine Tejada and her family in Brooklyn, the procedure known as Gamma Knife radiosurgery is nothing short of a miracle.
When she was 8, Christine was found to have a life-threatening blood vessel malformation in her brain and was scheduled to undergo risky invasive surgery that would have hospitalized her for perhaps 10 days and been followed by weeks or months of recovery and rehabilitation.
Instead, she was treated successfully in Chicago without so much as a slit in her scalp.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-8  TORIES VOTE TO KEEP MAJOR  John Major was easily re-elected as leader of the ruling Conservative Party, insuring his survival as Prime Minister of Britain but not gaining the decisive triumph that would have stamped his authority on a fractious party.
A1  CHINA'S SHADOW OVER HONG KONG  Signs of Britain's waning presence are becoming more apparent in Hong Kong, as is the looming shadow of China, which is take over the colony in June 1997.
Some say Hong Kong has long since ceased to be independent from China.
A1


With a Complex Space Ballet, U.S. and Russian Linkup Ends
Whirling through space at nearly five miles a second, 10 American and Russian astronauts today took apart the world's largest spacecraft as easily and flawlessly as they had put it together five days ago, ending the first East-West linkup in two decades and clearing the way for future cooperative ventures.
The elaborate disassembly began early today as a Russian Soyuz spaceship carrying two Russian astronauts undocked from the sprawling space complex, made up of the 112-foot-long Russian space station Mir and the 122-foot-long American space shuttle Atlantis.


Too Brilliant for the World's Good
Was Leni Riefenstahl a Nazi?
Or a Nazi collaborator?
Or just a Nazi employee?
More than 60 years after the making of her masterpiece, "Triumph of the Will," the questions persist.
And in a long segment of "The Wonderful, Horrible Life of Leni Riefenstahl," she answers them, in her fashion.
The fashion is to zig and zag, like an actress trying out her emotional range, from outbursts of impatience to airs of innocence to complaints of unfairness to repeated assertions of the artist's prerogatives: she was no Nazi, just an artist.
Tonight's three-hour biography, which was shown at the 1993 New York Film Festival, finds Ms.
Riefenstahl looking and sounding remarkably youthful, all things considered: smartly got up; memory intact, though occasionally at odds with the memories of others, and full of pep, particularly when justifying her political or apolitical past.


Japanese See Kodak Case As Hardly Black and White
To officials at the Eastman Kodak Company, perhaps, their complaint charging Fuji Photo Film and the Japanese Government with conspiring to block Kodak's entry into the Japanese photographic market might be as clear as a well-focused snapshot on a bright summer's day.
But here the case seems a lot more blurry and indistinct than that.
On Monday, the United States trade representative, Mickey Kantor, said his office would investigate charges by Kodak that it had been denied fair access to the Japanese market during the last 20 years.
Today, Fuji and Japanese Government officials dismissed Kodak as a sour-grapes loser and ruled out negotiations concerning the new trade fight that looms between Japan and the United States.


Pennies That Add Up to $16.98: Why CD's Cost So Much
For years, music lovers have been complaining about high CD prices.
If a CD costs as much to have manufactured as a vinyl record, their logic goes, then why does it cost so much more to buy?
The response from record labels has been to raise CD prices even higher.
Rod Stewart's new CD, "A Spanner in the Works" (Warner Brothers), which arrived in stores last month, is a good example.
It carries a $16.98 list price, the same as most CD's by established stars, and more than 100 times the cost of the materials used to manufacture it.


Peace Talks Open Anew in Mexico


Wine Talk
THE famous pianist and sometime Polish statesman Ignace Jan Paderewski liked zinfandel.
On the eve of World War I and at the height of his fame as an artist, he bought a 2,000-acre property, Rancho San Ignacio, near Paso Robles, in San Luis Obispo County, on the central coast of California.
Ten years later, after he had served a term as Prime Minister of the Polish state created by the Treaty of Versailles and had made a triumphant return to the concert stage, he planted a zinfandel vineyard at his California property.
When the vines matured, the wine was made for him by the nearby York Mountain Winery, then, as now, one of the best-known wineries between Los Angeles and San Francisco.


Woman Accosted at an A.T.M.
Gloria Wroten was using an automated teller machine at her bank early Monday when she was approached by a man who pointed a handgun at her, then fled on foot when she screamed.
Her husband, Charles Hightower, gave chase in his car and saw two men on a mountain bike.
One fired a shot at him, the police said.
Mr.
Hightower ducked, and when he looked up the men were gone.


Cooling Off on the Mall


CHRONICLE
A man who said he was WHITNEY HOUSTON's brother has agreed to leave her alone.
STEVEN J. MARRIOTT of Lloyd Harbor, L.I., signed court papers on Monday consenting to have no contact with the singer, her family or her management company.
The agreement, approved by Superior Court Judge Kenneth MacKenzie in Morristown, N.J., was reached after Ms.
Houston sued Mr.
Marriott last month, The Associated Press reported.
The suit said Mr.
Marriott sent Ms.
Houston flowers at her management company's office in Fort Lee, N.J., and called her several times demanding to speak with her.


New President at Whitman
David M. Barse has been named president of M. J. Whitman Inc., a securities brokerage and money management firm known for its skill in trading the debt of troubled companies.
Mr.
Barse, who had been chief operating officer of the firm, is succeeding Martin J. Whitman, who will remain chairman and chief executive.
As president, Mr.
Barse, who is 33, will oversee the daily operations of the firm and its subsidiaries.
He joined Whitman in 1991 as general counsel after working as a lawyer specializing in bankruptcy, corporate and securities law.


Cubs Hit Saberhagen Not Often, But Early
The instant that Brian McRae lined Bret Saberhagen's second pitch of the game out of the park last night, you just knew it was going to be another long evening for the Mets at Shea Stadium.
McRae, as it turned out, provided just about the only offense for either side.
Along with his homer, he tripled and doubled, just missed another extra-base hit with a drive that landed a few inches foul, and scored the only three runs of the game.


Journal; The Lost Frontier
For those of us old enough to recall dropping everything to watch the black-and-white TV image of Alan Shepard's 15-minute ride in a space capsule in 1961 -- or who remember just where we were when Neil Armstrong took those first steps on the moon -- it was heartening to see the space program capture the country's imagination once again over Independence Day weekend.
Except for one small detail.
It wasn't America's space program that thrilled hearts -- it was Hollywood's.
Though there actually are some NASA astronauts up in the sky at this very minute, they are hardly the ones captivating the country.
The astronauts of choice are Tom Hanks and Kevin Bacon -- not whatstheirnames.
The space vehicle of the moment is the ill-fated Apollo 13 of 1970 -- not the trouble-free shuttle Atlantis of 1995.
And while millions of paying customers lined up to make "Apollo 13" the No. 1 box-office smash of last weekend, evidence suggests that hardly anyone dropped anything to watch live TV coverage of Atlantis's rendezvous with the Russian space station Mir last Thursday.
The story didn't even make the first segment of the networks' evening news.


Courtyard Caves In at Harlem Apartments
As several children played a few feet away, a section of the courtyard of a city-owned apartment building in Harlem collapsed on Monday afternoon.
No one was injured, but the six-story building was sufficiently undermined that city officials evacuated all 30 families, the police said.
A police spokesman, Officer Arek Tarih, said the 15-by-4-foot section of the courtyard in the building at 550 West 144th Street collapsed about 5:30 P.M.
Monday.
The rubble left a hole 10 feet deep and exposed a rusting girder below the 30-foot-square courtyard, just inside an archway on the south side of 144th Street.


Corrections
Some tables on trading in futures in Business Day yesterday were published in error in some editions.
The tables for cocoa, coffee, sugar and cotton and the tables for energy and metals futures reflected trading on Friday.
Their markets in New York were closed on Monday.


Armstrong Lifts His Sights
Lance Armstrong is ready, willing and, he hopes, able.
About able, he'll know in a few weeks.
About ready and willing, he has no doubts right now.
"I'm definitely fit, much more fit than I've ever been in my life, ever," he said.
"I feel better, I feel stronger, my tests are better and my head is great."


Indian Politics Derail a Big Power Project
A few months ago, it seemed like an ideal match.
On one side was India, now open to foreign investment but starved of the electrical power needed for economic growth.
On the other was a consortium of major American companies with a contract to invest nearly $3 billion in an advanced power plant outside Bombay.
When paperwork on the contract was completed in January, the consortium, led by the Enron Corporation of Houston, a big natural-gas supplier, was the jewel in the crown of a budding new business relationship between India and the United States.


Martinez Survives Without a Red Carpet
Conchita Martinez, the defending Wimbledon champion who hasn't exactly been treated like royalty by the committee that doles out the coveted assignments for Center Court, left herself just two steps short of a perfect defense of her one and only Grand Slam crown today.
Back on Center Court after being banished to the grassy suburbs of this complex ever since she made her mandatory first-round reappearance on the main stage, the third-seeded Spaniard survived a strange interlude with eighth-seeded Gabriela Sabatini, 7-5, 7-6 (7-5), in the quarterfinals.


Accounts
*
Heinz U.S.A., Pittsburgh, a division of the H. J. Heinz Co., to Dymun-Nelson &amp; Co., Pittsburgh, to handle advertising for Heinz specialty sauce brands like seafood cocktail sauce.
The accounts of those brands, long inactive, were previously handled by the Leo Burnett Co., Chicago, which resigned them by mutual agreement in November.
The billings were not disclosed.


One Man's Journey From Academia to Extremism
For nearly two decades, as leader of a white supremacist organization called the National Alliance, William L. Pierce of Mill Point, W.Va., has held a prominent position among Americans with strong racist, anti-Semitic or anti-government views.
A former professor of physics and research scientist, he became a leader of the America Nazi Party and, in 1978, wrote a novel, "The Turner Diaries," that quickly became a favorite of right-wing fringe groups around the country.
In graphic detail, the story tells how an underground group kills Jews and blacks as part of an overthrow of the Government.


Running the Offense, When to Run Is Enough
Tomas Murray lost his right basketball shoe but hardly a step as he stopped to retrieve the shoe, slipped it back on and then stole the ball from the player he was guarding.
Those rapid-fire movements during a game held to assess talent at the Special Olympics World Games last Saturday would have evoked cheers at any basketball game.
But in this instance, they elicited a roar, because Murray has only one leg and, without a prosthesis, runs up and down the court on that one appendage.


People
*
Gary Elliott was named to the new position of senior partner and executive group director on the I.B.M. software account at Ogilvy &amp; Mather Los Angeles, a unit of the WPP Group.
Mr.
Elliott was previously a senior vice president and group management director at D'Arcy Masius Benton &amp; Bowles, Los Angeles.


Christopher Vincent In Venture With FGI
FGI Inc. in Chapel Hill, N.C., and Christopher Vincent Inc. in New York have formed a joint venture under which FGI has acquired a 50 percent stake in Vincent, and Christopher Vincent has acquired a minority interest in FGI.
The terms were not disclosed.


In Planning Takeover of Newark Schools, New Jersey Shifts Its Style
The State Department of Education, often vilified in Jersey City and Paterson for imposing school takeovers that have failed to improve student performance, is attempting to change its style as it moves on Wednesday toward the takeover of Newark's unwieldy, crumbling school system.
Stung by criticism that its outside management teams had too little local experience and were too stuck to their desks in Trenton to effect change, state officials are trying to paint the Newark takeover as something different.
State officials have set up a toll-free telephone number for concerned parents to ask questions or offer advice.
They stress that the final management team will be chosen only after consultations with local ethnic groups and have sought advice from Mayor Sharpe James, who no longer opposes the move.


Republicans Pursuing Campaign Foot Soldiers
Jean Dimock caught up with Phil Gramm near the stand selling "Clinocchio" T-shirts.
"You're going to keep your pro-life stand?" she asked.
Senator Gramm assured her he would.


Bombing's Survivors Stage Thanksgiving in July
In a loud blast of fireworks and music, this city tonight celebrated the nation's birthday and its own sense of gratitude and hope even in the wake of last April's terrorist bombing of the Federal Building here.
The day's festivities began, not with firecrackers or with drums, but with the sound of hands clapping and shouts of "Thank you!" as throngs of Oklahomans gathered to honor the rescuers who came from around the nation to help them and came back today to see them again.


Psychiatrist to Examine Woman in Alomar Case
The woman charged with threatening to kill ROBERTO ALOMAR of the Toronto Blue Jays was ordered yesterday to undergo a three-day psychiatric exam to determine if she is fit to stand trial.
Justice TOM MERCER of Ontario Court's General Division ordered the assessment for TRICIA MILLER, 31, at a hearing after a request from her lawyer.


What Exactly Does a Jackbooted Thug Wear?
To the Editor:
It is most curious that among the multitude of references to and repetitions of the word jackboot (mainly with regard to the epithet "jackbooted government thugs" by Wayne LaPierre, the National Rifle Association's executive vice president), there has not been a definition of what exactly a jackboot is.
An informal survey confirms that the meaning of jackboot is not generally known.
Now again, in your June 28 news article about the worldwide spread of skinhead violence, appears this statement: "Cruel history has taught us that we dare not ignore the first sounds of jackboots."


Pancho Gonzalez, U.S. Tennis Champion, Dies at 67
Richard (Pancho) Gonzalez, a two-time national champion whose pride and passion on a tennis court were as compelling as his natural talent, died Monday night in Las Vegas, Nev.
He was 67.
The cause of death was stomach cancer, said Gonzalez's former wife, Rita Agassi Gonzalez, who said that Gonzalez had entered Sunrise Hospital two weeks ago with a fever.
He seemed to be improving and was watching Wimbledon every day, she said, but then he developed pneumonia and doctors found that the cancer had spread.
"Pancho deteriorated very quickly," said Agassi Gonzalez, who is Andre Agassi's older sister.


Israel and P.L.O. Reach Accord on Pullout and Election
After months of failure and frustration, Israel and the Palestine Liberation Organization outlined an agreement today on Israeli Army withdrawals in the West Bank that set the stage for Palestinian elections and expanded self-rule.
The two sides fixed July 25 for signing a completed deal.
But there was no guarantee they would meet that target because many details must still be worked out, including arrangements for West Bank troop movements, elections, transfers of civil authority and releases of Palestinians from Israeli jails.


World News Briefs; 22 Berlusconi Executives To Stand Trial in Italy
A judge in Milan ordered 22 executives of former Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi's Fininvest corporation today to stand trial on corruption charges relating to the company's advertising business.
Earlier today, another Milan magistrate postponed until September a decision on whether Mr.
Berlusconi should be tried on charges of tax fraud in a real estate transaction.


All They Need on the Fourth of July: Hot Grill, Hot Weather
Surrounded by 20 family members and two barbecue grills, one sizzling with chicken and ribs and the second with a hefty pork shoulder, Amelia Thompson gazed around the patch of green she had claimed at Jacob Riis Park in Queens, looked up at the hazy blue sky and proclaimed that summer had arrived.
Mrs.
Thompson, 54, of East New York, was in the Rockaway Peninsula park to celebrate the Fourth of July with thousands of others enjoying the peak day of the long holiday weekend.


Record of Violations Found At Courtyard Collapse Site
New York City housing officials have been trying since 1992 to arrest a landlord who is a principal owner of a Harlem building where part of the courtyard collapsed Monday, an official with the Department of Housing Preservation and Development said yesterday.
The owner, Moishe Bodner, is well known to officials for "serious violations" of the city housing code at a number of buildings, including the site of the collapse, said Deborah Boatright, a spokeswoman for the Department of Housing Preservation and Development, and several court cases have been pursued against him.
Mr.
Bodner is a principal in the corporation that owns the building, Two B Holdings, Ms.
Boat right said.
She added that the corporation's owners are currently in bankruptcy proceedings.


Anthony Quinn The Number It Takes to Tango
ANTHONY QUINN turned 80 recently. What has he learned?
"Not to smoke, not to drink and not to get involved with women like you," he says.
Excuse me?
"An American woman," he says.
"I have to be married to a European woman. I avoid women like you because you challenge me and I don't like to be challenged. I was taught by my father that the only way to fight with a woman is to grab your hat and run."


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article yesterday about a new debate over abortions late in pregnancy referred incorrectly to a technique described graphically by the newsletter of the National Right to Life Committee.
Like most of the article, the newsletter dealt with a rarely used procedure known as "intact D &amp; E," for dilation and evacuation, in which the fetus is delivered intact -- not the more widely used D &amp; E, in which the fetus is broken apart inside the uterus and then suctioned out.


Whites Benefit Too
To the Editor:
"On Race, It's Thomas v. an Old Ideal" by David J. Garrow (Week in Review, July 2) discusses Justice Clarence Thomas's opinion that federally enforced school integration implies that all-black education is inherently inferior.
No one seems to ask whether segregated schooling (de facto or de jure) is healthy for white Americans.


Takeo Fukuda, 90, Ex-Premier And Backer of China Pact, Dies
Takeo Fukuda, who as Japan's Prime Minister from 1976 to 1978 was instrumental in concluding a treaty of peace and friendship with China, died yesterday in the hospital of Tokyo Women's Medical College.
He was 90 and lived in Tokyo.
The cause was chronic emphysema, the Kyodo news service reported.


Florida Governor Stricken by Mild Stroke
Gov.
Lawton Chiles, a 65-year-old Democrat serving his second term, was hospitalized here today after experiencing a temporary blockage in the blood flow to his brain.
Mr.
Chiles, who served three terms in the Senate before winning the Florida governorship in 1990 and narrowly winning re-election last November, was stricken by what his doctors called a transient ischemic attack.
The condition is often a precursor to a severe stroke, said Dr.
Charles Maitland, a neurologist who treated the Governor.


Centura Banks Inc.(CBC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Jun 30


Sports of The Times; The Real College Champions
IF graduating is the premise justifying so-called student-athletes at America's colleges, too many athletes are not students at our institutions of what is apparently higher perspiration, not higher learning.
By itself, that is hardly news.
Virtually a century ago educators discovered that, no matter how unstudious the student, a tradition of winning teams in leather helmets translated to a tradition of ticket-buyers and alumni contributions.


Comptroller Sues to Block Pataki Pension Fund Plan
State Comptroller H. Carl McCall filed suit today to prevent Gov.
George E. Pataki from using money in a special pension fund to balance the state budget, a move that could open a $110 million hole in the spending plan.
The fund in question was created in 1970 to augment the pensions of retired state and local workers whose benefits had been eroded by inflation.
But the Legislature never touched the money until last month, when it authorized Mr.
Pataki to use $110 million of the $360 million account to help close a projected budget shortfall of nearly $5 billion.


Devils Talks Are Continuing
More talks were held yesterday between officials of the Devils and the New Jersey Sports and Exposition Authority in an attempt to resolve the Stanley Cup champions' future at Byrne Meadowlands Arena.
"There's nothing new, just that discussions are ongoing," said John Samerjan, a spokesman for the authority.


Corrections
An obituary on June 28 about Marvin Camras, an electrical engineer and inventor, referred incompletely to the invention of magnetic tape recording.
While Mr.
Camras received a patent in 1944 for "method and means of magnetic recording," related technology existed earlier, especially in Germany.
In 1928, Fritz Pfleumer received a German patent for a magnetic recording tape.


PENTAGON DIVIDED BY RADAR JAMMER
For nearly three years, 102 electronic radar-jamming devices have gathered dust in a Navy warehouse in Indiana while Pentagon officials argued about what to do with them after testers concluded the devices were not fit for use.
Now the Navy has found a solution: send some to Marine Corps pilots patrolling the skies over Bosnia, who asked for the devices because they believe the jammers have to be better than what they have -- Vietnam-era issue.


No Delay of Game Now On Giants' Draft Picks
The Giants have signed one of their fourth-round draft picks, the former Nebraska offensive lineman Rob Zatechka, according to his agent, Joe Linta.
Zatechka is believed to have signed a three-year deal worth about $700,000 (including a $195,000 signing bonus).
Although that is important -- Zatechka is the first of the Giants' 1995 draft picks to sign -- there is something more significant about the agreement: the timing.
While he has been criticized in the past for negotiating slowly, General Manager George Young has done anything but tarry when it has come to this season's draft picks.


CHRONICLE
A piece of Camelot -- Hammersmith Farm, the Newport, R.I., estate where John F. Kennedy and Jacqueline Bouvier's wedding reception was held -- was put up for sale yesterday.
The asking price is $9.5 million.
The 50-acre property is currently owned by a group of 10 Massachusetts businessmen who want to be known only as Camelot Gardens &amp; Associates, CHRIS BURR, the real-estate agent, said yesterday.
The group bought the property in 1977 for $850,000 from Janet Lee Auchincloss, Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis's mother, and has been giving tours there.


Accord Is Close on Seles
Negotiations among the top players regarding Monica Seles's protected ranking upon her return are coming to a close.
Seles has not played competitively since being stabbed during a match in Hamburg, Germany two years ago.


Where's the Stealth In Clinton Adviser?
To the Editor:
"The Stealth Strategist Refocusing Clinton" (front page, July 1), your article about the resurgent Clinton adviser Dick Morris, seemed both confusing and unfair.


Whitman Takes On Labor for Makeover
There were plenty of cheers for Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman over the long holiday weekend.
She signed the latest installment of her 30 percent income tax cut, she wrenched a state labor contract to a settlement on terms highly favorable to the state, and then finessed a potentially crippling holiday strike by toll takers on the state's major highways.
This first-term Governor, who has become a national symbol of state tax-cutting, is to a great degree accomplishing her plans to remake New Jersey into a leaner, more business-hungry state by taking on the state's 60,000 unionized employees.
Her determination was clear over the holiday in the confrontation with toll takers on the New Jersey Turnpike and the Garden State Parkway, when the roadway authorities she controls deployed strike-breaking replacement workers to staff the tollbooths.


34-Year Veteran Quits Salomon
Salomon Brothers continues to lose top executives.
William A. McIntosh, a managing director and a member of the brokerage firm's executive committee until April, said yesterday that he would leave.
His decision, after 34 years at Salomon, is a measure of the continuing dissatisfaction among some of the firm's top executives.
Mr.
McIntosh, 56, declined to comment on the reasons for his resignation, but colleagues said he had been stripped of much of his power in a reshuffle earlier this year when he was replaced as head of the firm's fixed-income business.
He has no new job, but has told colleagues that he intended to work elsewhere.


No More Mr. Nice Guys
Bob Dole slipped off his blue blazer at the last minute.
Maybe when he saw a platter with a giant hog's head wearing a "Dole for President" bumper sticker and an American flag, he realized it was a casual affair.
But as he stepped on stage in his French cuffs and blue silk tie, he still looked awfully starchy for a political pig roast on the Fourth of July.
Fortunately, he was lining up for a photo with some of the other Republican contenders, so starchy was not a liability.
Here they were, paying homage to persnickety New Hampshire conservatives and smiling under a scalding sun, the hope of the G.O.P.: Bob Dole, Phil Gramm, Pat Buchanan.
Bob Dornan was also there.


Largest Teachers' Union Calls for National High School Exam
The nation's largest teacher's union called yesterday for the United States to follow the lead of European countries by instituting a common academic curriculum and a national examination for high school students.
The goal would be to improve the education of students who do not go to college and to give employers better information about students' abilities, said the union, the 875,000-member American Federation of Teachers.
It said national tests in Germany, France and Scotland, the three places it studied, provided greater incentive for students to work hard because almost all were tested, not just those who planned to go to college.


International Briefs; Compass Group in Talks To Buy Accor Unit
Compass Group P.L.C. said yesterday that it was in serious talks to buy Eurest International, a unit of Accor S.A. of France, for about 4.5 billion French francs, or $930 million, in a deal that would create the world's largest caterer.
Compass is already the third-biggest caterer in the United States and buying Eurest would "complete the jigsaw," a spokesman said.


SYBRON INTERNATIONAL TO BUY NUNC GROUP FROM BTR
The Sybron International Corporation said yesterday that it had agreed to acquire the Nunc companies from BTR P.L.C. of Britain for about $170 million in cash.
Nunc manufactures disposable plastic laboratory products used in analyzing and storing cells.
The companies are Nunc Inc. in Naperville, Ill.; Nunc A/S in Roskilde, Denmark, and Nunc G.m.b.H. in Wiesbaden, Germany.
Sybron, based in Milwaukee, develops and markets dental and laboratory supplies.
The company had sales of $439.7 million last year.


CHRONICLE
Once again, WOODY ALLEN has been defeated in his effort to gain custody from the actress MIA FARROW of his three children, The Associated Press reported.
New York's highest court, the Court of Appeals, dismissed his appeal yesterday to have overturned the lower court that awarded her custody of the children, Moses, Dylan and Satchel Farrow.


For a 'Maverick,' Some Breathing Room
Even more than giving Packard Bell a big, technologically powerful partner, NEC's $170 million investment gives the privately held computer maker the cash to remain independent, analysts said yesterday.
Packard Bell Electronics Inc. has been in need of cash to maintain its lead and sustain its phenomenal growth in the home computer market, the fastest-growing segment of the computer business.
In recent weeks, articles in the trade press have reported that the company was seeking a buyer.


The Pop Life
When compact disks first started appearing in record stores in the mid-1980's, many people warned that they would one day make vinyl albums extinct.
But few people said anything about the threat they posed to cassettes.
This was probably based on two assumptions: both CD's and LP's are round and have a hole in the middle and both are used primarily for playback rather than recording.
But sales of pre-recorded cassettes have slowly and steadily been shrinking, to a point where one day music stores may no longer even carry them.
"A lot of our stores don't stock a good variety of cassettes anymore," said Renee Tyler, a product manager at Tower Records headquarters in Sacramento, Calif.
"A couple of our stores have even gotten rid of cassettes altogether."


Effort to Reduce Overtime Pay Is a Key Issue in the Toll Strike
Beneath all the blustery language and flashes of temper, a basic issue in the labor strife on the New Jersey Turnpike is management's continuing campaign to cut overtime pay that reached nearly $12,800 for each toll collector last year.
Union concessions made months before Monday's eight-hour strike have allowed the New Jersey Turnpike Authority to reduce last year's costs.
But the executive director of the authority, Roger E. Nutt, insisted during the walkout that management wanted further retreat by unionized collectors on the overtime issue.


Let the Flea-Buyer Beware
To The Home Section:
In regard to "Flea Market in Zoning Peril" (June 15), my wife and I in the past six years of retirement enjoy going to this market.
But the vendors do not give "paid" invoices and avoid taxes!


George Leon Weil, 87, Physicist Who Helped Make Atomic Bomb
George Leon Weil, a physicist who assisted in the birth of the atomic age, died last Saturday at the Georgetown House retirement home in Washington.
A longtime Washington resident, he was 87.
He had suffered strokes and heart problems, according to the DeVol Funeral Home in Washington.


U.S. Ends Ticketmaster Investigation
The Justice Department announced yesterday that it was closing its investigation into complaints of anti-competitive practices by Ticketmaster.
The computerized ticketing giant had been under Federal inquiry and the focus of Congressional hearings since last year, when the Seattle grunge band Pearl Jam charged Ticketmaster with cutting the group out of bookings in a dispute over fees.
The decision to close the case without action caught Ticketmaster by surprise, a spokesman in Los Angeles said.
There was no immediate reaction from Pearl Jam, either, which just last week canceled its national tour over continued booking problems and then reinstated two dates, one through Ticketmaster.


Prices Climb As Traders Await Fed's Rate Decision
With trading subdued as investors and dealers awaited the outcome of the two-day Federal Open Market Committee meeting, Treasury securities moved higher yesterday.
Plenty of market analysts do not expect the committee, the Fed's policy-making arm, to cut short-term interest rates during the meeting, which began yesterday.
But if the committee acts, it is likely to do so today.


World News Briefs; Jailed Colombian Near Top of Drug Cartel
Jose Santacruz Londono, who was arrested in a Bogota restaurant late Tuesday, is regarded as one of the top three leaders of the Cali drug cartel and the chief operator of the largest cocaine processing and distribution network in the United States, American officials said today.
"His capture may affect the cartel's operations in the United States to the degree that it sends off a flow of ripples to the rest of the pond," Thomas Constantine, head of the Drug Enforcement Administration, said today in a telephone interview from Washington.


Firm Suspends Stock Trader In $128 Million Fund Loss
First Capital Strategists Inc. said yesterday that it had suspended the securities trader whose unauthorized bets on the direction of the stock market ran up a $128 million loss in the account of the Common Fund, First Capital's largest client.
The firm also said it was "winding down its index arbitrage program." That was the investment strategy whose execution was overseen by Kent Ahrens, the 39-year-old senior trader who, First Capital and the Common Fund say, has admitted making the unauthorized trades.


Wacoal Corp. reports earnings for Year to Mar 31


Meadowlands Plan Progresses
Proposals to build thousands of housing units and millions of square feet of commercial, office and industrial space in a 32-square-mile tract in the New Jersey Meadowlands made significant progress yesterday when five government agencies agreed on a draft environmental impact statement to guide development of the area over the next 20 years.
The plans call for a cleanup of 27 landfills, with the $900 million cost divided among developers and various public agencies.


Whitman vs. the Unions
In shaking up New Jersey government, Governor Whitman has taken on 60,000 unionized state workers.
News analysis, page B6.


U.S. Transportation Deaths Rise
Transportation deaths in the United States rose to 43,134 last year, up by 384, or 0.9 percent, from 42,750 in 1993, according to a preliminary count by the National Transportation Safety Board.
Highway and street accidents contributed the biggest part of the growth and caused the largest number of deaths.
Deaths on major airlines jumped to 237 in 1994 from 1 in 1993, because of three crashes: USAir in Charlotte, N.C., on July 2, and near Pittsburgh on Sept. 8, and American Eagle in Roselawn, Ind., on Oct. 31.
No common link in the airline crashes has been found; indeed, investigators have been unable to determine any cause for the Pittsburgh crash, a Boeing 737 on approach to the airport.
MATTHEW L. WALD


Giuliani Appointee Retains Position on School Board
The Board of Education re-elected a Mayoral appointee, Dr.
Irene H. Impellizzeri, as vice president yesterday, even though a majority of members blame Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani for driving away Schools Chancellor Ramon C. Cortines.
The board president, Carol A. Gresser, who leads a five-member coalition that has been at odds with the Mayor, said she had voted for Dr.
Impellizzeri in part because she wanted to avoid another rift with City Hall.


No Headline
I believe that schools can work for urban students.
I have lived it.
I have demonstrated in my own career that if you hold high standards, you have high expectations, then schools can make the difference in a student's life. -- DR.
BEVERLY HALL, named acting superintendent in Newark.  [ B6:2. ]


Drought Fears Prompt Warning on Water Use
After three parched months in which the flow of water into New York City's reservoirs was the second lowest on record, Gov.
George E. Pataki yesterday declared a drought watch for New York City and Westchester County and called for voluntary measures to cut water use.
The reservoirs are not seriously depleted now, but without replenishing rains they could soon sink to levels that would trigger a drought warning and some mandatory conservation measures, New York City water officials said.
The 19 reservoirs, which also supply most of Westchester County's water, now hold 460 billion gallons, 11.4 percent below the norm for this date, the officials said.


An Educator Who Passionately Believes the Poor Can Succeed
In confronting the vast problems of Newark's schools, Beverly Hall is armed with 25 years of experience in urban education, strong leadership skills and -- most important -- a passionate belief in the ability of poor students to succeed, friends and colleagues say.
"Dr. Hall is a perfect example of an administrator who has demonstrated that in fact, all children can learn," Dr.
Lester Young, Superintendent of District 13 in New York City, said yesterday.


A Fast Pitch for Their Own League
The league has altered the size of the ball, monkeyed with the distance between the mound and the plate and made the infield roomier, all to inject more action into the game and to entice more fans.
No, it's not Major League Baseball.
Rather it is the budding Women's Professional Fastpitch, a two-team all-star barnstorming extravaganza currently peppering the Midwest on a 16-city tour with its play and staking out sites for a half-dozen or so teams for a league of their own next June.


Court Rejects Appeal of 5 In Rape Case
A ruling from the state's highest court today in a highly publicized case paves the way for prosecution of five men charged with raping a woman who passed out after drinking too much in a northern New York bar.
The Court of Appeals declined to hear an appeal from the men, who had originally been indicted on felony rape charges.
But in 1993, a town court permitted them to plead guilty to sexual misconduct, a misdemeanor.
Each paid an $840 fine, a punishment that outraged many women's and victims' groups and prompted Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo to name the Attorney General as a special prosecutor.
Last year, a Superior Court judge reinstated the felony rape charges, the decision that the five men sought to appeal.


Amway Asia Pacific Ltd.(AAP,N) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


International Briefs; Lufthansa Reports Return to Profitability
Deutsche Lufthansa A.G., which shocked investors with a first-quarter loss in May, said yesterday that it had returned to profitability in the first half of the year, and it forecast a successful 1995 despite turbulent currency markets.
"Pretax profit in the first half was above the year-ago period," the airline's chairman, Jurgen Weber, said.
In the first half of 1994, profit before taxes and special items was 135 million German marks, about $97.47 million.


Amway Japan Ltd.(AJL,N) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


. . . As We Know It
Begin by recognizing that welfare is a federally sponsored euphemism; when we talk about helping the helpless, we're talking about charity.
Charity is not a dirty word, though it is treated as such by many of those on the receiving end; they prefer "welfare," because it implies an entitlement with no need for gratitude.
On the contrary, the word "charity" -- the tangible expression of generosity toward our fellow humans -- rates right up there with love and kindness.


Transactions
Football  National Football League
TAMPA BAY BUCCANEERS -- Signed Anthony McDowell, fullback, to a two-year contract.
Hockey  National Hockey League
TORONTO MAPLE LEAFS -- Named Mike Foligno assistant coach for St. John's of the


ATI Technologies reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


International Briefs; Britain's General Electric Sees Modest Profit Rise
The General Electric Company P.L.C., the British military and engineering company, said yesterday that it showed only moderate earnings growth in the year that ended on March 31.
A 2.9 percent rise in pretax profit, to $:891 million, about $1.42 billion, was below market expectations of $:895 million to $:934 million.
Profits fell at the company's electronic systems unit.


To Win Japanese Buyers
To the Editor:
A news analysis June 28, the day of the auto agreement between Japan and the United States, quotes a Ford Motor Company vice president: "We've got to get more serious fast in the export business." Yes indeed.


Corrections
A chart on Friday showing how automobile insurance premiums will rise under new legislation passed in Albany labeled the figures incorrectly.
They showed rates for drivers categorized as high-risk, not for safe drivers. (The figures in the article differed because they had been adjusted for inflation.)


An Olympic Bonding; Time With Teammates Is Special, Too
It was twilight in front of Durfee Hall at Yale University, home for 13 days to the Louisiana delegation to the Special Olympics, and the 103 mentally retarded athletes were winding down after a long day of competing and cheering for each other.
The men's team handball squad had just lost in the final seconds to Tennessee 17-16, while the women's softball team, whose coaches had not expected to win a game, trounced Washington 13-4.
And so the handball players were subdued, retreating to their beds to stare at books, listen to music and sleep.
But the softball players could not stop giggling.
"The angels watching over us were willing to help out," Sonya Green said.


Unions Have a Vital New Role to Play
To the Editor:
Re "Who Will Lead Labor, Where?" (editorial, June 19): The contest to succeed Lane Kirkland as A.F.L.-C.I.O. president has awakened new interest in the labor movement.


This Runner Inspires Respect
On Monday, Mark Straughn won a gold medal at 400 meters, on Tuesday a silver at 800 meters.
On Friday, he will be a favorite at 1,500 meters.
His best times are 2 minutes 6 seconds for the 400, 4:34 for the 800 and 8:58 for the 1,500.
Those times might not cause fear among Butch Reynolds, Sebastian Coe and Noureddine Morceli, the respective world-record holders at those distances, but they surely inspire respect.


Russian Press Free, Free to Go Broke
The arc of Vitaly Tretyakov's career sparked high in the electric days of perestroika and the new press freedoms that followed the demise of the Soviet Union.
But in the marketplace of a new Russia that is more interested in commerce than in big ideas, that is turning away from liberal democratic notions back toward corrupt bureaucratic management, Mr.
Tretyakov and his newspaper, Nezavisimaya Gazeta -- which was once as important to the intellectual and political elite as harsh cigarettes and thick black coffee -- have had a mighty tumble.


U.S. Petroleum Data
In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
June 30
June 23
July 1
1995
1995
1994
Gasoline production, daily
7.7
8.0
7.6
Distillate production, daily
3.1
3.1
3.3
Gasoline stocks
208.2
208.6
215.0
Distillate stocks
115.6
115.9
118.7
Crude imports, daily
7.6
6.8
7.4
Product imports, daily
1.8
1.8
1.6
Crude stocks
320.7
318.9
325.9
Crude production, daily
6.6
6.6
6.6
Refinery utilization (%)
95.1
96.6
96.5
Source: American Petroleum Institute


Lar Roberson; Dancer, 48
Lar Roberson, a dancer who performed in the 1970's with the companies of Martha Graham, Pearl Lang and Rod Rodgers, died on June 21 at his home in Kensington, Calif.
He was 48.
The cause was AIDS, said his companion, Thomas Hibdon.


Mild-Mannered Engineer Fans Fires of a Movement
The darling of the burgeoning state sovereignty movement is an engineer whose oratory is as pugnacious as his demeanor is mild-mannered.
The Federal Government, says Charles Duke, a Republican state senator in Colorado, is using the Oklahoma City bombing to broaden its police powers and impose "Gestapo tactics" on the American people.


Erly Industries Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Cape Town Journal; After Apartheid, Home at Last: A Family Adjusts
A year ago, when Olive Shisana became special assistant to the new Minister of Health, nearly every worker in the department was white, Afrikaner and male.
To Mrs.
Shisana they stood as living symbols of apartheid, cogs in a machine she had fought all her life.
Suddenly she was supposed to shake their hands and chat over tea?
"It was difficult," Mrs.
Shisana said.
"I saw them as enemies, very serious enemies that we had been fighting for a long time. You cannot just lie down today with somebody you've been running away from and fighting as much as all that and wake up tomorrow and love them."


Accounts
Knowledge Adventure Inc., La Crescenta, Calif., to Kalis &amp; Savage, Pacific Palisades, Calif., to handle the account of the educational software company, previously at Stein Robaire Helm, Los Angeles, now Kresser Stein Robaire.
The billings have not been determined.


Schools Takeover Is Delayed
The State Board of Education, deciding yesterday that the Newark school system had failed to provide its students with a minimum education, ordered a state-supervised management team to assume control of the schools.
But a judge ordered the takeover delayed while he weighed an appeal by lawyers for the city's Board of Education.  [ Page A1. ]


Nelson Is All but Signed, Sealed, Delivered
The Knicks were delaying an announcement until the paperwork could be concluded, but in all likelihood they will name Don Nelson as their 17th coach at a Madison Square Garden news conference either today or tomorrow.
Nelson interrupted a trip overseas yesterday to fly to New York, where he will apparently sign a pact that will pay him nearly $6 million in base salary over three years.


Russia Will Test a Trading Band for the Ruble
In an effort to increase investors' confidence and promote economic stability, Russian officials announced today that the ruble's exchange rate against the dollar would be fixed within a band and not allowed to float freely.
The creation of the trading band, which will be in place until Oct. 1, marked the first effort to fix the ruble's rate since the collapse of the Soviet Union, which had used differing exchange rates for different classes of commerce.


Acquittal Is Denied in NASA Bribery Case
A Federal judge today denied a defense motion seeking a judgment of not guilty for Dale Brown, the only man to go to trial on charges of corruption involving contracts at the National Aeronautics and Space Administration.
Last week, a Federal District Court jury was unable to reach a verdict in the Government's bribery case against Mr.
Brown, reporting that it was deadlocked, 9 to 3, for conviction.
A retrial was scheduled to begin on Sept. 5.


Going Around the World Without Leaving the House
Andros Hills, on a hilly 32-acre estate here, is more than a show house.
It is an excursion.
The 1906 house, a space of more than 10,000 square feet designed by Grosvenor Atterbury (who also did the American Wing at the Metropolitan Museum), has been given a facelift with echoes of Morocco, Japan, Bali, Korea and India by 34 interior and landscape designers.
There are also stateside flourishes, like "Hail America," an all-American dining room by Douglas C. Rowe for Greenbaum Interiors, where Kate Smith endlessly sings "God Bless America" on tape.


Health Care for Consumers Advances in Albany; Profits Before Patients
To the Editor:
Your warning in "Two Fixable Bills on H.M.O.'s" (editorial, June 28) about "rules that place the job security of doctors above the needs of their patients" raises two corollary questions:


Budget Battles Undercut U.S. Information Effort
When President Eisenhower created the United States Information Agency in 1953, it was the darling of conservatives, a powerful megaphone to undermine Communism around the world.
But with Communism on the run and the cold war over, conservative Republicans are now fighting a different war: the budget war, and the information agency could become one of its victims.


Intermetco Ltd. reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 30


Conspiracy Theories' Impact Reverberates in Legislatures
It was billed as a sort of town meeting for leaders of state governments.
Whatever its potential merits or shortcomings, the Conference of the States, as it was to be called, scarcely seemed a threat to the future of the Republic.
But some right-wing extremists saw the conference as nothing less than a clandestine Constitutional convention that could nullify basic American rights, perhaps as part of a sinister plot to impose a totalitarian "One World Government."


No Marriage, No Apologies
AFTER a 22-year marriage that ended in divorce, Cynthia Stech says she has finally figured out how to manage love.
She has a romantic interest, he has moved into her house in Kalamazoo, Mich., and that is probably how things are going to stay.


Primary Fight Goes to Round 3
There is an election in Jefferson Township that will not end.
Michael Glaab lost the June 6 Republican primary race for a seat on the Township Council to Debi Merz by 19 votes, and he asked for a recount.
When the recount gave him the election by 42 votes -- 685 for Mr.
Glaab to 643 for Ms.
Merz -- Ms.
Merz's lawyer, John Barbarula, filed suit, maintaining that there were "phantom votes" in at least one district, No. 11, where 86 people signed up to vote but 97 votes were cast.
After tests of voting machines, Judge Reginald Stanton of Morris County Superior Court ordered a new election, which will be held Aug. 15.


Economic Scene; Getting by without the Energy Department could be hard to do.
WOULD America be better off without the Department of Energy?
The rationale for creating the department in 1977 -- to break the economy's dependence on imported oil -- no longer strikes many policy makers as realistic or, for that matter, important.
Indeed, it was one of three (along with Commerce and Education) Cabinet-level agencies marked for extinction by House Republicans this year.
And it probably only survived because Pete V. Domenici, the Republican chairman of the Senate Budget Committee, has a soft spot for the Energy Department's laboratories in his home state of New Mexico.


Who in the world is Dyna Taylor? She may be the face that launched a thousand movie tie-ins.
IN one of the biggest marketing pushes of the year, someone who looks strikingly like Dyna Taylor is seemingly everywhere.
Dyna is on glasses at Burger King and on toys for Mattel.
Dyna smiles on the cover of Hallmark greeting cards.
Tens of millions of Nestle Crunch chocolate bars feature Dyna's face.
As readers peruse this column over the breakfast table, they may even see Dyna on the front of their boxes of Cheerios cereal.


Whitman Will Ask the Questions
Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman will get a chance to interview three television reporters tonight when she is host of "Larry King Live" on CNN.
The Governor's guests will be Lesley Stahl of CBS, Lisa Myers of NBC and Jeff Greenfield of ABC.
"Governors don't last forever, so you've got to be looking for a second career," Governor Whitman joked.
Maybe so.
Mario M. Cuomo, the New York Governor-turned-talk-show host, sat in Mr.
King's chair last night.
TERRY PRISTIN


Iraq Admits It Produced Germ Arsenal
Iraq has admitted for the first time that it produced offensive biological weapons in 1989-90, on the eve of the war in the Persian Gulf, the chairman of a United Nations inspection commission told the Security Council in a letter today.
The chairman, Rolf Ekeus, told the Council that the Iraqis admitted in a meeting Saturday in Baghdad that they had produced "large quantities" of two deadly biological agents, the bacteria that cause botulism and anthrax.
Iraqis maintain that the toxic agents were later destroyed.


Let the Flea-Buyer Beware
To The Home Section:
In regard to "Flea Market in Zoning Peril" (June 15), my wife and I in the past six years of retirement enjoy going to this market.
But the vendors do not give "paid" invoices and avoid taxes!


Warner Picks TV President
Warner Brothers said yesterday that it had named Tony Jonas the new president of its television division, the most successful television production unit in the industry.
The appointment had been expected.
Mr.
Jonas will replace Leslie Moonves, who left the job last month to take over as president of CBS Entertainment.
Mr.
Jonas had been the second-ranked executive at Warner Brothers Television, a unit of Time Warner, under Mr.
Moonves.
His previous title was executive vice president of creative affairs.
He has worked at Warner Brothers Television for six years.


Formal Thrusts in a Bleak Universe
In a solo called "Recidive," Hela Fattoumi is a birdlike figure who moves constantly on the balls of her feet while playing with balance and imbalance.
In "Controverse," Eric Lamoureux embarks on a desperate journey of propulsive force that leaves him curled around a suspended office lamp.
As French dancers and choreographers, Mr.
Lamoureux and Ms.
Fattoumi appear primarily interested in exploring complex new ways of moving.
Along the way, they describe a desolate world that isolates those who inhabit it.


Former Union Investigated Over Finances
Federal agents are investigating the financial dealings of former officials of the Transit Police Patrolmen's Benevolent Association before the union was disbanded last April, law enforcement officials said yesterday.
Aspects of the investigation were disclosed yesterday at a hearing in Federal District Court in Manhattan when Kenneth I. Wirfel, a lawyer for the union, demanded the return of medical expense records seized by the Federal Bureau of Investigation.


Lollapalooza Coming of Age as an Institution
The Lollapalooza Festival looked like an institution as it started its fifth summer tour with a sold-out show at the Gorge Amphitheater here today.
As usual, it was a daylong event with bands on two stages, exhibits, vendors, political leafletting and thousands of people wandering through it all.
Lollapalooza is a chance for an urban and college-town culture to visit the suburbs, while alternative-rock fans can show off a new hair color or navel ring to their semi-alienated, ticket-buying peers.
This year, the Lollapalooza name may be as much of a draw as the headliners, who on their own would fill clubs and smaller halls rather than arenas like the Gorge, with its capacity of 18,500.


Dawn of A Drought?
Gov.
George E. Pataki declared a drought watch in New York City and Westchester yesterday.
Water Saving Tips From New York City officials
Water lawns less.
Report open hydrants and leaks to a 24-hour hotline (718) DEP-HELP
Take shorter showers.
Fix leaky faucets.
Run dishwasher and washing machine only when full. Article, Page B1.


CHRONICLE
About 54 years ago, SKITCH HENDERSON, the founder and music director of the New York Pops, visited his friend Bing Crosby in California.
"While I was talking to Bing, he said, 'I want you to meet somebody, a wonderful pianist,' " Mr.
Henderson, 77, recalled yesterday.
" 'His name is Victor Borge and someday you will hear of this man.' "


AAR Corp.(AIR,N) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


SYBRON INTERNATIONAL TO BUY NUNC GROUP FROM BTR
The Sybron International Corporation said yesterday that it had agreed to acquire the Nunc companies from BTR P.L.C. of Britain for about $170 million in cash.
Nunc manufactures disposable plastic laboratory products used in analyzing and storing cells.
The companies are Nunc Inc. in Naperville, Ill.; Nunc A/S in Roskilde, Denmark, and Nunc G.m.b.H. in Wiesbaden, Germany.
Sybron, based in Milwaukee, develops and markets dental and laboratory supplies.
The company had sales of $439.7 million last year.


'Improper Sales Practices' Cited in Warner Dismissal
The Warner Music Group dismissed Doug Morris as the chief executive of its United States operations because of "improper sales practices" that occurred while he was chairman of its Atlantic record label, according to documents the company filed yesterday in New York State Supreme Court in Manhattan.
Time Warner's music division contends that Mr.
Morris failed to inform his bosses about a scandal involving stolen compact disks when he negotiated a lucrative new employment contract last December.


Key Fibers Linked to Simpson Vehicle
Carpet fibers found with the bloody leather glove picked up behind O. J. Simpson's house and on a knit cap found at the crime scene match the extremely unusual fibers lifted off the floor of Mr.
Simpson's Ford Bronco, a prosecution expert testified today.
Because of a ruling last week by Judge Lance A. Ito, the witness, Douglas Deedrick, a specialist from the Federal Bureau of Investigation's division on hair and trace evidence, was not permitted to say just how distinctive the fibers are: that they appear almost nowhere, only in a limited number of Broncos made in late 1993 and 1994.
Those Broncos include Mr.
Simpson's, which prosecutors say he drove to the scene of the murders with which he is charged and then back home.


Quality Food Centers Inc.(QFCI,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Jun 17


Israeli City Fears Becoming Frontier
On a road leading into this trim city of tree-lined streets, smart shops and red-roofed houses, motorists were greeted today with signs carrying a stark message: "Stop! Border Ahead."
The signs, hung by the rightist Likud party, were a warning that this community on the northern edge of the metropolitan sprawl around Tel Aviv may become a frontier town when Israeli forces withdraw from Qalqilya, a Palestinian city about two miles east in the West Bank.


At the Met, Britannia Rules Again
THREE prosperous-looking women stepped into the new Annie Laurie Aitken Galleries of English Decorative Arts at the Metropolitan Museum of Art the other day, and one gasped.
"Look what they've done to my room!" she said.
But the censure gave way to a smile as she crept closer to inspect one room's elaborately stuccoed walls.
Once the dining room of a 1740's country house in Oxfordshire, the spacious chamber was for 41 years a frigid chalk white.
Now it is painted a rich mottled yellow that recalls egg yolks whisked into milk.
Sunny, warm and appealing, the shade is symbolic of the newly optimistic attitude of the Aitken Galleries.


A Court Running in the Wrong Direction
Radical change is under way at the Supreme Court, only three years after its center held against a strong right-wing campaign to overturn the Court's 1973 abortion decision.
As the term ended last week a five-justice majority was toppling doctrines and precedents that had held for decades and was looking around for more.
This is a heady time for opponents of what the Court has stood for at least since Earl Warren was Chief Justice.
It is a nervous time for supporters of the concepts of racial justice and national union that the Court has fostered for half a century.


Parents Surprised as Brooklyn Board Fails to Open Summer School on Time
Up to 3,000 children were left waiting at school doors yesterday morning in East New York, Brooklyn, when the district's summer school program failed to open as expected, wreaking havoc with parents' work schedules.
The confusion came after five of nine community school board members failed to attend two meetings at which the summer school budget was to be voted on.
Without a quorum, the budget resolution needed for summer school to begin could not be passed.
The board then failed to notify parents of the delay.


Signing Up Shoreline Advocates
United States Senator Bill Bradley, Democrat of New Jersey, has asked colleagues from 30 states to join him in a bipartisan group that would look out for the nation's shoreline.
So far, Senators John H. Chafee, Republican of Rhode Island; William S. Cohen, Republican of Maine, and Connie Mack, Republican of Florida, have signed up for his Coastal Coalition.
The coalition will work on several environmental issues, including opposing efforts to scale back the Clean Water Act.


Celebrating Mixed Use
To The Home Section:
Your article about rezoning the flea market neighborhood  [ June 15 ]  describes the area as "a motley assortment of semivacant loft buildings, warehouses and parking lots." While writing it off that way is most convenient for politicians and developers, the area is, in fact, right now, the most genuine mixed-use neighborhood in the city, and it is thriving.


Thousands Seek Permits To Carry Concealed Arms
Randall Wright, an engineer for a military contractor, travels by subway to and from his Washington office and often works until 10 P.M.
That means walking past dark, unlighted stretches of woods between the subway stop and his home here in Fairfax County.
It is only a 15-minute walk, he said, but since Virginia this week became the sixth state this year to relax restrictions on carrying a concealed pistol, Mr.
Wright, 30, saw no reason to leave himself vulnerable to crime.


U.S. Seizes Latex Gloves
Marshals seized about 100 cases of imported latex gloves from a small Morris County distribution company yesterday, saying they did not meet Federal standards intended to protect against the transmission of disease.
In a civil lawsuit, the United States Attorney's office contends that Chester Laboratories imports gloves from Malaysia and India and sells them for medical uses without having them inspected by the Food and Drug Administration.
Bob Kennedy, president of the company, said that the gloves exceed Government requirements and that 90 percent are sold for industrial purposes.


METRO DIGEST
NEW JERSEY TO MANAGE NEWARK'S SCHOOLS The State Board of Education ruled that the Newark school system, the largest in New Jersey, had failed to give its students a minimum education for decades and would be taken over by a state-supervised management team headed by a top educator from the New York City schools.  [ Page A1. ] In confronting the vast problems of Newark's schools, Beverly Hall is armed with 25 years of experience in urban education.  [ B6. ]


Space Patient Is Prodded and Poked


Graf Is in Forefront Of a Familiar Lineup
It was almost a year ago, just after the nine-time champion Martina Navratilova ended her enviable Wimbledon singles career by coming in second to Conchita Martinez of Spain, that Navratilova made a prediction about what life would be like without her here.
"It's going to be like Steffi and the Seven Dwarfs," said Navratilova, who believes that Steffi Graf, already a five-time Wimbledon champion, is the only woman capable of breaking her record.
For Thursday's semifinal round, Graf, who hasn't lost a match this year, will be joined by the three women, Arantxa Sanchez Vicario, Martinez and Jana Novotna, who follow her on the seedings list.


Group Bullied The Homeless, Agency Finds
Federal housing officials canceled a $547,000 grant to the Grand Central Partnership yesterday after concluding there was "substantial evidence" that Partnership workers had harassed and brutalized homeless people.
"There's no doubt that these things happened," said Andrew M. Cuomo, an Assistant Secretary of Housing and Urban Development, who made the announcement in Manhattan.


Bridge
The United States will be strongly represented in the Venice Trophy contest for women's teams, to be played in the world championships in Beijing in October.
The winning team in the American Trials, which were played over the last weekend in Alexandria, Va., included five players who have won world team titles: Kitty Munson, Sue Picus and Judi Radin, all of Manhattan; Rozanne Pollack of Warren, N.J., and Karen McCallum of Exeter, N.H.


Baylor Coaches Face Prison
When they came to Baylor in 1992, GARY THOMAS and KEVIN GRAY thought they had hooked up with a rising star as assistants to the new basketball coach, DARREL JOHNSON.
TROY DRUMMOND signed on a year later with similar hopes.
Johnson, who had won back-to-back N.A.I.A. national championships at Oklahoma City University before taking the Baylor job, was determined to turn the Waco, Tex., school into a basketball power.
Then the bottom fell out.


After the Fireworks, the Lady Goes to Pieces


The Twins Of Modernism, In Light and Dark
Some dwell in darkness and others dwell in light, goes the line in "The Threepenny Opera." Shades of light and dark, anticipation and despair, divide the otherwise closely allied work of Sofia Gubaidulina and Alfred Schnittke, the dominant figures in contemporary Russian music.
Unquestionably they belong together, having followed almost identical career paths.
Both were born in the early 1930's; both pursued an avant-garde program in the 60's in defiance of the Soviet regime; both have drawn on a broad range of contemporary techniques without becoming beholden to any of them, and both have taken refuge in Hamburg, Germany, in the turbulent 90's.
Yet the differences are substantial, even irreconcilable.
Mr.
Schnittke has placed himself in the main line of German tradition; he has passed the ultimate hurdle of Germanic art by writing his own "Faust." At the same time his work is marked by devastating pessimism, a certainty that classical traditions have come to an end.
Ms.
Gubaidulina, by contrast, has sought freedom and escape; she has avoided standard genres, used non-Western instruments, inclined toward improvisation, and cultivated a complex form of religious mysticism.


Baggio Signs With AC Milan
ROBERTO BAGGIO, soccer's world player of the year in 1993, left Juventus of Turin yesterday and signed with AC Milan for three years.
AC Milan, owned by the former Italian premier SILVIO BERLUSCONI, will pay a transfer fee of about $12.5 million to Juventus over two years.


At Lincoln Center in Summer, Fun Is Serious Business
At first glance, and even at the second and third, this year's Serious Fun festival at Lincoln Center looks as though it has abandoned the music-centered, provocative and sometimes grungy eclecticism of its early days and become an extension of the dance season.
Granted, it opens tonight at Alice Tully Hall with a potentially quirky theater piece, Robert Wilson's monologue version of "Hamlet." And the series, which runs through July 30, also includes a music-theater piece by the composer John Adams, the poet June Jordan and the director Peter Sellars.
Still, four of the six events in this final Serious Fun series (it is to be replaced next summer by an expansive new arts festival) focus on recent works by choreographers.
Mark Morris, Trisha Brown and Martha Clarke have used 18th- and 19th-century classical works.
A fourth work, "Degga," is a collaboration between the choreographer Bill T. Jones, the novelist Toni Morrison and the jazz composer Max Roach.


Smith Corona, a Computer Victim, Files for Bankruptcy
The Smith Corona Corporation, whose portable typewriters were an essential tool for generations of high school and college students, filed for bankruptcy protection yesterday, a victim of the computer revolution.
The company said it had decided to seek bankruptcy court protection in Delaware to stabilize its operations, obtain additional financing and carry out a restructuring plan.
Less than a week ago, the company installed new management and hired a firm that specializes in turning around troubled companies.


ESPRIT ANNOUNCES RESIGNATION OF CHIEF EXECUTIVE
The Esprit de Corporation, the closely held apparel manufacturer, said yesterday that David Folkman, its president and chief executive, resigned on Monday.
A successor has not yet been named.
In a statement, Mr.
Folkman said: "I came to Esprit in March 1993 with a set of specific objectives. I have accomplished what I set out to do and am pleased with the substantial progress the company has made." Esprit said it had formed an executive committee consisting of the two principal shareholders of Esprit U.S. -- Susie Tompkins, its co-founder and owner, and Michael Ying -- and Donald La Vigne, a board member, to which the three senior executives at Esprit U.S will report.


The Tenement Battle Is Over, but Not the Fight
Hours after a band of squatters and their sympathizers briefly seized control of a city-owned tenement, both they and the police officials who successfully removed them early yesterday morning vowed yesterday that they would not back down in their struggle over the building.
The squatters and their allies took control of the building at 541 East 13th Street about 10 P.M.
Tuesday amid the glare and noise of the Fourth of July fireworks.


Pepperidge Farm Chooses Saatchi
The Pepperidge Farm unit of the Campbell Soup Company in Norwalk, Conn., said yesterday that it had selected Saatchi &amp; Saatchi Advertising in New York to handle its North American account, with billings estimated at $10 million to $15 million.
For the last 40 years, the account had been at Ogilvy &amp; Mather New York, a unit of the WPP Group, until the agency resigned it last month because of a conflict with another client, the Van Den Bergh Foods Company.


Let's Not Throw Out the Good School Boards With the Bad
To the Editor:
The solutions of Edward F. Stancik and Sandra Feldman to fraud in New York City school board elections and corruption on community school boards (Op-Ed, June 28) will likely achieve change, but not their laudable objectives.


Health Care for Consumers Advances in Albany
To the Editor:
There is only one managed care bill considered by the New York State Legislature in its final hours that meets the needs of people with disabilities and chronic illnesses.
That is the "Health Care Bill of Rights," which you misleadingly characterize in "Two Fixable Bills on H.M.O's" (editorial, June 28) as physician-backed legislation, designed to cripple health maintenance organizations and deprive them of control on hiring and firing.


McGraw-Hill Says It Has Settled With a Reseller of Used Books
McGraw-Hill said yesterday that it had reached a settlement with the Nebraska Book Company, a unit of Lincoln Industries, one of 20 companies it had accused of illegally diverting textbooks.
In a lawsuit, McGraw-Hill contended that the companies had illegally diverted or planned to resell $20 million worth of college and professional texts.
The books -- outdated editions, faulty copies and extra stock -- were meant to be shredded or recycled.
An amended version of the suit was filed last month in Federal District Court in Newark.


Defense Challenges F.B.I. Over Bomb Plot Informer
Closely questioning F.B.I. agents about their control over their chief informer, lawyers for Sheik Omar Abdel Rahman and 10 other men began presenting their case yesterday, arguing that the defendants had been framed as participants in terror bombing plots.
They called as their first witnesses Federal Bureau of Investigation agents who had dealt with the informer, Emad Salem, a former Egyptian military officer who had infiltrated Mr.
Abdel Rahman's circle.
The defense is seeking to portray Mr.
Salem as having been so loosely supervised by the F.B.I. agents who worked with him that he was able to plant or create evidence to incriminate the defendants and destroy or doctor evidence that could exonerate them.


NEW JERSEY SENDS TEAM TO MANAGE NEWARK SCHOOLS
The New Jersey Board of Education ruled today that the Newark school system, the largest in the state, had failed to give its students a minimum education for decades and would be taken over by a state-supervised management team headed by a top educator from the New York City schools.
But a state judge ordered the takeover halted for at least a day while he weighed an appeal by lawyers for the city's Board of Education.


Key's Surgery Called Success
While the Yankees will not know for months whether Jimmy Key will ever be able to pitch for them again, they described the surgery he had today to repair a torn rotator cuff in his left shoulder as successful.
Dr.
James Andrews performed Key's surgery in Birmingham, Ala., but the Yankees declined to provide details about the operation.
Although the Yankees claimed Key had a "small tear," they refused to reveal its length or discuss Andrews's procedures.


Regulator Accused of Improprieties
A regulator with the State Public Service Commission improperly accepted three golf outings and meals from an executive at Orange and Rockland Utilities, the New York State Ethics Commission charged today.
The charge was the latest allegation of impropriety involving the utility, which has been mired in scandal after its chief executive and several top officers were charged two years ago with illegally using the utility's money for political contributions and personal expenses.
The money used for the golf outings was part of the more than $3 million in questionable spending that an outside investigator documented last summer, a utility spokesman said.


Seeing the World in One House


Belfast Catholics Loyal to I.R.A. Say It Stirred Up Street Violence
Residents of the Roman Catholic section of West Belfast said on Wednesday that the Irish Republican Army and its political wing, Sinn Fein, had been stirring up the violence that has raged in the streets of Belfast for the last two nights.
The residents, who asked for anonymity because they feared reprisal, said that they saw members of the overwhelmingly Catholic I.R.A. and Sinn Fein recruiting young men, many of them teen-agers, for the violence that some fear could endanger the official effort to bring peace to the British province.


Corrections
The Vows column in the Styles pages on Sunday, about a wedding on June 24 in the Convent Avenue Baptist Church in Harlem that evoked African village traditions, misspelled the given name of the bride.
She is Cheree Nicole Rumley, not Sheree.


American Sprinters Race Past Top Fields
The men's 100-meter race was under way, and the world's fastest human was sitting in the stands and dividing his attention.
In front of Leroy Burrell was the finish line of the race in which he set the world record of 9.85 seconds last year.
In Burrell's lap was his baby son, who was finishing a bottle of milk.
"It's going to be Marsh," Burrell said.


Witness Links Stolen Firearms To Army Friend of McVeigh
A witness scheduled to appear before the grand jury hearing evidence in the bombing of the Federal Building here says that an old Army buddy of the two main suspects tried to make him an unwitting accomplice in disposing of loot from a robbery.
The witness, James Rosencrans, came to the attention of Federal investigators when they discovered that he had recently pawned a rifle that had been stolen in a robbery to which one of the suspects, Terry L. Nichols, had been tied earlier.


Stock Trading Is Brisk as Dow Hits 4,615.23, Rising 30.08
The Dow Jones industrial average burst through 4,600 yesterday for the first time, leading the stock market to a banner day.
Stocks rallied even as the outlook for interest rates remained uncertain.
There was no announcement yesterday after the first day of a two-day meeting of Federal Reserve policy makers on interest-rate policy.
Still, the Dow continued its seven-month rally and set a record for the 41st time in 1995.
The broader Standard &amp; Poor's index of 500 stocks and the Nasdaq composite index also ended the session on the up side.


Foster Furcolo, 83, Governor, Legislator and Sometime Writer
Foster Furcolo, whose two two-year terms as Governor of Massachusetts highlighted a lifetime in politics, public service, legal practice, teaching and literary endeavors, died yesterday at Youville Hospital in his hometown, Cambridge, Mass.
He was 83.
Death was due to heart failure, his son Charles said.


Rookie Earns Ticket To Ride Right on Back to Columbus
There was an Elvis impersonator, four mop-topped musicians singing Beatles songs and a red-headed kid answering to the name of Opie.
The White Sox had a "Turn Back the Clock to 1964" promotion so the night was filled with imitators and nostalgia.
Brian Boehringer contributed to the theme with a lousy impersonation of a major league pitcher.
Boehringer made certain the largest crowd of the season at Comiskey Park would revel in what transpired on the field by seriously struggling to throw strikes.
The 25-year-old rookie walked the first four batters of the game, then allowed John Kruk's grand slam to help the White Sox build a huge cushion and coast to an 11-5 victory over the Yankees before 42,961 spectators.


Norman Bates, His Mom And That Fatal Shower
PSYCHO Behind the Scenes of the Classic Thriller By Janet Leigh With Christopher Nickens Illustrated. 197 pages.
Harmony Books/Crown Publishers. $22.


Pirate Homers Add to the Phillies' Woes
Pirates 7, Phillies 4
The Pittsburgh Pirates scored five runs on homers in the eighth inning and sent the visiting Philadelphia Phillies to their fifth straight loss last night.
Dave Clark hit a three-run pinch-homer and Al Martin followed with a two-run shot off Ricky Bottalico, who failed to hold a 3-2 lead.
The Phillies, who got another good pitching performance from the rookie Tyler Green, lost for the eighth time in nine games.
They have been shut out in 68 of their last 74 innings.


Neumann Received Threats
LISELOTTE NEUMANN, the second-ranked Ladies Professional Golf Association golfer last year, has received threats and played a one-day tournament this week under guard, a published report said yesterday.
Neumann, 29, was accompanied by police guards as she won the tournament at the Viberga course south of Stockholm on Tuesday.
Two officers were assigned to protect her.


About 500 Workers Are Hired For New Force at Javits Center
Officials at the Jacob K. Javits Convention Center said yesterday that they had hired about 500 employees over the weekend for a new permanent work force whose creation is intended to break the grip of organized crime on the center.
The workers were chosen from a pool of more than 2,700 applicants who lined up around the center on Friday and Saturday, some seeking to keep coveted union jobs they had held for years and others without union cards hoping for a chance to work at the center for the first time.


I.R.S. Inquiry: Is Worker At I.B.M. Really A Contractor?
The Internal Revenue Service is auditing I.B.M. to determine if it improperly paid thousands of workers as independent contractors instead of employees.
Income and Social Security taxes must be withheld from employees' paychecks, but not from payments to independent contractors.
An I.B.M. spokesman said it regarded the inquiry, which covers the years 1986 through 1992, as routine.
"We are cooperating fully with the I.R.S.," the spokesman, Rob Wilson, said.


Becker Barely Survives, but It's a Day for Favorites
The man says he was born at Wimbledon when he surfaced as this Grand Slam's 17-year-old champion 10 years ago, but he now confesses to being in the sunset of his career.
Today, Boris Becker played almost until the sun went down -- and in England at this time of year, sundown takes forever.
So did this match.


Packard Bell Selling NEC A Big Stake
Linking the leading personal computer vendors in the United States and Japan, the NEC Corporation said today that it had agreed to buy nearly 20 percent of Packard Bell Electronics Inc. for $170 million.
The relationship gives a crucial financial infusion to Packard Bell, which is privately held.
The Sacramento, Calif., company has surged to the lead of the American personal computer market largely by selling machines through mass merchants like Wal-Mart Stores Inc. and Sears, Roebuck &amp; Company, but has grown at a pace that would be hard to sustain without outside investors.


Market Place; Dollar General has been giving investors a bang for their buck.
IF it ain't broke, don't fix it is just how the management of the Dollar General Corporation is proceeding as it continues to open more small, low-price stores, focusing on small-town America.
Wall Street apparently likes what it sees, with many security analysts rating the company, which transferred to the New York Stock Exchange in February, as a buy.
The stock has been moving upward recently, notching a number of new highs.


Just Close the Bases
President Clinton should resist the temptation to intervene in the politically painful business of closing unneeded military bases.
His efforts can only undermine the independent base-closing commission that Congress established to prevent politics from paralyzing a process that can save the country billions of dollars while streamlining American defenses.
The White House has gotten involved because the commission's latest recommendations call for closing two bases in California, a state Mr.
Clinton cannot afford to lose in next year's election.
To ease the pain of closing, the White House and Pentagon have proposed a plan that could save some of the 11,000 jobs at McClellan Air Force Base, near Sacramento.
It would leave the Pentagon the option of privatizing the maintenance work in California instead of transferring it to an Army base in Pennsylvania, as the commission proposed.


Lining Up for Aid in Chechnya


Woman Is Charged in Forgery
An Atlantic City woman who was charged in April with endangering the welfare of a child and forging signatures to secure a job as a lifeguard is in trouble again.
Nicyce A. Smith was arrested yesterday and charged with forging a doctor's signature so that she could work at the Greenbriar Health Care Facility.
The deception was uncovered in a week and she was dismissed, the authorities said.
The earlier charges are pending.


Yugoslavia Deports Refugee Serbs to Fight for Rebels in Bosnia and Croatia
In the center of Belgrade this afternoon, several dozen women in black dresses held a silent protest against a new Government policy under which their sons and husbands have been arrested and sent to fight in Serbian armies in Bosnia and Croatia.
The women carried signs reading "No Forced Mobilization" and "Desertion Is an Alternative to War."


Stolt Comex Seaway S.A.  (SCSWF,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Mr. Major Wins, for Now
Britain's Prime Minister, John Major, usually casts himself as a benign compromiser, straddling the unthreatening middle ground of an ideologically divided Conservative Party.
But two weeks ago he deliberately forced the fight of his political life, and on Tuesday he won it cleanly.
Directly challenging his party's vociferous anti-European Union minority, Mr.
Major won the votes of two-thirds of the Conservative members of Parliament to renew his mandate as party leader, and thus Prime Minister.
His only declared challenger, John Redwood, got most of the rest.


Out of South Africa, Progress
At the turn of the century, Cecil Rhodes, one of this country's early statesmen-tycoons, dreamed of building a railroad from Cape Town to Cairo.
He never realized his vision.
Succeeding where Rhodes fell short, a South African entrepreneur, Hans Harwinkels, is linking the far corners of the continent with microwave signals instead of steel.
In little more than two years, he has built a pay-for-view satellite-television empire whose programming is beamed from South Africa to Egypt and 40 countries in between.


Criminal-Records Plan Is Fought
The American Civil Liberties Union of New Jersey filed formal comments yesterday opposing a state police plan to make all criminal records, including arrests that did not lead to conviction, readily accessible to the public for a $5 fee.
The A.C.L.U. said such disclosure could unfairly taint people, because the fact that an arrest does not result in conviction is often not reflected in the records.
But Chuck Davis, a spokesman for the State Attorney General's office, said nearly all the information to be provided under the policy change is already available at courthouses and police stations.


Hotel Workers' Union Approves 6-Year Contract With Pay Raise
Jubilant hotel workers approved a new six-year contract yesterday, all but ending a labor battle that nearly caused the first hotel strike in New York City in 10 years.
The contract, including a wage increase, an improved pension plan and the promise that independent businesses operating within hotels must adhere to the union agreement's terms, must now be voted on by the board of directors of the Hotel Association of New York City, representing the owners of 79 hotels.
The board is to meet this afternoon, and if it approves the contract as expected, the agreement will take effect immediately, retroactive to Saturday.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-10  NEW USE FOR FAILED RADAR  For nearly three years, 102 electronic radar-jamming devices have sat in a Navy warehouse after testers concluded they were not fit for use.
Now the Navy has found a solution: send them to Marine pilots patrolling over Bosnia.
A1  I.R.A.
IS ACCUSED IN VIOLENCE  Residents of the Roman Catholic section of West Belfast said that the I.R.A. had been stirring up the violence that has raged in the city for two nights and that could endanger the official peace effort.
A1  ISRAELIS CONCERNED OVER PULLOUT  Israeli towns like Kfar Sava may become the frontier when troops withdraw from the West Bank under Israel's accord with the Palestinians, a prospect that makes many Israelis feel vulnerable.
A3  IRAQ ADMITS GERM ARSENAL  Iraq has admitted for the first time that it produced offensive biological weapons in 1989-90, on the eve of the war in the Persian Gulf, the chairman of a United Nations inspection commission said.
A3  DEPORTED SERBS MADE TO FIGHT  Since mid-June, police squads throughout Yugoslavia -- which now consists of Serbia and Montenegro -- have been arresting Serbian refugees from Bosnia and Croatia, and shipping them back home to be impressed into Serbian armies.
A6  The U.S. warns Thais on naming ministers linked to drugs.
A5  Russia's newly liberated press is now free to go broke.
A8  Cape Town Journal: Apartheid victims find reconciliation hard.
A4 National A14-18, B8-9  THE POWER OF PARANOIA  As suspicions about Government grow, the usual wide mesh in the net of conspiracy theories has grown smaller and warier of what subscribers see as sinister plots, sinking what had been advertised as a town meeting for the leaders of state governments.
A1  NEW TIME OF CHANGE  In Philadelphia, supporters and opponents of affirmative action both sense changes coming, but after agreeing that their reactions diverge, one side is angry and disillusioned, the other hopeful.
A1  VIRGINIANS SEEKING HIDDEN GUNS  As Virginia became the sixth state to relax restrictions this year on carrying concealed handguns, thousands of residents lined up to submit their applications.
A14  TEACHERS PUSH NATIONAL TEST  Seeking to improve the education of students who do not go to college, the nation's largest teachers union called for a national curriculum and test for high school students.
A15  TALES OF STOLEN GUNS  A witness told a grand jury in Oklahoma City that an old Army friend of the two main suspects in the bombing of the Federal building used him, trying to make him an unwitting accomplice in disposing of stolen weapons.
B8  HEARINGS PROMPT WARNING  Treasury Secretary Robert Rubin, whose department oversees the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms, warned Congress that hearings into the bureau's actions in raiding the Branch Davidian compound near Waco, Tex., could send the wrong message.
B8  MATCH OF RARE FIBERS IS CITED  A prosecution expert testified that fibers found on a leather glove that police found at O.J.
Simpson's house and a cap from the murder scene were similar to rare fibers from the carpet of his Ford Bronco.
B9 Metro Digest B1 TAKEOVER OF NEWARK SCHOOLS  The New Jersey Board of Education ruled that the Newark school system had failed to give students a minimum education and would be taken over by an outside state-supervised management team.
A1  TESTING THE RIGHT TO DIE  George Delury, an Upper West Side editor who helped his wife commit suicide, has been charged with second-degree manslaughter in a case likely to become New York's most prominent test of the state's law against assisted suicide.
A1  Business Digest D1  Arts/Entertainment C9-16  At Lincoln Center, summer fun is serious business.
C9  Ticketmaster inquiry ends.
C14  Music: European premieres of Schnittke and Gubaidulina.
C9  The fifth Lollapalooza.
C9  The Pop Life C13  Dance: U.S. debut of the Compagnie Fattoumi-Lamoureux.
C12  Books: "Psycho," by Janet Leigh, with Christopher Nickens.
C13  The Home Section C1-8  No marriage, no apologies C1  Sports B11-16  Baseball: White Sox crush Yankees.
B11  Mets rally in ninth.
B13  Basketball: Don Nelson flies to New York to become Knicks coach.
B11  Two Knicks are on opposite sides in the N.B.A. labor dispute.
B15  Columns: Anderson on graduation rates B11  Hockey: The Islanders name Mike Milbury as coach.
B15  Tennis: Becker avoids upset in a four-hour marathon.
B11  Obituaries B10  Takeo Fukuda, former Japanese Prime Minister.
Foster Furcolo, former Governor of Massachusetts.
Editorials/Op-Ed A20-21  Editorials  Just close the bases.
Mr.
Major wins, for now.
Wrong direction for the Court.
Letters  William Safire: . . . as we know it.
Maureen Dowd: No more Mr.
Nice Guys.
David Boaz: Budget cuts -- less than meets the eye.
James R. Blanning: Whose fair share?
Chronicle D22 Bridge C14 Crossword C13


Calendar: Design Shows And a Textile Exhibition
A Gross of Objects  Brooklyn Museum, 200 Eastern Parkway, at Washington Avenue; (718) 638-5000.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Dow Rises 30.08 Points, Pushing Through 4,600  The Dow Jones industrials burst through 4,600 points and set its 41st record high of this year, as stocks continued a seven-month rally.
Analysts said traders were optimistic about the outlook for the economy, pushing the Dow up 30.08 points, to 4,615.23.
The broader Standard &amp; Poor's index of 500 stocks and the Nasdaq composite index also rose.  [ Page D6. ]


As Affirmative Action Ebbs, A Sense of Uncertainty Rises
Eddie Graham senses changes in the air, and he is angry and disillusioned.
"A lot of blacks have gotten to where they are because of affirmative action," said Mr.
Graham, a 37-year-old black lawyer, as he stood on a street corner in Philadelphia last week.
"For them to say now it's time to end it, that's really a disservice to our younger generation that's coming along."


Mets Mount a Rally For Rare Shea Victory
It took a gutsy move by the manager, a key out from the closer, a freakish play followed by a gorgeous slide by the leadoff hitter and a clutch two-out single in the bottom of the ninth from the cleanup man.
But, as the Mets were saying almost in unison last night, something had to go right for them at some point.
Bobby Bonilla's single on the first pitch he saw from left-handed reliever Bryan Hickerson drove in Brett Butler and gave the Mets a wild 5-4 victory over the Cubs at Shea Stadium last night, just their second victory in their last 10 games at home.


A Meal, a Deadly Potion, a Major Legal Test
The couple dined on their traditional celebration meal, kosher chicken and wine.
Then, George Delury said yesterday, he diluted the pills in water and added some honey to sweeten the foul mixture.
He poured the concoction into two cups and brought them, with a straw, to Myrna Lebov, his wife of 22 years.
Her wrists were nearly useless from the multiple sclerosis that had stolen her strength and memory, but, reclining in bed in a colorful T-shirt, she managed to hold the cup with one hand.


Goodfellow Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Hillenbrand Industries(HB,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Jun 3


U.S. Warns Thais on Naming Cabinet Members Linked to Drugs
The United States and Thailand appeared to be on a diplomatic collision course today over the possibility of Cabinet posts for Thai politicians linked by the United States Government to drug trafficking.
The United States has warned that relations with Thailand, one of its closest allies in Southeast Asia, could be strained if drug-tainted politicians are named to the Cabinet being formed by the Chart Thai, or Thai Nation, political party, which won national elections on Sunday.


Corrections
A article and a chart in Business Day on June 27 about Graef S. Crystal's analysis of company directors' compensation included an erroneous estimate, based on data supplied to Mr.
Crystal by Standard &amp; Poor's Compustat, for the amount paid to directors of Bausch &amp; Lomb in 1994.
It was $70,300, not $139,100, according to Mr.
Crystal.


Players Have Different Views From Bench
Patrick Ewing and Charles Smith shared a bench yesterday.
This was not at Madison Square Garden but in a hearing room at the New York office of the National Labor Relations Board.
Ewing and Smith, Knick teammates, were separated by only one person, but they were much farther apart in their positions in the civil war that brought them and three teams of lawyers together.
Larry Singer, the hearing officer, conducted the hearing so that Daniel Silverman, the regional director, can determine if the board should hold an election on the effort by a large group of players to decertify the union that represents National Basketball Association players.


Major's Cabinet: Right and Left Rewarded
Riding on his re-election on Tuesday as the Conservative Party leader, Prime Minister John Major shuffled his Cabinet this afternoon, passing out plum positions to loyalists of both the Tory right and the Tory left and rewarding two would-be rivals who did not challenge him.
The post of Foreign Secretary, which is critical as Britain tries to hammer out its policies on European integration and on Bosnia, went to Malcolm Rifkind, who had backed Mr.
Major and had been effective as an articulate and cost-cutting Defense Secretary.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
9.00
9.00
7.25
DISCOUNT RATE
5.25
5.25
3.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
8.00
5.89
4.37
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.49
5.43
4.31
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.41
5.46
4.74
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.17
6.20
7.29
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.60
6.63
7.58
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.54
7.57
8.37
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.21
6.23
6.47
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Chiron Files Plan With F.D.A. for Implant to Deliver Drug Into Eye
The Chiron Corporation said today that it had filed an application with the Food and Drug Administration to market an implant that would deliver the antiviral drug ganciclovir directly to the eye in patients with CMV retinitis.
CMV retinitis is the most common infection and leading cause of blindness in people with AIDS.
Patients with CMV retinitis are now treated with intravenous ganciclovir, or foscarnet, another antiviral drug, but the therapy commonly requires one or more shots a day.
The Chiron implant would deliver the drug for up to six months, reducing cost, while slowing progression of the disease relative to the intravenous injection.
Chiron has not specified a price for the implant, which it calls Vitrasert.


Administration Tries to Blunt Hearing on Raid on Texas Sect
Trying to blunt a potentially embarrassing inquiry, members of the Clinton Administration and some of its supporters in Congress are warning that scheduled Congressional hearings on the Government raid on the Branch Davidian compound near Waco, Tex., might undermine Federal firearms laws and shore up support for paramilitary groups.
Treasury Secretary Robert E. Rubin said in a letter today that he was "worried that investigating events at Waco, without investigating the extreme activities of some militias, seems to suggest that law-enforcement agencies are the real threat to the safety of American citizens." Mr.
Rubin oversees the Federal Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms, which conducted the initial assault on the compound in 1993.


A Rare Chance for Egypt-Sudan Accord
To the Editor:
Re "Firefight on Border Worsens Egypt-Sudan Political Feud" (news article, June 29): The contested 7,000-square-mile Halaib triangle formally became a part of Egypt in 1899, has been under the administrative control of the Sudan since 1902 and has been at least the proximate cause of political friction between the two countries since.


New Coach Emphasizes Break With Isles' Past
By hiring Mike Milbury as their new head coach, as the Islanders formally announced at a news conference here this morning, the once-proud franchise did more than secure a long-term commitment from perhaps the best available candidate for the job.
They also openly moved to make a break from their past by going outside the organization to fill the position, all the while stating the goal of reattaining past glories in the near future.


NEW JERSEY SENDS TEAM TO MANAGE NEWARK SCHOOLS
The New Jersey Board of Education ruled today that the Newark school system, the largest in the state, had failed to give its students a minimum education for decades and would be taken over by a state-supervised management team headed by a top educator from the New York City schools.
But a state judge ordered the takeover halted for at least a day while he weighed an appeal by lawyers for the city's Board of Education.


Burnett to Handle Johnnie Walker
The United Distillers unit of Guinness P.L.C. in London said yesterday that it had consolidated its worldwide Johnnie Walker Scotch whisky business at the London office of the Leo Burnett Company.
The account, with billings estimated at $45 million to $80 million, was previously divided among six agencies.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  Federal Home Loan Bank is selling $100 million of notes due in 2000 through First Tennessee Bank.
Callable in six months, the issue is priced at par to yield 7.05 percent.
Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corp., known as Freddie Mac, is selling $35 million of bonds due in 1997 through First Tennessee Bank.
Callable in one year, the issue is priced at par to yield 6.1 percent.


INSIDE
Action on Homeless Abuse
Federal housing officials canceled a $547,000 grant to the Grand Central Partnership, a business improvement district, after finding "substantial evidence" that workers had brutalized the homeless.
Page B1.
Challenge to Pataki Budget
New York State's Comptroller sued to prevent Governor Pataki from using pension-fund money to balance the budget, a move that could open a $110 million budget gap.
Page B7.
Wimbledon, as Planned
It took Boris Becker's marathon victory to complete the set, but for the first time four top-seeded men and four top-seeded women are in the Wimbledon semifinals.
Page B11.


COMPANY BRIEFS
FREEPORT-McMORAN INC., New Orleans, will distribute its interest in Freeport-McMoran Copper and Gold Inc., Reno, to its shareholders as a special tax-free dividend on July 28.
Shareholders of Freeport-McMoran would receive 0.702 share of the subsidiary for each share they own of the parent.
ARBOR HEALTH CARE CO., Lima, Ohio, said it would acquire Vrable Healthcare Services, which provides pharmacy-related services, for $11.5 million in cash.
Arbor will also make a $2.5 million contingent payment if certain earnings targets are met.


Seaway Food Town (SEWY,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to May 27


Abroad at Home; Mr. Clinton's Betrayal
For Bill Clinton's natural supporters, the most painful realization of his Presidency is that he is a man without a bottom line.
He may abandon any seeming belief, any principle.
You cannot rely on him.
There is a telling example to hand.
As the Senate debated a counterterrorism bill last month, Mr.
Clinton changed his position on the power of Federal courts to issue writs of habeas corpus.
The Senate then approved a provision that may effectively eliminate that power.


RESULTS PLUS
GOLF Watson Takes Lead
Tom Watson, a nonwinner on the PGA Tour since 1987, returned to the event that produced his first tour victory in 1974 and took the first-round lead yesterday at the Western Open in Lamont, Ill.
Despite steady winds with gusts in excess of 30 miles an hour, the 45-year-old Watson shot a four-under-par 68.
He birdied four of the final six holes and shot 32 on the back nine to take a one-stroke lead over Ed Fiori, Jay Haas, Brett Ogle, Joel Edwards and Steve Lowery.
Edwards had a hole-in-one on the 172-yard 14th hole.
The only amateur in the field, 19-year-old Tiger Woods, shot a 74. (AP) NO-NAME LEADS BIG NAMES: Sven Struver of Germany, who has never won on the PGA European tour, outplayed all the big names as he fired a seven-under-par 65 in the opening round of the Irish Open yesterday in Kilkenny and took a two-stroke lead over Roger Chapman of Britain and the Australian Robert Allenby. (AP) BASEBALL Autopsy on Versalles
An autopsy has determined that the former Minnesota Twins shortstop Zoilo Versalles died of arteriosclerotic heart disease, or hardening of the arteries.
Versalles, 55, was found dead June 9 in his Bloomington, Minn., home.
The Hennepin County Medical Examiner's office conducted an autopsy the next day, and further blood and tissue tests confirmed that Versalles, who had suffered two earlier heart attacks, died of natural causes. (AP)


Dorsey Trailers (DSYT,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Jun 24


Islanders Holding High Cards at the Draft Table
When the National Hockey League conducts the first entry draft under its new collective bargaining agreement tomorrow in Edmonton, the Islanders will be holding some of the bigger bargaining pieces on a significantly altered chessboard.
Even if they can't sign Todd Bertuzzi, their first-round choice of two years ago, they will get an extra second-round pick as compensation if he goes back into the eligibility pool.


Clinton Urges 'Less Combat' By Politicians
Drawing together many of his recent themes, President Clinton called on the nation's political figures today to have "more conversation and less combat" and to help Americans find some "common ground" as Republicans and Democrats debate the proper role of government.
In a wide-ranging speech, the President vigorously defended his vision of government as an agent to improve the lives of the middle class against the Republicans' call for less government.
But Mr.
Clinton also denounced "too much extremism of rhetoric and excessive partisanship" and said the way the political debate was conducted was as important to the country as its outcome.


Saidye Rosner Bronfman; Philanthropist, 98
Saidye Rosner Bronfman, a philanthropist and widow of Samuel Bronfman, founder of the Seagram Company, died yesterday at her home in Montreal.
She was 98.
At her death, she was honorary president of the Samuel and Saidye Bronfman Family Foundation, which supports a variety of charitable and community causes.
A patron of the arts, she and her husband founded the Samuel Bronfman Collection of Canadian Art.
She created a special fund for the Montreal Musem of Fine Arts to encourage young artists through the purchase of their work.


Families Are Barriers to Many Organ Donations, Study Finds
Although 10,000 of the Americans who die each year have the potential to be organ donors, only 40 percent of them actually become donors.
Conventional wisdom has held that the problem is doctors' reluctance to approach bereaved family members.
But a new study has come with another explanation.
The problem is not that doctors neglect to ask family members about the donation of organs and tissues, the study finds, but that most families refuse when they are asked.


Panel Fears Possible Flaws In Jet Engines
As many as five jet engines in commercial service on American planes, overhauled in Turkey, might be vulnerable to flaws that could cause a catastrophic accident, the National Transportation Safety Board and the Federal Aviation Administration said yesterday.
An accident involving such an engine destroyed a Valujet DC-9 on a takeoff run at the Hartsfield International Airport in Atlanta on June 8, they said.
Seven people were injured, including a flight attendant who suffered burns on 30 percent of her body and was hit by shrapnel from the engine.
If the plane had been in the air or had been carrying more passengers, the safety board said, "there would most likely have been numerous fatalities because of the fire and the buildup of toxic fumes in the cabin."


Scott's Hospitality reports earnings for Year to Apr 30


Unraveling of a Land Swap: No School, No Plant Expansion
Two years ago, it appeared to be the perfect civic deal: a major manufacturer in Brooklyn and the city's School Construction Authority would swap two adjacent pieces of land, allowing a long-delayed school to be built and giving the manufacturer the space it needed to expand its 700-worker plant.
And both the city and state would offer financial help.
But now, the deal -- brokered late in 1993 by former Mayor David N. Dinkins and former Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo -- is dead.
A lawsuit blocks the construction of the badly needed intermediate school in East New York.
The manufacturer, Blue Ridge Farms, is talking about moving its food-processing plant -- and the jobs -- to the South.


Chemical Aims to Expand Electronic Banking
Chemical Bank said yesterday that it would expand its electronic banking services beginning in October, including a new push into the home banking arena that it has tried unsuccessfully to develop for more than a decade.
As part of the program, the bank announced an alliance with the Microsoft Corporation to provide money management software linked to Chemical's private computer network.
Microsoft will help Chemical market the new services by providing it with names of registered users of Microsoft products in the bank's area, a spokesman for Microsoft said.


Small-Town Practice Proves Attractive for Rising Number of Lawyers
When Jeff and Cathy Helms leave their law offices here on their daily stroll to lunch at Harpers Drug Store, they pass a half-dozen clients whose wills they wrote and, on occasion, a logger for whom they won a workman's compensation claim.
At Harpers they eat next to people whose timber leases, real estate closings and personal injury cases they have handled.
Passing through the store are the proud parents of students on the Clinch County High School mock trial team, which the couple coached to a regional championship this year.


Places To Dine Out Under the Sky
PEOPLE who have never participated in the ultimate urban experience often have a hard time understanding why people in Manhattan revere nature.
When you are surrounded by nothing but the relentless gray of concrete and the cold glare of glass, each flower becomes an occasion for celebration.
Many of us spend the cold months dreaming about the warm ones.
When spring finally arrives, we make pilgrimages to smell the lilacs in Central Park, and summer finds us spreading blankets in unlikely places so we can worship the sun.
We nurture each pathetic tree that struggles upward to spread a bit of shade across a sidewalk.
Is it any wonder that every restaurant with a square foot of outdoor space instantly fills it with a table?
You already know about Barbetta, the Tavern on the Green, Provence and the Sea Grill, to name just a few famous outdoor eating spots.
But just when it seemed that no garden had gone undiscovered, some ingenious restaurateurs unearthed a few more.
They reclaimed derelict parks and created farms out of what once was paved.
Some found unused courtyards; others went up on the roof.
These gardens, listed loosely in the order of preference, have all opened in Manhattan within the last year or two.
They are large and small, high and low, and they offer every conceivable sort of food.
But each has made summer in the city just a little bit better.


New Indictment for Reputed Colombo Crime Family Captain
The life of Gregory Scarpa Jr. reads like the script of a gangster soap opera.
The latest episode unfolded yesterday in Federal District Court in Brooklyn, where Mr.
Scarpa -- whom the authorities call a mobster, the son of a mobster and the nephew of a mobster -- pleaded not guilty to 13 charges including murder, racketeering, drug trafficking, extortion and gambling.
Mr.
Scarpa, 43, who is already serving 20 years for racketeering, has been accused by Federal prosecutors of being a Colombo captain and the leader of a crew of 13 members of the crime family since 1980.
The crew has been accused of 15 murders, including two assassinations that took place during an internal war for control of the Colombo family in 1991, in addition to charges that it maintained a routine of drug-running, extortion and gambling.


Major's Scorecard
By coming out on top in his calculated gamble of submitting to a Conservative leadership contest, John Major has virtually guaranteed that he will stay on as Prime Minister and lead the Tories into the next general election sometime between now and the spring of 1997.
But he accomplished nothing that would help him win that election.
Quite the contrary: the last two weeks demonstrated that the Conservative Party is riven into two hostile camps, that it is obsessed with an issue that everyday people do not care much about, and that Mr.
Major has persevered at the helm not because he is an inspirational captain but because he is, as one of his own ministers put it during Tuesday's vote, "the least worst option."


2 Killed and 2 Wounded in Club Shootout
Two men were killed and two others seriously wounded early yesterday in a wild shootout at a social club in Elmhurst, Queens, the police said.
The police found the bodies of the two dead men at 5:30 A.M. at a curb in front of Evocacion Club, at 38-02 34th Street, an after-hours club that caters to Colombians, said Lieut.
James Maguire, commander of the 114th Precinct Detective Squad.
Police officials said that they had no idea of a motive in the shootings and no charges have been filed.


Aziz Nesin of Turkey Dies at 80; Writer Escaped Militants' Arson
Aziz Nesin, an iconoclastic Turkish writer who narrowly escaped death in a 1993 fire set by militant Muslims he had angered, died yesterday while visiting Cesme, a town on Turkey's Aegean coast.
He was 80 and had a home in Istanbul.
The cause was a heart attack, The Associated Press reported.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball
THE BASEBALL NETWORK -- Announced the resignation of Dave Alworth, vice president broadcasting and production.
National League  NEW YORK METS -- Placed Jeff Kent, second baseman, on the 15-day disabled list.
Recalled Ricky Otero, outfielder, from Norfolk of the International League.
Mid-America League  MERRILLVILLE MUDDOGS -- Traded Augie Gonzalez, outfielder, to Minot of the Prairie League for Brian Amstutz, outfielder, and Peter Arthur, pitcher.
Signed Javier Gomez, Ryan Lewis and Vito Poehnelt, pitchers.
Northern League  ST.
PAUL SAINTS -- Traded Jeff Hebert, pitcher, to the Thunder Bay for Sean Gousha, catcher.
Signed Brian Marrillia, infiedler, and Mike Caravelli, pitcher.
Waived Luis Lopez, infielder.
Placed Steve Curry, pitcher, on the disabled list, retroactive to July 5.
Basketball  National Basketball Association  NEW YORK KNICKS -- Named Don Nelson coach.
Football  National Football League  INDIANAPOLIS COLTS -- Re-signed Freddie Joe Nunn, defensive lineman.
NEW YORK GIANTS -- Signed Rob Zatechka, guard, and James Williams, cornerback.
PITTSBURGH STEELERS -- Signed William Lofton, defensive tackle.
Arena Football League  TAMPA BAY STORM -- Signed Kelvin Harris, lineman.
Hockey  National Hockey League  NHL -- Named Guido Tognoni managing director, Europe.
ST.
LOUIS BLUES -- Announced the resignation of Ted Sator, associate coach.
International Hockey League  FORT WAYNE KOMETS -- Named Dave Farrish coach and director of player development.
East Coast Hockey League  CHARLOTTE CHECKERS -- Signed Darryl Noren, wing.
JACKSONVILLE LIZARD KINGS -- Named Jeff Brubaker coach.


Survivors Call Settlement 'Unjust'
Delicia Pineda couldn't make ends meet after her husband died in the Happy Land social club fire five years ago.
"I've been doing my best," she said, "but it has been a very difficult time."
Eventually, Ms.
Pineda moved into a smaller apartment with her children and began collecting public assistance checks.
"I haven't been able to support my family the way I'd like to," said Ms.
Pineda, whose husband, Martin, a gas station attendant, was the family's sole wage earner.


More Noche Flamenca
Noche Flamenca, a company of three flamenco dancers and four musicians, will give a second series of performances, starting Wednesday and running through July 30, at Theater 80, the home of the Pearl Theater company, at 80 St.
Marks Place, East Village.
The program features choreography by Martin Santangelo and Alejandros Granados.
Performances are Wednesdays through Sundays at 8 P.M.
Tickets are $15 on Wednesdays and Thursdays; $20 Fridays through Sundays.
Reservations: (212) 924-0077.


Inside Art
Art for Profit
Buying art purely as an investment is an idea commonly frowned upon in the art world today.
But 21 years ago, when the British Rail Pension Fund decided to invest 2.9 percent of its assets in Impressionist and Old Master paintings, Old Master drawings, Chinese and European works of art and antiquities, it was a downright scandal.
It was considered outrageous that railroad workers' money was being invested in something as elitist as art, and Sotheby's, the pension fund's adviser, was thought to have a conflict of interest because most of the art was bought at auction.


This Time, the Fed Trails the Market
The bankers who set loan and deposit rates and the investors who buy and sell Treasury bonds apparently concluded months ago that the risk of an overheated economy was fading and higher interest rates were no longer needed to protect them against inflation.
The Federal Reserve waited until yesterday to ratify that thinking with its first cut in the Federal funds rate after a yearlong series of increases.
Many rates that directly affect consumers had already fallen in anticipation of the move, and analysts say long-term rates are not likely to fall further soon, though short-term rates may drop.
Articles, pages A1 and D4.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-10  U.S.
MAY BE NEAR VIETNAM TIES  Twenty years after the war in Vietnam ended, President Clinton has concluded that the time has come to establish full diplomatic relations and may announce the decision as early as next week, senior U.S. officials said.
A1  ISRAELI LEADER'S AMBIVALENCE  Reflecting on his three years in office, Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin is sometimes as ambivalent as his critics over Israel's peace efforts.
That skepticism may be his greatest strength.
A1  RWANDA CLERGY STANDS ACCUSED  When the Rwanda Hutu embarked on their killing frenzy in April 1994, tens of thousands of Tutsi sought shelter in Roman Catholic churches.
But now more than a score of clerics have been accused of complicity in atrocities.
A3  SCANDAL HITS NEW FRENCH LEADER  President Jacques Chirac and his conservative Government are embroiled in a scandal about his largesse in doling out city-owned luxury apartments to political cronies while he was Mayor of Paris.
A3  U.N.
PROMISES TOUGHER FORCE  Senior U.N. military officers said that a new rapid reaction force in Bosnia would operate forcefully and streamline its command structure to avoid excessive interference by civilian officials.
A10  Bosnian Serbs bombarded the U.N.
"safe area" of Srebrenica.
A10  News analysis: John Major still faces a tough election fight.
A2  U.S. envoys press the I.R.A. to move toward peace.
A2  Careiro da Varzea Journal: In the Amazon, Avon is calling.
A4  National A12-16  INTEREST RATES ARE CUT  The Federal Reserve reduced short-term interest rates by a quarter of a percentage point, its first rate cut since 1992.
The move may mean lower borrowing costs for consumers and businesses.
A1  CLINTON WANTS QUIETER DEBATE  President Clinton called for "more conversation and less combat" in political debates.
A1  SIMPSON PROSECUTION RESTS  After 92 days, prosecutors in the O.J.
Simpson murder trial finished presenting their case A1  ATTACKING BROADCAST VIOLENCE  Congress and Federal regulators said they hoped to clamp down on broadcast violence.
A1  AMERASIANS' DIMINISHED DREAM  The Amerasian children of American servicemen in Vietnam have found much less in the United States than they had hoped.
A12  SAYING 'NO' TO ORGAN REQUESTS  A new study has found that families are reluctant to donate organs of deceased relatives.
A13  IMPOTENCE DRUG APPROVED  The Federal Food and Drug Administration approved the marketing of the first prescription drug for the treatment of impotence.
A13  BASE FIGURES DISPUTED  A proposal under review at the White House would preserve about 800 jobs -- not several thousand -- at an Air Force base.
A14  A NEW INDEPENDENT PROSECUTOR  A Miami lawyer, Daniel Pearson, was appointed to investigate the personal finances of Commerce Secretary Ronald H. Brown.
A14  GINGRICH ON BOOK CIRCUIT  Speaker Newt Gingrich showed himself a master of the book-promotion circuit at a stop in New York City yesterday.
A16  The District of Columbia got a curfew for teen-agers.
A16  Law A17  RISE IN SMALL-TOWN LAWYERS  Small towns have become more attractive to lawyers, as seen by a couple of practitioners in Georgia.
MAKING THE LAW REVIEW  A law school has made it harder to determine the degree to which race and ethnicity determine admission to the law review.
Metro Digest B1  SETTLEMENT IN HAPPY LAND FIRE  More than five years after the arson fire at the Happy Land social club killed 87 people, lawyers for families of the victims agreed to a $15.8 million settlement of all claims stemming from the fire in the packed Bronx nightclub.
A1  Business Digest D1  Weekend C1-26  Dining out under the sky.
C1  A spa weekend.
C1  Midnight movies.
C1  Gordon Parks's archives.
C2  Skepticism about "Sleepers," by Lorenzo Carcaterra.
C3  For Children C21  Theater: If you want to be a star, insist on a staircase.
C2  Film: "Species." C3  "First Knight." C10  "The Crude Oasis." C10  Dance: Inspired by Ukraine.
C26  Restaurants C23  Art: "Views From Abroad" at the Whitney Museum.
C16  "Philip Guston's PoemPictures." C12  "The Golden Age of Danish Art" at the Frick Collection.
C14  Inside Art C18  Art in Review C24  Books: "Therapy," by David Lodge.
C26  Television: TV Weekend B15  Home Video B15  Sports B6-14  Basketball: Knicks name Don Nelson coach.
B7  Baseball: Early power from Rangers is enough to beat Yankees.
B9  Mets self-destruct against Cubs at Shea.
B9  Columns: Berkow on the Knicks' new hire B7  TV Sports B9  Vecsey on Wimbledon B13  Hockey: Islanders in good position for draft.
B12  Tennis: Steffi Graf and Arantxa Sanchez Vicario gain final.
B7  Obituaries A18-19  Bert Hardy, British photographer.
A18  Aziz Nesin, Turkish writer attacked for translating Rushdie.
A19  Editorials/Op-Ed A24-25  Editorials  Baghdad's biological arsenal.
Overkill in revising regulation.
The law school cartel.
Raising college sports standards.
Letters  Bob Herbert: Bad meat and politics.
Anthony Lewis: Mr.
Clinton's betrayal.
Ken Gormley: Your gerrymander or mine?
Miriam Shuchman and Michael S. Wilkes: Medical successes, on line.
Jeff DeBonis: Buffaloed by the land-use bullies.
Chronicle B4  Crossword C26


Whitman, in Host's Seat, Gets to Toot Her Horn
Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman has often appeared as a guest on talk shows, but last night she switched roles to occupy the guest host's seat on CNN's "Larry King Live," where she invited television news personalities to criticize their craft and managed to slip in short personal commercials for her career as a tax cutter and job creator in New Jersey.
Mrs.
Whitman was one of a series of guest hosts for the national cable interview program.
Last night the spot was taken by former Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo of New York, whom Mrs.
Whitman helped defeat by campaigning for his Republican successor, George E. Pataki.


After a Lull, Crowds Return
Two-thirds of the way through the Special Olympics World Games, the public's on-again, off-again love affair with this nine-day, 140-nation extravaganza for mentally retarded athletes seems to be on again.
At least 60,000 people attended Saturday's celebrity-laden opening ceremony at the Yale Bowl.
Attendance quickly tailed off for the 19 sports at 25 sites, with crowds often consisting mostly of athletes' families.
The organizers estimated there were 400,000 spectators for the first four days, but they included 150,000 visitors to tall ships in the New Haven harbor and 50,000 at a Fourth of July fireworks exhibition.


3 Years Later, Witness Is Beaten
It's been three years since Angel Ortiz helped police by identifying Alex Lugo as a burglary suspect.
Earlier this week, on the Fourth of July, Mr.
Ortiz was walking home from church when he was beaten and thrown into the trunk of a car.
The car was set on fire, and Mr.
Ortiz suffered burns before firefighters rescued him.
Mr.
Lugo was charged yesterday with attempted murder, aggravated arson and retaliation against a witness, prosecutors said.
He pleaded not guilty and is being held in lieu of $150,000 bail.
Mr.
Ortiz is in University Hospital in stable condition.


Demise of a Network Opens Baseball Format
Let's not label ABC's Al Michaels a traitor for pointing out flaws in the Baseball Network, the TV and advertising venture that immolated last month when ABC and NBC divorced major league baseball, effective after this season.
About the regular-season weekly format that begins next week, in which viewers see the same local game they would normally get, he said: "You don't see a national game. To me, I don't see the plus or minus to that."


Man Charged in D.W.I. Deaths
State police have determined that Kevin R. Price, 24, of Basking Ridge was drunk when he slammed head-on into a van while driving the wrong way on the Garden State Parkway earlier this week, killing four people.


Home Video
This summer the big titles are in movie theaters, not video stores, but there are always discoveries to be made on tape.
For example, Shanachie Entertainment recently released "Out of Ireland," Paul Wagner's documentary about the Irish migration to the United States.
Shown on PBS a month ago, the tape has mainline credentials, but it also leads to an eclectic trove of lesser-known videos from a small distributor with varying interests.
Shanachie is primarily a recording company, but its video catalogue, which currently lists only one feature film ("Vampire Vixens From Venus"), is growing in several directions.
Sherwin Dunner, the video acquisitions director, said Shanachie favors Americana and historical documentaries.
A large part of the collection consists of PBS titles like "The Kennedys," "Amelia Earhart" and Ric Burns's documentary "The Way West."


Winning Streak for Whitman
Continuing her winning streak, Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman got a second state workers' union to reach a settlement yesterday on a four-year contract that includes a two-year pay freeze and requires employees who want traditional health insurance to help pay for it, The Associated Press reported.
The agreement with the 7,000-member International Federation of Professional and Technical Engineers is similar to a deal reached earlier this week with the 9,000-member American Federation of State, County and Municipal Employees.
But the largest state workers union, the 35,000-member Communications Workers of America, said it will not agree to the same terms.


Keep in Mind
"RUMPLE WHO?" A musical based on the Rumplestiltskin fairy tale.
At 13th Street Repertory Company, 50 West 13th Street, West Village.
For ages 3 to 9.
Saturdays and Sundays, 1 P.M.
Through July 16.
Tickets: $5.
Reservations: (212) 675-6677.
"THE SECRET GARDEN," a musical based on the childhood classic, at Paper Mill Playhouse, Brookside Drive, Millburn, N.J.
Through July 23.
Wednesdays through Sundays, 8 P.M.; Thursdays, 2 P.M.; Saturdays and Sundays, 3 P.M.; on July 16 and July 23, 1 and 6 P.M.
For ages 4 and up.
Tickets: $29 to $44.
Reservations: (201) 376-4343.





For Children
Sport Exhibition
Liberty Science Center  Liberty State Park  251 Phillip Street  Jersey City  (201) 200-1000  Recommended ages: 4 and up  Through Sept. 4
This may be your only chance to steer a bobsled at Olympic speed without experiencing psychic or physical damage.
At this self-guided exhibition, you can learn some of the biology and physics behind sports.
Sitting in a stationary bobsled on a simulated course, for example, riders learn a basic lesson in gravity as they career and careen down the ice at 60 miles per hour.
Children can also sit in stationary wheelchairs and race in place, feeling the ground's resistance and finding out which move faster, arms or legs.
Children will also relish the climbing walls; one is boulderlike, the other flat with protrusions.
Give both a try.


The Law School Cartel
White-collar professionals are sometimes accused of using professional rule-making as a mask to hide anti-competitive conspiracies.
But now the antitrust division of the Justice Department has punctured one such hypocrisy.
It settled a suit against the American Bar Association under terms that will prevent the organization from manipulating its accreditation of law schools for the purpose of jacking up faculty salaries and improving working conditions.
The A.B.A. accredits law schools to assure students and employers that the schools are meeting professional standards.
But the A.B.A. has turned its accrediting committees over to professors who have used their control to force law schools to pay high wages and provide expensive fringe benefits.
The A.B.A. refused, for example, to accredit law schools that earned profit, paid low salaries or failed to provide paid leaves for faculty.


No Headline
"Clearly, a record can be made that violent content on television is more dangerous to children than indecency. REED E. HUNDT, chairman of the F.C.C.  [ A1:5. ]


Ambivalent Rabin Reflects Israel's Wary View of Peace
Yitzhak Rabin answers the question with a question: Should anyone be surprised that Israelis are ambivalent about their peace talks with the Palestinians?
"On one hand, rationally, they understand that the time has come to end the conflict in all its parts," the Israeli Prime Minister said.
"On the other hand, they are emotionally not convinced that the Palestinian Authority is capable or willing to cope with the terror."


Art in Review
Barry Le Va  Sonnabend Gallery 420 West Broadway (near Spring Street) SoHo Through July 28
Barry Le Va may not want the credit, but in some ways his dispersed low-lying sculptures make him one of the grandfathers of scatter art.
More important, his sculptures develop the tenets of early 1970's Post-Minimalism with a persistence and clarity that has eluded many artists of his generation.


A German court rules that images in a Benetton campaign are exploitative and illegal.
AN advertising campaign by Benetton Group S.p.A., the Italian clothing maker, that includes depictions of an oil-drenched bird, child laborers in Latin America and a human body stamped with the words "H.I.V. positive" was ruled illegal yesterday by a German appellate court.
The country's second-highest court, in the city of Karlsruhe, ruled that "anyone who exploits feelings of pity in such an intense way for commercial interests violates competition law."


Seven-Year Pact for Keady
Purdue yesterday announced that its basketball coach, GENE KEADY, has signed a new seven-year contract.
Athletic Director MORGAN J. BURKE said the agreement includes a base salary of $138,000 per year and that specific details will not be announced.
Keady has compiled a 322-142 mark in 15 years at Purdue.


In the Amazon, Guess Who's Calling?


The Spoken Word
POLICE THRILLER, Barnes &amp; Noble, Citicorp, 160 East 54th Street, Manhattan.
Dan Mahoney, a retired police captain and author of "Detective First Grade" will read from his new novel, "Edge of the City." Tomorrow at 2 P.M.
Free.
Information: (212) 750-8033.
"PERSONAL SPACE AND THE GARDEN," Bridgehampton Community House, Main Street, Bridgehampton, L.I.
A lecture and slide show on garden design by Bill Shank, an interior designer and one of the founders of the Horticultural Alliance of the Hamptons.
Today at 7:30 P.M.
Suggested donation, $5.
Information: (516) 537-2223.


In America; Bad Meat and Politics
The bacterium Escherichia coli 0157:H7 is a nightmare embedded in millions of hamburger patties.
Not everyone will become ill from eating meat tainted with E. coli 0157, but for those who do -- especially children, the elderly, and people with weakened immune systems -- the consequences can be catastrophic.
Bloody diarrhea and severe abdominal cramps are the usual first signs of E. coli poisoning, which can result in the failure of kidneys and other major organs, blindness, impaired motor skills, cognitive difficulties and death.
It is a problem that is growing.
E. coli poisoning is now the leading cause of acute kidney failure in American children.


Staff Builders Inc.(SBLI,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Art in Review
'Six Artists From Korea'  Grace Borgenicht Gallery 724 Fifth Avenue (at 57th Street) Through July 28
This show, with the American artist David Saunders as curator, is intended to focus on Korean art as art, breaking with the pattern of recent exhibitions that have approached Asian art as an expression of ethnic identity.
Nonetheless, the viewer inevitably approaches the work with the question, "What's Korean about this?"


Identifying With Kierkegaard's Unhappiest Man
THERAPY  By David Lodge  321 pages. Viking. $22.95.
Another novel about a midlife crisis?
Another middle-aged hero worrying about hair loss, impotence, joint pain and mortality?


Scandal Over Paris Luxury Apartments Embarrasses Chirac
President Jacques Chirac and his conservative Government, not yet two months in office, are already embroiled in a widening scandal about his largesse in doling out city-owned luxury apartments to political cronies while he was Mayor of Paris for 18 years.
One of the most prominent beneficiaries was Alain Juppe, named Prime Minister by Mr.
Chirac after he was elected to the Presidency May 7.
Mr.
Juppe appeared on national television tonight to say that there was absolutely nothing improper about the way he had got his own apartment from the city in 1990.


A Hospital Stay Allows New Mothers to Adjust to Childbirth
To the Editor:
Dr.
Robert Matz ("Let Mothers and Newborns Recover in the Comfort of Home," letter, July 4) theorizes that "there is no indication that prolonged hospital care is useful."


Head of Municipal Art Society Announces His Resignation
Kent L. Barwick said yesterday that he would resign as president of the Municipal Art Society of New York in mid-September to become president of the New York State Historical Association.
Mr.
Barwick, who is 58, has been president of the nonprofit society since 1983.
It champions excellence in urban design, rational planning and preservation of the best of the city's past.


Higher Standards for College Sports
One of the most tantalizing but destructive dreams inner-city youths have today is the notion that they can skip their educations and become millionaires in professional sports.
The idea was reinforced in the recent professional basketball draft, in which several top prospects quit or passed on college altogether to sign lucrative contracts.
But such athletes are rare.
Fewer than one in 100,000 high school athletes win college sports scholarships.
Of those only a few ascend to the pros, and most of them will be washed up by their mid-20's.
In 1986 the N.C.A.A. sought to insure better academic success with its Proposition 48, a measure that raised eligibility standards for freshmen athletes.
To play sports as a freshman, an athlete needs a 2.0 average in a high school core curriculum and a combined score of at least 700 on the Scholastic Assessment Test, about 200 points below the national average for college-bound seniors.


CHRONICLE
Another wedding in Britain made news this week, that of CROWN PRINCE PAVLOS, 28, of Greece, and MARIE-CHANTAL MILLER, 26, an American heiress.
The bridegroom's parents are KING CONSTANTINE and QUEEN ANNE-MARIE, who live in exile in London, and the bride is the daughter of CHANTAL MILLER and ROBERT W. MILLER, a founder of Duty Free Shoppers.
Only 450 of the 1,500 invited guests could fit into the Cathedral of St.
Sophia in London for the ceremony on Saturday.
It was said to be the biggest assemblage of royalty since the marriage of Queen Elizabeth II to Prince Philip in 1947.
In September, Crown Prince Pavlos is to start a job with Charles R. Weber, a ship-brokerage firm in Greenwich, Conn.
His wife, who is to be known as Crown Princess Pavlos, will return to her art history studies at New York University.
NADINE BROZAN


Patient Meets the Press


Diner's Journal
The Diner Is the Theme
If 57th Street is going to be taken over by theme restaurants, I wish more of them could be like Brooklyn Diner U.S.A., which opened last week.
It is a sanitized fantasy of an old diner, one where the floor is always clean, your cup is always full and everyone who works in the place begins the day with be-nice pills.


Reduction's Biggest Impact: Fanning Hopes of More Cuts
The Federal Reserve's move yesterday to reduce the Federal funds rate, which banks charge each other for overnight loans, is likely to have only a minor impact on consumers, at least in the near future.
Indeed, the Fed's decision to drop short-term interest rates merely mirrored what has already happened in financial markets.
Long-term mortgage rates have already fallen almost one and a half percentage points, to 7.63 percent, since the beginning of the year, and yields on Treasury bonds have also dropped steadily.


Charges Against Rabbi Dropped
Federal prosecutors have dismissed charges against one of two rabbis from Borough Park, Brooklyn, who were accused of sexually abusing a 15-year-old girl during a trans-Pacific flight in May, officials said yesterday.
The United States Attorney's office in Los Angeles dropped the complaint of abusive sexual misconduct against Rabbi Israel Grunwald, 44, "without prejudice" -- meaning that the investigation will continue and the charge can be refiled, according to a statement from Assistant United States Attorney Debra W. Yang.


Pitching Makes That First Inning A Doozy
Sterling Hitchock, meet Brian Boehringer.
Mr.
Boehringer, this is Mr.
Hitchcock.
Even though the two young pitchers do not need such introductions, they could have chatted for hours tonight because they had a frustrating trait in common: Both pitched so erratically during the first inning in the past two nights that the Yankees were doomed and dejected early and then defeated.
Hitchcock, a superior prospect, was not as sloppy as Boehringer was the night before in Chicago, but he was no Jimmy Key either as the Rangers rocked two monstrous homers in the first and then added one more shot in the fifth in breezing to a 5-2 victory at the Ballpark in Arlington.
A black cat skipped in and out of the dugout throughout the game and the Yankee owner, George Steinbrenner, sat beside it.
But Hitchcock could not blame bad luck or bad vibes.
Simply blame bad pitching and his futile quest for his curveball.


Law Review Masks Diversity in a New Admission System
In the competitive world of law school, where students scramble to distinguish themselves from their peers, admission to a law review is an honor that can enhance a career.
Now the editorial board of a prestigious law review has changed its selection process, making it harder to determine who is admitted on merit alone and who is selected partly on the basis of race or ethnicity.


Allwaste Inc.(ALW,N) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Drawings From the Golden Age of Denmark
The Golden Age of Denmark, a brief cultural flowering that followed the end of the Napoleonic Wars and lasted until around 1850, numbered among its luminaries Hans Christian Andersen and Kirkegaard, as well as achievements in physics, ballet and theater.
In painting, the period produced a small circle of artists who developed a precise, discretely romantic art based on direct observation of everyday life and the Danish landscape.
The star of this circle was Christen Kobke, who was born in 1810, the son of a master baker, and died in 1848, producing his best work in the 1830's and early 40's.
Kobke's singularity makes the phrase Golden Age seem inflated, at least where art is concerned.
Exhibitions devoted to the period are mostly opportunities for further study of his special, quintessentially Danish genius and the context that produced it.
They also allow one to measure his surprisingly sure, clear talent against the efforts of his predecessors and contemporaries.


Balkan Force To Fight Back If Threatened
Senior United Nations military officers said today that a new rapid reaction force in Bosnia would operate forcefully and streamline its command structure to avoid excessive interference by civilian officials.
The military's statement came as the French and British Governments indicated that they wanted the new 12,500-member force to respond aggressively to threats to the safety of peacekeepers or of aid convoys, particularly in the Sarajevo region, where the plight of civilians is now extreme.


Retailers Report Their Sales Were Sluggish Last Month
Spending at the nation's retail chain stores was sluggish during June, sales figures released yesterday show.
Analysts said the lackluster results were consistent with a slowdown in the economy.
Big department stores and discount chains registered the biggest sales gains, as consumers continued to be spend cautiously, gravitating to stores offering markdowns on summer merchandise.


Family Dollar Stores Inc.(FDO,N) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Sports of The Times; Nelson Comes Off The Rack
THE Knicks could have conducted their three-week search for a new coach through every high-fashion men's shop in the world, and they couldn't have come up with a better choice of goods than Don Nelson.
While he may be a little shiny around the elbows, he has worn well, and has come through some bad weather.
To dispense with the sartorial first: Don Nelson is best known for the clunky black sneakers he once wore as a coach on the sidelines.
Guccis, as it happens in this case, are for a certain predecessor.


Angry Chrysler Board Prevents Iacocca From Using Stock Options
The old saying "you can't take it with you" has a painful new meaning for Lee A. Iacocca, one that could cost the former chairman and chief executive of the Chrysler Corporation almost $32 million.
Chrysler's board, angered at his alliance with Kirk Kerkorian's attempt to take over the auto maker, has refused to allow Mr.
Iacocca to exercise stock options he received after retiring from Chrysler in 1992, the company said in a document filed yesterday with the Securities and Exchange Commission.


U.S. TO ESTABLISH FULL HANOI LINKS, TOP OFFICIALS SAY
Twenty years after the war in Vietnam ended, President Clinton has concluded that the time has come to establish full diplomatic relations with the former enemy and may announce the decision as early as next week, senior Administration officials said today.
The President has not yet signed a formal order granting Vietnam full diplomatic recognition, which would be the United States' most important step towards burying the bitterness of the Vietnam War.
But Anthony Lake, the President's national security adviser, is completing a draft order recommending the policy change, which is expected to be presented to the President within the next few days.


Nelson Takes Blame for Webber Rift
Don Nelson remains convinced that the best days between him and Chris Webber were ahead of them, but he also knows he made some grave mistakes that not only cost him the respect of the Golden State Warriors' prized rookie but, ultimately, his job.
Speaking candidly for the first time about the power struggle between himself and the complex young superstar from the University of Michigan, Nelson blamed himself for the falling out between the two that eventually led to Webber's trade to Washington, the loss of the Warriors' morale and his forced resignation from Golden State during the All-Star Game break in February.
"It was a complicated thing, no question," Nelson said after being introduced as the Knicks' coach yesterday at Madison Square Garden.
"As I look back, I'm going to take the blame for that because I was the adult in that situation."
Webber exercised a year-out option clause in his contract partly because he grew tired of Nelson's incessant criticism.
Nelson, who acquired Webber in a draft-day deal with Orlando for the rights to Anfernee Hardaway, merely saw him as any other first-year player: a great talent with a young mind in need of fine-tuning and discipline.
The trouble began as soon as the 1993-94 season began, with Webber refusing the unglamorous chores of a big man underneath the boards.
Nelson told several backcourt players that Webber was costing the team games and once that got back to Webber from the reserve swingman Jeff Grayer, the rift widened into a chasm.
Nelson blew up during a timeout at Charlotte Coliseum in February 1994 after Webber threw a pass away.
Webber retaliated, screaming: "Treat me like a man! Treat me like a man!"
Nelson tried to talk Webber into a one-on-one meeting to apologize and clear the air, but it never materialized.
"I should have communicated with Chris more during the summer, when he was in negotiations with our team," Nelson said.
"He probably needed that closeness to me. I was the head coach in the World Games and I was pretty busy in Toronto. I should have made time for him, and I didn't. I thought we were going to get together at my basketball camp and everything would have been smoothed over. And I should have stayed closer to the situation.
"Hopefully, we can leave that behind us now because we both have to go on. I learn as I go. I'm only 55. I learn every day. And I learned a big lesson there."
The Webber incident was the first to taint Nelson's reputation as a players' coach in his 18 seasons in the job.
That reputation was built on Nelson working rookies and young players harder than most.
Sarunas Marciulionis, the Lithuanian who came to America, said that Nelson "worked me like a dog, but I became a better player because of it."
In general, Nelson has been revered by most of his former players.
"I've never had a problem with loving my players even if they didn't love me in return," Nelson said.
"I've never disliked Chris. I like him very much. He doesn't like me very much, but I do like him.
"I still believe, in the bottom of my heart, that he would have loved playing for me. If I had him over time, more than one year, we would've been the best of friends."


China to Keep Coast Areas' Special Status
After months of rumors and speculation, Shanghai's Mayor made an announcement today that amounts to a vote to keep promises to foreign investors and not to yield to demands for equality from investment-starved inland areas.
Mayor Xu Kuangdi, smiling broadly as he addressed a room full of reporters, said that after long political debate in Beijing, China's leaders had decided not to revoke the preferential tax status given to East Shanghai, one of China's fastest-growing development zones and a barometer of the nation's efforts to modernize industry.


Skytel Chooses Suissa Miller
The Skytel Corporation in Jackson, Miss., named Suissa Miller in Santa Monica, Calif., to handle its account, with billings estimated at $20 million.
For the last two years the account had been at the Martin Agency in Richmond, a unit of the Interpublic Group of Companies.


Host of Financial Talk Show Is Indicted for a Second Time
The legal troubles of Sonny Bloch, the financial radio talk show host who was indicted in May on fraud charges, have taken a turn for the worse.
Federal prosecutors in Manhattan announced yesterday that Mr.
Bloch had been indicted again, this time on eight counts of tax fraud, perjury and obstruction of justice.


ConAgra Inc.(CAG,N) reports earnings for Qtr to May 28


Unitrin Inc.(UNIT,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Jun 30


Market Place; Finding stock values with the aid of the relative dividend yield.
INVEST in lower-risk and less-expensive stocks.
That is the credo of Anthony Spare, a San Francisco money manager, and to pursue it, his firm, Spare, Kaplan, Bischel &amp; Associates, employs a little-understood investment strategy known as relative dividend yield.
The technique can also be used by individual investors, he says.


Player Suspended for Betting
The University of Maryland has declared at least one football player ineligible for gambling on college sporting events, but the school has submitted an appeal to the National Collegiate Athletic Association, DEBBIE YOW, the school's athletic director, said yesterday.
Yow would not disclose any names, and would not say how many football players were involved.
But a source said the school's lengthy in-house inquiry into student-athlete gambling was started March 6 because of allegations that the starting quarterback, SCOTT MILANOVICH, placed bets on college basketball games.


U.S. Envoys Press the I.R.A. To Take Steps to Yield Arms
The United States Ambassadors to Britain and Ireland have reminded Gerry Adams, leader of the political wing of the Irish Republican Army, that the Clinton Administration wants him to advance the Northern Ireland peace effort.
The Administration is particularly interested, the Ambassadors say, in the area of decommissioning of arms by the I.R.A., in order to enhance the possibility of convening full-fledged peace negotiations.


'On Stage, and Off'
The "On Stage, and Off" column will resume with the new theater season in September.


An Oasis Appears On Dyckman Street; A 'Boat Bum' Who Reads the Fine Print Is Building a Pier and Marina in Inwood
Music echoed from loudspeakers as two men unfurled six green Heineken umbrellas over tables at a waterside snack bar.
A menu offered fried shrimp and calamari.
On a concrete pier, four anglers watched lines for the twitch of a nibbling bass.
Beneath them, waves washed at a sandy beach.
Two dozen boats bobbed at a dock and a line of moorings.
The sounds and sights were Newport, but this was the dead end of Dyckman Street in Inwood, a stretch of the Hudson River shore in upper Manhattan that until this spring was little more than a glass-littered cul-de-sac frequented by cabbies on lunch breaks and people dumping trash.


F.C.C. Joining A Move to Curb Violence on TV
Federal regulators and members of Congress say they hope to clamp down on broadcast violence and require more programming for children by taking advantage of a recent Federal appeals court decision that upheld restrictions on indecent programs on television and radio.
"Clearly, a record can be made that violent content on television is more dangerous to children than indecency," Reed E. Hundt, chairman of the Federal Communications Commission, said today.


Art in Review
Fred Sandback  Lawrence Markey Gallery 55 Vandam Street (between Varick and Hudson Streets) South Village Through July 28
Minimalism would seem a self-liquidating enterprise: once art gets down to nothing, what's left to do?
Since the late 1960's, Fred Sandback has devoted his career to proving this isn't true.


At a Spa, Six Moms on an Escapade
WE were six moms on the loose, pulling up to the Norwich Inn and Spa in (what else) a station wagon.
After months of plotting, four college pals and two others we'd befriended later had flown the coop for the weekend, leaving the dads to handle manfully the home fronts.
All of us were facing 40. We'd face it better with a facial.


Overkill in Revising Regulation
Senator Bob Dole's bill to reform regulatory procedures would erect needless obstacles to adopting Federal health, safety and environmental rules.
Its excessive provisions invite filibuster by angry Democrats and a Presidential veto.
The majority leader could exercise better leadership by joining forces with John Glenn, Democrat of Ohio, whose alternative bill would bring common sense to Federal rules, not extinguish them.
Both Mr.
Dole and Mr.
Glenn start off right by requiring Federal agencies to weigh benefits against costs to weed out regulations that do more harm than good.
The calculations are necessarily inexact, especially where non-quantifiable benefits, like the value of clean air over the Grand Canyon, are involved.
But forcing agencies to explain the pros and cons of rules and justify their wisdom gives the public vital information.


Last Chance
Here is a sampling of shows and exhibitions that are to close soon:  Closing This Weekend "NADAR," Metropolitan Museum of Art, Fifth Avenue and 82d Street.
An exhibition of works by the French photographer Gaspard-Felix Tournachon, known as Nadar.
Through Sunday.
Hours: Today and tomorrow, 9:30 A.M. to 9 P.M.; Sunday, 9:30 A.M. to 5:15 P.M.
Suggested contribution: $7; $3.50 for children and the elderly.
Information: (212) 879-5500.


Bert Hardy, 82, Photographer Of British Life
Bert Hardy, a photographer whose images of life in England during and after World War II are considered classics of British photojournalism, died on Monday in Oxted, south of London.
He was 82.
The cause was a heart attack, his family said.


International Briefs; Italian Designers Reportedly Indicted
The toast of Italian fashion -- Giorgio Armani, GianFranco Ferre, Santo Versace, Gerolamo Etro and Krizia -- and other leading designers have been indicted for reportedly bribing tax inspectors, news agencies in Milan reported yesterday.
The indictments were part of the "Clean Hands" investigation, which has uncovered systematic, nationwide kickbacks to politicians and bureaucrats from business people.


Sales Tax Is Wrong Bailout for Orange County; Local Irresponsibility
To the Editor:
Re "Orange County's Threat to Us All" (editorial, July 2):
Perhaps your editorial should have been titled "Orange County's Favor to Us All."


Insecurity on the Job Will Change Our Politics
To the Editor:
"In New Work World, Employers Call All the Shots," your report on the end of the era of job security and rising wages, deserved the July 3 front-page place you gave it, not because it is news -- it is not -- but because it can help hasten the demise of illusions that do not die easily.
Eroding expectations and shrinking opportunities will sooner or later transform people's views of the country and the ability of those who lead -- and those who propose to lead -- to provide answers that make sense.
A new politics is waiting to be born.


A Defeat in D.M.V. Fight
An employees' union effort to block the conversion on Saturday of state motor vehicle offices to a private operation failed yesterday when the New Jersey Supreme Court refused to hear the case.
The setback does not mean the Communications Workers of America local representing 330 D.M.V. workers will not have its day in court.
The union had tried to bypass the Appellate Division of Superior Court after a trial court judge upheld the Whitman administration's decision to award privatization contracts without bidding.


White House Draws the Ire Of Base Panel
Only 800 jobs, and not the thousands cited by some Clinton Administration officials, are at issue in one Pentagon proposal on how the White House could respond to an independent commission's recommendation that an Air Force base in California be closed, members and aides of the commission said today.
The reason, they said, is that the commission's recommendation already gives the Defense Department the authority to keep in California more than 10,000 of the 11,000 jobs now at the post, McClellan Air Force Base near Sacramento, by awarding work done there to private companies within the state.
So no intervention by President Clinton is needed to save those jobs, said members of the independent panel, the Defense Base Closure and Realignment Commission.


Restaurants
The first time I went to Parioli Romanissimo, I was horrified: the prices seemed outrageous.
But that was three years ago, and while the restaurant's prices have not changed, my outlook has.
In the interim, I've moved to New York and discovered exactly what you pay for when you buy a rack of lamb for $35.50.
Space and quiet and discreet service; Parioli Romanissimo is one of New York City's most civilized restaurants.
The small, subdued dining room occupies the ground floor of a gracious town house, and from the moment you walk in, the staff tries to make you feel as if you are dining in a private home.
The captains play the role of butler; they are thoughtful, retiring, unopinionated and if there do happen to be some other people in the room, well, they'd just as soon you overlooked it.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
9.00
9.00
7.25
DISCOUNT RATE
5.25
5.25
3.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
6.13
7.41
4.36
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.36
5.49
4.23
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.25
5.41
4.70
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.02
6.17
7.29
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.49
6.60
7.60
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.44
7.54
8.36
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.15
6.21
6.44
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Bay Gets Special Protection
Barnegat Bay in Ocean County is getting federal protection against pollution.
The Federal Environmental Protection Agency added the bay yesterday to a national list of more than 20 estuaries granted special protection.
The designation makes New Jersey eligible to receive up to $1.5 million in Federal funds over three years to develop a plan to protect the bay.
An estuary is a coastal area where fresh water from rivers and streams mixes with salt water from the ocean.
TERRY PRISTIN


Novel Way to Unwind: Picnics by the Parkway
ON days when the air in her Bronx apartment hangs thick and dull, Tiny Timpanaro likes to take her two boys to the grassy shoulder of the Palisades Parkway.
She loads her "Mami," an '84 Corolla hatchback, with a Styrofoam cooler, a portable stereo and a big blue comforter, and she and the boys make a beeline for a spot beside two huge trees near Exit 16.


FIRST CUT SINCE '92
Under mounting political and economic pressure to stave off a possible recession, the Federal Reserve reduced short-term interest rates today for the first time since 1992.
But the Federal Reserve's top rate-setting committee made only a small reduction, reflecting its confidence that any downturn would be brief and mild.
It trimmed the Federal funds rate, which banks charge each other for overnight loans, to 5.75 percent from 6 percent.
The less critical discount rate, which the Federal Reserve levies on banks for short-term loans, was left unchanged at 5.25 percent.


Clergy in Rwanda Is Accused of Abetting Atrocities
When the Rwanda Hutu embarked on their killing frenzy in April 1994, tens of thousands of Tutsi sought shelter in Roman Catholic churches.
Many men and women of the cloth risked their lives to protect the refugees, and often lost their lives when Hutu militia ignored the sanctity of the temple.
But now a darker side of the story is emerging.
More than a score of priests and nuns have been accused by witnesses of complicity in atrocities, including one priest, the Rev.
Wenceslas Munyeshyaka, who has been performing his pastoral duties in France for nearly a year.


Court Shuns An Appeal On Schools
The state government moved one step closer to gaining direct control of the troubled Newark school system today after an appeals court refused to block the takeover.
But the legal skirmishing is not over.
The case now moves to the seven-judge New Jersey Supreme Court, which gave lawyers for the Newark Board of Education until 1 P.M. on Friday to file their request for a stay in the takeover.
Supreme Court members said today they would add the issue to their regular agenda next Wednesday.


E. Claiborne Robins, 84, Dies; Executive and Philanthropist
E.
Claiborne Robins, a philanthropist who built and lost one of the country's largest pharmaceutical companies, died yesterday at his home in Richmond.
He was 84.
The cause was cancer of the pancreas, said Randy Fitzgerald, a spokesman for the University of Richmond, where Mr.
Robins had been a trustee or trustee emeritus since 1951.


Also of Note
Critics' choices of some other Manhattan art shows: BRYAN HUNT, Gagosian Gallery, 136 Wooster Street, between Houston and Prince Streets, SoHo (through July 14).
Bryan Hunt has suddenly decided to go for Baroque, twisting his trademark bronze waterfalls into contorted shapes and modeling them with ridges and furrows like drapery folds.
The results lack the inhuman elegance of his earlier work, but don't quite attain the Rodinesque muscularity he seems to be aiming for (Pepe Karmel).


Art in Review
Paul McCarthy  Museum of Modern Art 11 West 53d Street Manhattan Through July 18
The Los Angeles artist Paul McCarthy has been making his iconoclastic presence felt on the New York gallery scene for several years now.
A multi-media artist with a deep attraction to foodstuffs who works in video, performance, sculpture and installation, he's known for conjuring raunchy mixtures of sex, scatology, condiments and esthetics that satirize both the art world and society as a whole.
His latest bout of exhibitionism, a video-installation piece in the Projects gallery at the Museum of Modern Art, gives his talent its best New York showing yet.


President of Warriors Quits
ANDY DOLICH, the Golden State Warriors president and chief operating officer, resigned yesterday after being with the team about eight months.
Dolich, formerly with the Oakland Athletics for 15 years, said he was leaving because the Warriors' transition is complete, with a new owner, coach and general manager.
"We helped guide the organization through a change of ownership and restructuring," Dolich said.
"The basketball side of the operation is in great hands with the addition of DAVE TWARDZIK, RICK ADELMAN and a first-class coaching staff." (AP)


Interest Rate Cut By Fed Pushes Treasury Prices Up
Treasury prices surged yesterday after the Federal Reserve cut short-term interest rates by a quarter of percentage point.
The move matched the expectations of many in the market, which had already priced in a cut of that size.
But many trader and analysts are still uncertain about how far the Fed's new course will take interest rates.


At New Javits Center, Work Is Cheaper, if Slower
The task may be simple -- unrolling a swatch of bright green carpet, tugging it into place and tacking it to the floor.
But before this week, said woodworkers with the United Brotherhood of Carpenters and Joiners of America, they had never been allowed to touch a piece of carpet.
"That was for the rug guys," said a union carpenter in a black T-shirt, as he pried open a crate yesterday at the Jacob K. Javits Convention Center.
On the other side of the cavernous convention hall, a 36-year-old carpenter who would identify himself only as Ronald stapled a pleated drape to a fold-out table for the first time in his three years of occasional work at the center.


A Hell's Kitchen Tale Is Doubted and Defended
"This is a true story about friendships that run deeper than blood," reads a passage from a new book about love, death and revenge in the Hell's Kitchen section of Manhattan.
But despite the insistence of the publisher and the author himself that the book is true, there is growing talk in book publishing that the story is at least in part fiction.
Yesterday The Daily News published an article spelling out the allegations.
The book, "Sleepers," by Lorenzo Carcaterra, is about the ordeal of four boys in a reformatory and the revenge they wreak on their tormentors.
An alternate selection of the Book-of-the-Month Club, "Sleepers" is being published as nonfiction by Ballantine Books (it is already in bookstores) and has been sold for $2 million for adaptation as a movie to be directed by Barry Levinson.


Singles Bars And Single Half-Aliens
The creature at the center of "Species" is a result of one of those overreaching scientific experiments gone wrong.
In a quiet Government lab in Utah, Xavier Fitch (Ben Kingsley) has combined human DNA with alien DNA that was beamed down from a supposedly friendly planet.
The new life form, named Sil, has a supermodel's body and face, presumably from her human genes.
The deadly tentacle that whips out from her mouth and tears people's throats apart comes from the extraterrestrial side of the family.
As Fitch and a team of experts track Sil through Los Angeles, this science-fiction thriller is slick and competent, but ultimately too predictable and by-the-numbers.
It begins with promising strangeness, leaping into the middle of a scene that is only gradually explained.
A 12-year-old blond girl is being gassed inside a chamber; Fitch is shedding a tear, though he understands that his prized creature must be destroyed, fast. (Some bad REM sleep has suggested violent times ahead.) But before the girl goes under, she crashes through the glass chamber and escapes.
En route to Los Angeles, she kills a vagrant and a train conductor.
She also mutates; her skin begins to bubble, she is enveloped in a huge sticky cocoon, and she steps off the train in L.A. as a grown woman (Natasha Henstridge) who somehow knows how to drive.


Sales Tax Is Wrong Bailout for Orange County
To the Editor:
"Orange County's Threat to Us All" (editorial, July 2) chided the voters of California's Orange County ("a very wealthy area") with "arrogance" because they rejected an increase in the sales tax to 8.25 percent.
The increase was the centerpiece of a plan making up for losses incurred by County Treasurer Robert Citron's rogue trading in the derivatives market.
You explained that the "outrageous" outcome of this vote was due to an "anti-tax ideology," which threatens "the very concept of government as a shared enterprise with benefits for all."


INSIDE
Dispute Over Base Closing
Base-closing officials accused the Administration of overstating the number of jobs at issue in the shutdown of a California post.
Page A14 The Organ Donor Gap
Failure to use organs for transplants occurs not because doctors don't ask but because donors' families say no, a big study suggests.
Page A13.
Prosecutor for Brown
An independent prosecutor was appointed to investigate the personal finances of Commerce Secretary Ronald H. Brown.
Page A14.
Top-Seeded Women Win
Steffi Graf and Arantxa Sanchez Vicario are right where they are supposed to be: in tomorrow's women's finals at Wimbledon.
Page B7.
Knicks Hire Nelson
Saying he would make the Knicks a faster, more exciting team, Don Nelson took over as coach.
Page B7.


Awaiting The Pope
The Vatican has issued the schedule for Pope John Paul II's visit to the United States in the fall.
Sites of his six appearances in the New York area are listed below, in chronological order.
Page B4.


Rethinking Postwar Pigeonholes for Art
A mostly unstudied assumption nowadays holds that the European and American art scenes have increasingly come to resemble one another.
This is true, to a point.
But generally, Europeans are more comfortable with tradition than we are: Americans prize innovation and value art to the degree it's groundbreaking, while their artists recognize themselves as part of a history that they feel freer to draw from.
Which may explain why a traditional medium like painting is more vital to young European artists than to young Americans, and why Europeans extol postwar painters like Karel Appel and Asger Jorn, whom Americans regard as insufficiently radical.
Where is this line of thought going, you may wonder?
To a new three-part series at the Whitney Museum of American Art, "Views From Abroad," the first installment of which has just opened.
The idea is a good one, a variation on the notion that has artists organizing shows like the Artist's Choice exhibitions at the Modern of Modern Art.
In this case, the director of a European museum selects works from the Whitney's collection, giving a foreign slant, presumably, to American art.


CHRONICLE
RICHARD TYLER, the fashion designer, and LISA TRAFFICANTE, his wife and business partner, are the new owners of one of the city's grandest old residences: the 37-room Benjamin Sonnenberg house at Gramercy Park South and Irving Place.
The purchase of the six-story town house, which includes a 38-by-25-foot ballroom, was finalized on Wednesday.


Semifinals Boast Cast Of Colorful Characters
Top gun Andre Agassi, who would be Wimbledon's darling even if he wore a paper bag over his head and an outfit that fit, hasn't been traumatized by being called "short, fat, bald, and ugly" in one London publication.
Pete Sampras, the two-time defending champion, is visibly vexed by the Euro-media's insistence on comparing him to a robot.


Hotel Is Closing for Makeover
The Trump Regency Hotel will be closed for about six months when major renovations begin around Sept. 20, it was announced yesterday.
About 325 employees may find themselves out of work, at least temporarily.
But hotel officials said hundreds of new jobs will be created when the Trump Regency re-opens early next year.
When the makeover is completed, the hotel will be operated as a part of Trump Plaza, which will then become the largest hotel-casino in Atlantic City.


Kodak vs. Fuji TV Ads
To the Editor:
Re "Japanese See Kodak Case as Hardly Black and White" (Business Day, July 5): As someone who has lived in Japan and the United States, I was puzzled by the two pictures you carry to illustrate how Fuji and Kodak products are treated in retail stores in Tokyo and Washington.


Brian Blades Is a Witness To Cousin's Shooting Death
Seattle Seahawks wide receiver BRIAN BLADES, who witnessed his cousin's shooting death on Wednesday, owned the gun that killed him, the police in Plantation, Fla., believe.
The police say it is unclear who pulled the trigger, but Brian Blades was the only other person in the room when the gun went off, killing Charles Blades, 34, of nearby Opa-locka with a single shot to the head.
"Right now we're going on the assumption it was an accident," Police Sgt.
MIKE PRICE told The Miami Herald for an article published yesterday.
"We do believe the gun belonged to Brian."


Rangers to Sign Two Top Picks
The Rangers are expected to announce today the signing of their two most recent first-round draft choices: Center Nicklas Sundstrom, eighth over all in the first round in 1993, and goalie Dan Cloutier, 26th in the first round of 1994.
Both players are expected to sign long-term contracts.
One factor in their signing might have been the implementation of the rookie salary cap of $850,000 per season, which goes into effect tomorrow.
Sundstrom, 6 feet and 183 pounds, turned 20 last month and is expected to contend for a position on the club in training camp.
He was born in Ornskoldsvik, Sweden, and last season with MoDo in Sweden had 8 goals and 13 assists in 33 games.


Must AIDS Infants Be Punished Too?
To the Editor:
It was disheartening to read of Jesse Helms's views of the victims of AIDS and his efforts to cut funds to the Ryan White Care Act of 1990 (news article, July 5).
As medical director of a clinic for H.I.V.-positive children funded by the Ryan White Care Act, I see daily the positive impact these funds have on the lives of children with H.I.V./AIDS.


Drug for Treating Impotence Is Ready for Sale, F.D.A. Says
The Food and Drug Administration yesterday approved the marketing of the first prescription drug for the treatment of impotence, a condition that affects 10 million to 20 million American men.
The drug is administered by injection into the penis shortly before sexual intercourse.
It is not recommended for use more than three times a week or more than once in 24 hours.
Although it is intended for self-administration, "the first injections must be done in a physician's office by medically trained personnel," the F.D.A. said in a statement.


Karim Sanjabi, Politician, 90, Foe of Shah and Islamic Militants
Karim Sanjabi, a veteran Iranian politician who fought both the heavy-handed monarchy of Shah Mohammed Riza Pahlevi and the harsh Islamic fundamentalism of Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini that followed, died in exile Tuesday at his home in Carbondale, Ill.
He was 90.
A law professor at Teheran University, he was associated with Mohammed Mossadegh, the nationalist Prime Minister who sought to nationalize the country's vast oil monopoly controlled by British interests.
Dr.
Mossadegh was ousted in 1951 in a coup engineered by the American and British intelligence services with the aid of the Shah's military.


Parks's Works to Go to Library of Congress
The Library of Congress is to announce today that it has acquired the archives of Gordon Parks, the photographer, writer, film maker and composer.
The archives include several thousand photographs and negatives and about 15,000 manuscript pages of Mr.
Parks's poems, novels and screenplays.
The library already holds the photographs that Mr.
Parks did in the 1940's for the Farm Security Administration and the Office of War Information under Roy Stryker, as well as his published and unpublished film scores and several of his film and television productions.


A Visit by the Pope
In early October, Pope John Paull II will make a five-day visit to the East Coast, with Masses, prayer services and speeches in Manhattan, Queens, Newark, Yonkers and Baltimore.
The Pope had originally planned to visit the region last October, but was forced to postpone the trip because of medical problems.
It will be his second trip to New York and the first visit any pope has made to Baltimore or New Jersey.
Here is his schedule, as provided by the Associated Press.
WEDNESDAY, OCT. 4:
3 p.m. -- Arrives at Newark International Airport.
Welcoming ceremony, including an address.
5 p.m. -- Evening prayer at Sacred Heart Cathedral, Newark, including an address.
THURSDAY, OCT. 5:
9:15 a.m. to 1 p.m. -- Visits the United Nations.
Delivers address to General Assembly and U.N. staff.
6 p.m. -- Celebrates Mass, delivers homily at Giants Stadium. FRIDAY, OCT. 6:
9:30 a.m. -- Celebrates Mass, delivers homily at Aqueduct.
5 p.m. -- Tour by Popemobile on grounds of St. Joseph's Seminary, Yonkers.
5:15 p.m. -- Leads evening prayer and delivers address to seminarians at St.
Joseph's.
SATURDAY, OCT. 7:
9:30 a.m. -- Celebrates Mass and delivers homily in Central Park.
12:15 p.m. -- Arrives at residence of Cardinal John O'Connor at St.
Patrick's Cathedral in Manhattan.
3:30 p.m. -- Recites rosary in St. Patrick's and delivers brief address.
5 p.m. -- Blesses offices of Holy See Mission to the United Nations in Manhattan and delivers brief address.
6:30 p.m. -- Holds informal meeting with the leadership of other Christian churches at O'Connor's residence.
7 p.m. -- Dines with regional bishops at O'Connor's residence.
8:30 p.m. -- Meets with leaders of the Jewish community at O'Connor's residence.
SUNDAY, OCT. 8:
9:50 a.m. -- Arrives at Baltimore-Washington International Airport.
10:45 a.m. -- Celebrates Mass, delivers homily and recites prayer at Oriole Park.
1:30 p.m. -- Travels by Popemobile to Cardinal William Keeler's residence in Baltimore with accompanying parade.
5 p.m. -- Visits Basilica of the Assumption in Baltimore and meets with leadership of Catholic Relief Services.
5:45 p.m. -- Visits Cathedral of Mary Our Queen in Baltimore and delivers brief address.
6:25 p.m. -- Arrives at St.
Mary's Seminary and from there travels to Baltimore-Washington International Airport.
7:30 p.m. -- Airport departure ceremony; delivers address.
8 p.m. -- Departs for Rome.


Not So Predictably, Graf and Sanchez Vicario Gain Final
Nobody cried, nobody choked and nobody's royal shoulder was stained by the tears of a defeated player -- but neither of Wimbledon's three-set women's semifinal matches today unfolded on a wholly predictable note either.
This Grand Slam tournament's defending champion not only developed a case of cold feet, she was also hobbled by blisters on both feet.
Exit Conchita Martinez, limping.


Bassett Furniture Industries(BSET,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


International Briefs; Fokker to Report Loss for the Half
Fokker N.V., the Dutch aircraft maker, said yesterday that it would report a loss for the first half of 1995 and was uncertain about a return to profitability in 1996.
Fokker, which is majority owned by Daimler-Benz Aerospace of Germany, said its loss for the first half of 1995 would exceed its loss of 449 million guilders ($290 million) for all of 1994.


A Painter Who Collaborated With Poets
Philip Guston produced some of the great abstract paintings of the 1950's and 60's.
With their shadowed greens and elegiac old-rose reds pulled to the center of the canvas, they suggest both poems on a page and the material traces of rumination, like late-night cigarette smudges in the bottom of a dish.
The artist's unpredicted switch to an anti-lyrical, Rabelaisian cartoon style in the late 60's baffled practically everyone.
Stung by the general critical disparagement, Guston retired to upstate New York and stayed there, pushing further along the difficult path he had set for himself, rebuking the art world from afar and choosing writers rather than artists as his companions.


You Want to Be a Star? Insist on a Staircase!
Any musical comedy don or diva, not to mention aspiring Sarah Bernhardts everywhere, can tell you that a staircase is a star's best friend.
For the Dollys and the Mames who preen step by calculated step to the serenades of infatuated choruses, for the flamboyantly cruel Regina Giddens in "The Little Foxes," for the flamboyantly crazy monarch of "The Madness of George III," nothing quite becomes an entrance, an exit or a legend-in-the-making like a heady flight of stairs.
But staircases afford theatrical uses well beyond their status as platforms for aggrandizing and posturing.
Linking public and private worlds and the visible with the unseen, they have symbolic and emotional resonance that the right combinations of actor, director and set designer can turn into intricate guides to themes and characters.
Currently on view on Broadway stages are three very different sets of stairs that splendidly meet the dramatic purposes of three very different plays, which these days is enough to create a whole new Tony category.


Marriott International Inc.(MAR,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Jun 16


Art in Review
Ralph Gibson 'Luminosite Francaise'  French Cultural Services 972 Fifth Avenue (near 79th Street) Through Thursday
In recent years Ralph Gibson has become something like photography's answer to Mickey Rourke: wildly popular in France but neglected in the United States.
This exhibition gathers selections of the photographs Mr.
Gibson has made during his many trips to France over the last two decades.


Once Lost in Vietnam, Now Lost in America
Tam Ly dresses in the image of the father he never knew, in camouflage clothing and combat boots and, for good measure, a rakish pair of black sunglasses.
Born out of wedlock, nursed in a Buddhist temple in Vietnam, reared on the streets where he sold honey cakes outside the central cathedral in Ho Chi Minh City, Mr.
Tam, now 23, came to the United States two years ago as part of a belated Government program to accept the offspring of American servicemen abandoned by their fathers in South Vietnam.


Regulators Examine Investment Adviser's Registration Tangle
First Capital Strategists, the investment adviser whose rogue trader lost $128 million in the account of the Common Fund, first registered with the Commodity Futures Trading Commission as a commodities trading adviser in 1987.
But it was not until last year that First Capital completed a similar filing as a registered investment adviser with the Securities and Exchange Commission.
Why those filings were not made until years after the York, Pa., firm was founded in 1980 are among the questions being asked by Federal and state regulators.


METRO DIGEST
SETTLEMENT REACHED IN BRONX CLUB FIRE
More than five years after the arson fire that killed 87 people at the Happy Land social club in the Bronx, lawyers for families of the victims agreed to a $15.8 million settlement of all claims in the blaze, which became the worst case of mass murder in the nation's history.
The agreement ends more than $5 billion in lawsuits by providing an average $163,000 for each of the 92 dead or injured victims, before lawyers' fees and other costs.  [ Page A1. ]


Roadway Services (ROAD,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Jun 17


Former Newark Official Is Sentenced for Graft
A former City Councilman was sentenced to 33 months in prison and fined $26,000 on corruption charges today in a case that provided a window onto the kind of under-the-table deals that Federal prosecutors assert are rampant in Newark.
While relatives of the former official, Ralph T. Grant Jr., sobbed and hugged each other in court, Mr.
Grant's lawyer, Clarence Faines 3d, said he would appeal the conviction.
Mr.
Grant remained free on $10,000 bail.


29 Latin Kings Gang Leaders Are Indicted
Leaders of one of the city's most notorious criminal gangs, the Latin Kings, were charged yesterday with attempted murder, murder, racketeering, heroin and cocaine trafficking, and other crimes in an 80-count Federal indictment.
"These indictments are aimed at the leadership," said Mary Jo White, the United States Attorney for the Southern District of New York.
She said that for 27 of the 29 defendants named in the indictment, the maximum sentence would be life in prison.
Of the two remaining defendants, she added, one faces 20 years, the other 105.


Nelson Vows to Rev Up Offense and Laugh Track
After saying he would trade in his coaching sneakers for "some of them Guccis," he promised to run, gun and have fun.
There is indeed a new sheriff in town.
Don Nelson took over New York's basketball team yesterday, and you may want to take a long, hard look at the Knicks today.
They are not likely to be the same tomorrow.
Nelson, three times the National Basketball Association coach of the year and a man who has guided his teams to 50-victory seasons nine times, signed a three-year contract that will pay him nearly $6 million in base salary.
With his hiring, the Knicks ushered in a new coaching era and put behind them four successful but sometimes trying years under Pat Riley.
Nothing personal, said Nelson, but Riley had his way of doings things and Nelson has his own.
The main thing, said the 55-year-old coach, is that they find a way to bring home a championship banner to the Garden.


Mesa, at Pickens's Urging, Adopts Takeover Defense
T.
Boone Pickens, who loudly decried "poison pill" measures to fend off corporate takeovers when he was staging attacks, persuaded the board of his own besieged company, Mesa Inc., to adopt such a plan today.
Two major shareholders immediately said that they would try to replace the board with a group that, free of Mr.
Pickens's control, would look to the company's sale or merger.


No Need to Raise Anxiety About Food
To the Editor:
Consumers reading "Congress Moving to Revamp Rules on Food Safety" (front page, July 3), your article on proposed changes in food safety laws, might conclude that Republicans in Congress are conspiring with the food industry to increase the number of "carcinogens" and pathogens in our food supply, all in pursuit of increased profits (presumably Republicans have stashed away a separate, safe food supply for their own consumption).


Sports of The Times; How Arantxa Used Chris as Her Model
SHE was only 16 when she first put her feet on the treacherous grass of Wimbledon.
It took her three tournaments to finally win a match there.
Then Arantxa Sanchez Vicario made this observation to Spanish journalists: "Chris Evert did it. So I must do it, too."
Chris Evert had won three Wimbledons with a game better suited for slower, more predictable surfaces.
That is what a champion -- or at least a professional -- does.


Ruling on Police Is Reversed
The State Supreme Court ruled yesterday that police officers cannot be sued for injuries sustained in high-speed chases unless they intentionally disobey orders or violate department rules, The Associated Press reported.
An appeals court had held that a Neptune Township police officer, Frederick Jenkins, was liable for injuries suffered by a passenger in a car with which his car collided, on the ground that his was not the vehicle being chased.
In reversing the earlier ruling, the Supreme Court said the law on police immunity was designed to "encourage vigorous law enforcement."


BUSINESS DIGEST
Stocks and Bonds Surge on Fed Rate Cut The Federal Reserve's quarter-point cut in the Federal funds rate lifted the stock and bond markets, as traders became more optimistic about the economy and predicted that the Fed would now cut rates yet again.
Treasury prices surged, pushing the yield on the 30-year bond down to 6.49 percent, from 6.60 percent.
The Dow industrials rose to another record, climbing 48.77 points, to 4,664.00, and the S.&amp;.P 500 index added 6.73 points, to a record 553.99.  [ Page D6. ] The rate cut did little to the dollar.
In late New York trading, it edged up to 84.96 yen and was little changed at 1.3787 marks.  [ D5. ] Japan, Canada and France also moved to lower interest rates.
In Tokyo, after the Bank of Japan announced that it would allow an interest rate to fall below the discount rate of 1 percent, stocks surged.  [ D4. ] A Look at TV Violence  Federal regulators and some members of Congress say they hope to clamp down on broadcast violence and require more programming for children.  [ A1. ] Retail Sales Sluggish in June  Spending at retail chain stores was relatively sluggish in June, rising 3.4 percent.
Big department stores and discount chains had the biggest sales gains, as consumers continued to be cautious spenders.  [ D3. ] Mesa Adopts Poison Pill  Two big shareholders of Mesa Inc. said they would try to replace the board after it adopted a poison pill plan, a strategy Mesa's chairman, T. Boone Pickens, once decried.  [ D3. ] Radio Host Indicted Again  Sonny Bloch, the financial radio talk-show host, has been indicted again.


The Tale of Camelot, Now Color Coordinated
"First Knight" is distinguished from other, better retellings of the Arthurian legend by its conviction that Camelot was ruled by someone much more powerful than a mere king: a decorator.
How else to explain blue rooftops that match the blue Round Table, on which the knights clank down their swords in perfect symmetry?
Or the coordinating blue accents on the peasants' robes?
Obviously, attention to appearances also colored the casting, since the presence of Richard Gere emphasizes Lancelot's studly side.
Try to remain calm when Sean Connery (King Arthur) tells his preening co-star, "The truth is, you care nothing for yourself."
Draped in costumes that would be just right for the Starship Enterprise, this film's medieval mannequins act out a stiff, grandiose version of Camelot's triangular love story, punctuated by occasional battle scenes that look suspiciously computer enhanced.
Visual effects also amplify the glittering shots of a Camelot that's only slightly smaller than Manhattan.
In terms of aural flourishes, noisy clanging and Jerry Goldsmith's thunderingly banal score accompany the combat scenes that present Mr.
Gere's dueling dude as a walking anachronism.
It's definitely time for Hollywood to lay down its swords this season.


Baghdad's Biological Arsenal
After four years of denial, deception and evasion, Iraq has acknowledged that it stockpiled frighteningly large quantities of germ warfare agents in the late 1980's.
Regrettably, it has yet to explain fully what subsequently became of the thousands of gallons of anthrax bacteria and botulism toxin it produced, enough to make hundreds of lethal bombs, each one capable of killing thousands of people.
Biological agents have no real battlefield utility.
They are terror weapons designed for the wholesale slaughter of civilians and the blackmail of their governments.
Iraq is not the only country to develop biological weapons.
The United States and Soviet Union produced them during the cold war.
But given Saddam Hussein's demonstrated record of aggression and ruthlessness, his possession of such means of mass murder is a chilling thought.


It Must Be Midnight And Must Be Weird
IT was close to midnight on a wet Saturday, and the corner of Third Avenue and 11th Street was a collage of umbrellas as the usual swarm of uppity clubgoers, weekend barflies and itinerant musicians moved through the rain.
Under the glow of the Sony East Village's movie theater marquee, however, a more dour crowd waited in a short line to buy tickets to "Batman Forever."
"Midnight is a terrible time for a movie," said Joanne Elliott, a 17-year-old model.
"It's late, and I should be sleeping."


Latin-Spouting Hustler From the East Goes West
Described by TNT as a student of Martin Scorsese and Brian De Palma, P. J. Pesce makes his feature-film directorial debut on Sunday with "The Desperate Trail," a homage, we are told, to the westerns of Howard Hawks, Sergio Leone and Sam Peckinpah.
Apparent proof: scene after scene of bloody shootouts.
For all its violence, "The Desperate Trail" is also chock full of offbeat civility.
The film opens with a stagecoach ambush that leaves two strangers linked to each other's fate.
Jack Cooper (Craig Sheffer) is a classical-Latin-spouting hustler from the East on the way to visit the ranch of his otherworldly brother, Walter (Frank Whaley), an amateur astronomer.
Sarah O'Rourke (Linda Fiorentino) is a murderer being accompanied to justice by an exceedingly dour marshal (Sam Elliott).
When Jack and Sarah take off with the Wells Fargo cash box, the marshal and his posse chase them with a vengeance.


Jordan, McGrath Gets a Diet Account
The Weight Watchers Food Company in Hamden, Conn., a unit of the H. J. Heinz Company, selected Jordan, McGrath, Case &amp; Taylor in New York to handle its frozen-food account, which had previously been handled by Ally &amp; Gargano in New York.
The billings were estimated at $10 million.
Jordan, McGrath was awarded the account on Wednesday after a four-month review that also included Ally and three other agencies: Grace &amp; Rothschild in New York, Ground Zero in Venice, Calif., and the San Francisco office of Young &amp; Rubicam Inc.


In the Line of Fire; Sights on Clinton, G.O.P. Assails His Economist
Few operations of the Government are smaller or cheaper than the White House's Council of Economic Advisers.
So why are Congressional Republicans so interested in abolishing it?
That question confronts the council's new chairman, Joseph E. Stiglitz, appointed on the same day last week that a House Appropriations subcommittee voted to eliminate financing for the council.


Gene Iba Returns to Coaching
GENE IBA, a former basketball coach at Baylor, was named basketball coach at Pittsburg State in Kansas on Wednesday.
Iba, nephew of the late Oklahoma State coach Hank Iba, has a 226-202 career record, including 98-106 in seven years at Baylor.
He has been out of coaching for three years. (AP)





Ukrainian Folk Movements Inspire Canadian Troupe
What fun it must be to stamp and kick!
The Tryzub Ukrainian Dance Ensemble made such hearty movements irresistibly attractive when it performed on Wednesday night at Town Hall.
George Chrunik, the director of this Canadian troupe from Calgary, Alberta, knows how to combine vitality with discipline.
Many of the 35 dancers in Tryzub (pronounced TREH-zoob) are university students, a company spokesman said, and their average age is 22.


A Correction: Freddie Mac Yields
Corrected average weekly yields on Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation 30-year and 15-year participation certificates, in percent.


Excerpts From the President's Speech at Georgetown University
Following are excerpts from remarks by President Clinton at Georgetown University today.
They were made available by the Federal News Service, a private transcription service:
Today I want to have more of a conversation than deliver a formal speech, about the great debate now raging in our nation, not so much over what we should do, but over how we should resolve the great questions of our time here in Washington and in communities all across our country.
I want to talk about the obligations of citizenship, the obligations imposed on the President and people in power, and the obligations imposed on all Americans.


Art in Review
Kevin Bubriski  National Arts Club 15 Gramercy Park South Tomorrow and Sunday
The people in Kevin Bubriski's black-and-white portraits, made over the last decade in Nepal, Tibet and northern India, face the camera with quiet, almost meditative assurance.
The most persuasive pictures were made with large-format cameras, and reflect the deliberate seeing that such cumbersome equipment favors.


Corrections
A chart in Business Day yesterday with an article about the credit markets misstated the average yields this week for participation certificates of the Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation, or Freddie Mac.
The yield for the 15-year certificate was 7 percent, not 7.03 percent; the yield for the 30-year certificate was 7.39 percent, not 7.53 percent.
A corrected chart appears today on page D15.


Stolt-Nielsen S.A. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


International Briefs; Accor to Sell Unit To Compass Group
Accor S.A., the debt-laden French hotel company, formally announced yesterday that it was selling Eurest, its catering business, to Compass Group P.L.C. for a big stake in the British company and 2.1 billion francs ($433 million) in cash.
Accor said the move would create one of the world's biggest catering companies, with global revenue of 20.4 billion francs ($4.2 billion).
The French company's stake in the new company formed around Compass will be 22.5 percent.


Symantec Offers To Buy Delrina As Windows 95 Release Nears
The Symantec Corporation said today that it would acquire the Delrina Corporation, best known for its Winfax software, in a stock swap valued at $415 million.
The deal would add Delrina's communications programs to the mix of utilities and programming tools produced by Symantec, which is based in Cupertino, Calif.
The acquisition is the latest in a wave of software industry mergers.
The consolidation is expected to increase as the Aug. 24 shipping date of the Microsoft Corporation's new Windows 95 operating system approaches.
Windows 95 will incorporate many functions that were previously filled by separate application programs, often sold by other companies.


Your Gerrymander or Mine?
The Supreme Court's decision declaring Georgia's 11th Congressional district unconstitutional is more than a setback for minority groups in their battle to gain fair representation.
It reflects a serious misunderstanding of how redistricting works.
The ruling, in Miller v.
Johnson, follows Shaw v.
Reno, the 1993 case that invalidated a North Carolina Congressional district that was shaped like a carnival serpent.


A Miami Lawyer Is Chosen to Investigate Commerce Secretary's Finances
A panel of Federal appellate judges today appointed a veteran Miami lawyer as an independent prosecutor to investigate the personal finances of Commerce Secretary Ronald H. Brown.
The inquiry is the fourth criminal investigation involving high-ranking officials in the Clinton Administration.
The judicial panel selected Daniel S. Pearson, a partner at Holland &amp; Knight, one of Florida's largest law firms.
Mr.
Pearson, 64, was a Federal prosecutor in Miami in the early 1960's and a state appeals court judge from 1980 to 1989.
In recent years he has worked on appellate litigation.


3 Are Shot in a Chinatown Gambling Den
Three men were shot inside a Chinatown gambling den yesterday afternoon in an incident that appeared to involve Chinese gangs, law enforcement officials said.
Shortly after the shooting, the men staggered onto the street, jumped into a gray Honda Accord and were taken to a nearby clinic, where officials summoned the police.


Trade Climate With U.S. Improving, Europeans Say
After weeks of criticizing the Clinton Administration for its threatened trade sanctions against Japan and, more recently, for pulling out of talks on opening global financial markets, the European Commission said today that the trade picture between Europe and the United States was brightening.
Relations with Washington "are better than they have been for some time," the commission said in a statement accompanying its annual review of American trade barriers.
"Mainly due to resolving bilateral problems during the Uruguay Round" of trade negotiations, this year's report is 40 pages shorter than last year's, the Europeans noted.


Gingrich, on Book Tour, Quickly Wields the Pen
Far from the madding legislation, the Speaker moved the goods, signing "Newt" with mercantile abandon into each $24 copy of his new book as a line of devotees moved past, cash in hand, heart on sleeve.
"Hey, Newt, you get rich yet?" a New York voice bellowed from the nonbuying part of the audience yesterday at Barnes &amp; Noble's Fifth Avenue store, where Speaker Newt Gingrich, flushed with success in wielding majority control over Congress, seemed born to the ephemeral art of book touring.


Visiting Athlete Disappears During a Swim
Coast Guard and police helicopters and boats searched Long Island Sound today for a Special Olympics athlete from Nepal who disappeared while swimming during a visit to Hammonasset Beach State Park in Madison, the authorities said.
The 21-year-old mentally retarded athlete, whom The Associated Press identified as Ramesh Mali, was last seen about 12:15 P.M. in water up to his chest off a section of the two-mile beach where lifeguards were not stationed, the authorities said.
Divers and other rescuers, assisted by two helicopters and several boats, focused on a stretch of shore several hundred yards long.


Pioneer Hi-Bred International Inc.(PHYB,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Stocks Soar; Dow Up 48.77 After the Fed Lowers Rate
When the Federal Reserve dropped the other shoe yesterday, the stock market reacted with a surge of energy.
Within minutes after the Fed's Open Market Committee announced at 2:15 P.M. that it was lowering its target for the Federal funds rate by one-quarter of a percentage point to 5.75 percent, buyers poured into the market, sending the key averages into record territory.


Schools Chief Who Stressed Diversity in Ithaca Quits Post
The Superintendent of Schools in Ithaca, N.Y., who had sought to merge high school honors courses with those at more modest academic levels as a way of promoting diversity, resigned on Wednesday night, citing the angry reaction that his plans had touched off among some parents and members of the school board.
"Professionally, I believe the systematic tracking of students is wrong," said Dr.
James E. Lorthridge, the Superintendent, in a statement he read at a Board of Education meeting Wednesday night.
"And I choose not to be part of a system that participates in this educational practice."


After 92 Days of Testimony, Simpson Prosecution Rests
With some final fragments of hair and fiber evidence and a statement from Nicole Brown Simpson's mother, prosecutors at the O. J. Simpson trial quietly and unceremoniously rested this afternoon -- 92 days of testimony, 58 witnesses, 488 exhibits, and 34,500 transcript pages after they began.
Prosecutors had once hinted at concluding with a flourish, something that could compensate for weeks of stultifying scientific testimony, remind the jury of the case's heart-wrenching essence and perhaps erase lingering images of Mr.
Simpson's struggling to don the leather gloves he wore, they say, when he killed his former wife and Ronald L. Goldman.


CHRONICLE
STEPHEN HAWKING, the British physicist and Cambridge University professor, will marry a nurse who was hired by his former wife to help him cope with the motor neuron disease that has crippled him since his student days, The Daily Telegraph reported yesterday.
According to the newspaper's account, Professor Hawking, 53, whose book "A Brief History of Time" was a best seller, plans to marry ELAINE MASON at the Cambridge Register Office on Sept. 16.
A blessing will be conferred at St.
Barnabas Church, and a reception will be held at Madingley Hall near Cambridge.


Giuliani Replaces Water Board Members After Criticism of Plan to Sell Water System
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani has replaced a majority of the members of the New York City Water Board in recent weeks, not long after several members of the board raised questions about his plan to sell the city's water system to the board to raise money.
The four board members, at least one of whom raised money in opposition to Mr.
Giuliani's mayoral campaign, were appointed by previous mayors and their terms were up.
Most expected to be replaced eventually.
But the former chairman of the seven-member board, who received his removal notice this week, said the replacements went beyond normal turnover.


COMPANY BRIEFS
ARCUS INC., Irving, Tex., a provider of backup computer services, said its primary shareholder, ATI Systems International Inc., would sell its 94.8 percent stake in the company to United Acquisition Co. for about $50 million.


More Than 650 'Newts' an Hour


Teen-Agers in Washington Face New Curfew
Citing a "culture of fear and violence" permeating the city, Mayor Marion S. Barry Jr. today signed into law a curfew intended to keep teen-agers off Washington streets at night, when much of the city's violent crime is committed.
"We believe our young people ought to be safe from handgun violence and violent assaults," Mr.
Barry said at a news conference before signing the measure, which affects young people under 17.


Woman's Waking Nightmare
Karen and Jim Webb, the unhappy childless couple at the heart of Alex Graves's moody film "The Crude Oasis," live in an immaculate ranch house across the road from an oil refinery in the Kansas flat lands near Wichita.
Karen (Jennifer Taylor), who is emotionally unstable, has a recurrent nightmare in which she stands at the edge of a river in the pouring rain and a young man wading knee-deep in the water notices her watching him and approaches her in a threatening manner.
When Karen wakes with a start, it is into a world that is as ominous as her dream.
Her gaunt, stone-faced husband, who works in the refinery, often returns home late at night with lame excuses as to his whereabouts.
When Karen becomes upset, Jim (Robert Peterson) tries to calm her in an eerily robotic voice, as if he were addressing a child.


Careiro da Varzea Journal; Who Braves Piranha Waters? Your Avon Lady!
Padding down cow paths in flip-flop sandals or paddling a canoe through piranha-infested creeks, Iraci Macedo da Costa Queiroz lugs from door to door what rain forest dreams are made of: Mesmerize cologne, Forever Fragrance perfume and Cool Confidence deodorant.
With no doorbells to ring at the riverside shanties on stilts, this Avon lady of the Amazon claps her hands and calls out cheerily: "Hi, honey!  I'm here!"


Davis, Ready to Do Battle, Returns to Oakland
Los Angeles is citing him for malpractice and San Francisco is ordering him out of the neighborhood, but Al Davis set foot in Oakland today -- the glare from his Super Bowl ring blinding -- and planted a Raider flag.
"I can imagine how they must've felt in Eastern Europe when the Germans were coming," he said.


Grade Inflation Demeans Good Students
To the Editor:
Congratulations to college administrators ("In a Change of Policy, and Heart, Colleges Join Fight Against Inflated Grades," news article, July 4) who are finally recognizing that grade inflation can only be curbed by policy supported from the top.


Helen J. Boiardi, 90; Started Line of Pasta
Helen J. Boiardi, who helped to launch the Chef Boyardee line of prepared pasta dinners, died on Monday at her home in Shaker Heights, Ohio.
She was 90.
In the 1920's she and her husband, Hector Boiardi, a successful chef, opened a restaurant in Cleveland's financial district.
Its spaghetti dinners proved so savory that customers asked for portions of pasta, sauce and cheese to take home.


Hours Later, Mets Boot Out Excitement of Victory
The Mets, fresh off a rare ninth-inning victory at home the night before, fell into a not-so-rare lethargy early in the bright afternoon sun and heavy humidity at Shea Stadium yesterday.
Their starter, Pete Harnisch, yielded a home run to the first batter of the game, and their fielders committed two errors that led to two more Chicago runs before the conclusion of the first inning.
Matters worsened in the seventh inning, where the stretching amounted to the Cubs extending their lead with four more unearned runs.
And that pretty much wrapped up an 8-4 victory over the Mets in a game that Harnisch called "horrible and ugly."


I.B.M. Creates a Division For Its At-Home Offerings
Taking aim at the fast-growing market for computer-related home electronics, I.B.M. will create a division responsible for expanding the company's offerings to consumers, company executives said yesterday.
The new division, which will be formally announced later this year and has still not been named, will bring several of the International Business Machines Corporation's consumer-oriented products, like multimedia personal computers and software, under one umbrella.
It will also be the focus of I.B.M.'s efforts to develop new products in the areas of consumer electronics, software and perhaps even on-line services.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK MURDER RATE PLUNGES SHARPLY In an acceleration of a four-year trend, the murder rate in New York City has plunged sharply since January to the lowest level in 25 years, according to Police Department statistics.
In the first 25 weeks of the year, murders have fallen by nearly a third, to 563 from 826 in the same period last year.
If the trend holds through the rest of the year, 1995 will record the fewest slayings since 1970, when 1,117 people were killed.  [ Page 1. ] PRESBYTERIAN HOSPITAL SEEKS MERGER Convinced that it cannot survive on its own in a medical marketplace racked by budget cuts and dominated by managed care, Presbyterian Hospital, one of the city's premiere academic hospitals, is actively looking to merge with another medical center.
Executives at Presbyterian, the hospital at Columbia-Presbyterian Medical Center, have begun discussions with two other leading centers, the New York Hospital and New York University Hospital, and hope to cement a partnership within a year, said Dr.
OFFICES CRIPPLED ON LAST DAY The long and bitter fight over Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman's plan to privatize motor vehicle offices continued to the last day of state operation, as disgruntled workers sabotaged computers at five offices and failed to show up in large numbers, leaving six other offices too understaffed to function, authorities said.  [ 24. ] A teen-ager was fatally injured when he fell through a skylight, the police said.  [ 24. ] About New York by Michael T. Kaufman 23


Geac Computer reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 30


Gay Russians Are 'Free' Now But Still Stay in Fearful Closet
At first glance Aleksandr Korotkov seems like the happiest man in Russia.
Packed tightly into a black leather jumpsuit and dancing as if a disco beat had taken hold of his soul, once a week he becomes an openly gay man in a society that has never had much use for openness or for homosexuality.
Mr.
Korotkov, who is 27, earns enough as a graphics designer to live here in a comfortable apartment.
He owns a car, and every Saturday he spends $30 for the privilege of entering Mayak, this city's most fashionable gay nightclub.


Your Attention, Please
Republicans have a right to their suspicions about President Clinton's calls for an end to harsh partisanship.
Mr.
Clinton never hesitated to slug them in the eye back when he had the Congressional majority to back him up.
But a President without votes on the Hill must placate more often than threaten.
So Mr.
Clinton's "common-ground" speech at Georgetown University can be read by political realists as an attempt to make a virtue of necessity.
The necessity, in Mr.
Clinton's case, was created by his party's collapse at the polls in 1994.
If 1996 is to be any different for the Democrats -- and more to the point, their standard-bearer -- Mr.
Clinton needs Republican help in establishing himself as a bipartisan leader.
Even allowing for this most cynical reading of the politics of his speech, the President is right on its core ideas.
The ills afflicting American society do not flow from the fact that the middle class no longer possesses the moral perfection of, let us say, Jesse Helms and Phil Gramm.
Mr.
Clinton is closer to the truth when he points up that "middle-class values and strong families" are threatened by a consistent economic battering for which no end is in sight.


Slide From Riches for Landlord in Happy Land Case
The building housing the Happy Land Social Club, where 87 people died in a 1990 arson fire, was owned by Alexander DiLorenzo 3d, scion of a real estate empire that at one time put him in the same league as Donald Trump or other New York tycoons.
But lawyers for the victims who filed suit over the tragedy, which was caused in part by conditions in the building, found Mr.
DiLorenzo so deeply enmeshed in financial problems that they gave up on seeking damages from him.
"If we had gone after DiLorenzo, we would have spent 5 or 10 years trying to to figure where his money was, or if there was any left," said Paul E. Bleifer, who represented the families of 17 of the victims.


Gas Main Is Safely Repaired
A ruptured section of a high-pressure gas main crossing Route 22 at Foothill Road in Bridgewater was repaired yesterday by Public Service Electric &amp; Gas crews.
Traffic had been diverted onto nearby Interstate 287 during the morning rush hour on Thursday while an emergency patch was installed, but no diversion was necessary yesterday, according to Lieut.
James Piliani of the Bridgewater police.
The main is not part of the gas pipeline that blew up near Edison in March 1994.


Brown Tide Spreading Misery on L.I.
The bays and estuaries of Eastern Long Island are being invaded by a massive bloom of brown algae for the first time in a decade, devastating fragile scallop beds and causing tourists to turn away in disgust.
"This is the most extensive bloom since we began monitoring the brown tide," said Vito Minei, chief of ecology for the Suffolk County Department of Health.
"While it looks unpleasant, it does not represent a health hazard to humans. But it's deadly for the scallop, causing it to starve to death."


Drink Up, It's Closing Time
Bars on the Boardwalk in Point Pleasant are closing a little earlier on weekends, starting immediately, to cut down on late-night rowdiness of the sort that occurred last month between off-duty New York City officers and the local police.
Three Boardwalk saloons -- Jenkinson's, Martell's and Major's -- agreed to stop serving drinks and shut down the bands at 1 A.M. on weekends, an hour earlier than usual.
The bars' licenses come up for renewal Tuesday before the Borough Council.


Harold R. Neumann, 89, Pilot Who Won Speed-Racing Titles
Harold R. Neumann, a champion airplane speed-racing pilot in the 1930's who went on to set record cross-Atlantic flight times as a commercial pilot, died on Wednesday in San Jose, Calif., the Associated Press reported.
He was 89.
Mr.
Neumann was named the fastest airplane pilot in 1935 after winning the Thompson Trophy race in the National Air Races in Cleveland.
He also won the Louis W. Greve trophy, piloting his plane, Mike, an average 207 miles an hour for the 75 miles of the race before 65,000 people at Cleveland Airport.
Mr.
Neumann received $4,500 for his winning effort, cutting each pylon close as he flew around the quadrangular five-mile course 15 times.


Man Photographed After Attack Is Ruled Out as Unabom Suspect
A man photographed acting suspiciously at the scene of a fatal mail bombing in Sacramento, Calif., last April is not a suspect in that attack, the Sacramento police said today.
The Federal authorities have attributed the Sacramento attack to the terrorist commonly known as the Unabomber, and Federal agents investigating the Unabom case recently showed the grainy photograph to scrap-yard dealers in the San Francisco area.
The picture came from a videotape made by a photographer hired by the Sacramento police.


Sports of The Times; Endless And Special Possibilities
FOR the past 48 hours, I've been in bed, trying to find a position of least pain.
The July 4th holiday weekend proved too much for a bad back to bear.
I aggravated a chronic condition while participating in the he-man Olympics of a summer weekend: lifting heavy barbecue pits, dragging ice-filled coolers and chairs to and from the beach.
The final straw was accepting the challenge to chase some 8-year-olds over sand, twisting and turning to grab them as they tried to get away.
The progressive strain of it all put me here in bed, staring at the ceiling, contemplating the blessings of good health.


AIDS Research Credit
To the Editor:
In "The Vanishing Heroes of Science" (Op-Ed, July 4), Daniel S. Greenberg writes that the Government concluded that Robert Gallo had failed to give French scientists credit for their pioneering work on the AIDS virus.
There has never been, and never could be, such a Government conclusion.


SHL Systemhouse (SHKIF,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Meat Inspection Delay Will Endanger Lives
To the Editor:
Our national organization of food-borne illness victims will not allow Representative James T. Walsh (letter, June 28) to wriggle out of the public relations squeeze he's crawled into.
Mr.
Walsh will be remembered as the man who pulled the plug on meat inspection reform for the meat lobby.
No one has taken the public health crisis of contaminated meat and reduced it so effectively to a partisan food fight as has he.


Post 8 a Test for Star Filly
She's not exactly the girl next stall.
No, CR Kay Suzie is much more, as she proved last Saturday at Yonkers Raceway when she blazed to a 10-length victory in her first race against members of the opposite sex.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.75
9.00
7.25
DISCOUNT RATE
5.25
5.25
3.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
5.75
6.06
4.32
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.37
5.36
4.35
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.26
5.25
4.81
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.04
6.02
7.41
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.52
6.49
7.69
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.45
7.44
8.47
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.11
6.15
6.48
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Executive Changes
ABLE TELCOM HOLDING CORP., Tampa, Fla., appointed William J. Mercurio president and chief executive.


Dying Hamlet With 15 Reveries
Hamlet as Dracula, as Norman Bates, as a galumphing vaudevillian, as a magician and as a lost little boy: these are some of the more indelible images that Robert Wilson brings to mind in his expressionistic portrayal of the melancholy Dane in "Hamlet: A Monologue."
This deconstructed version of Shakespeare's masterpiece, which had the first of three performances at Alice Tully Hall on Thursday as part of the Serious Fun festival, may be the most overtly emotional theater piece ever created by Mr.
Wilson.
Its more impassioned moments are so heated that it is tempting to look for an autobiographical subtext in his magnetic, self-lacerating performance.


Chess Masters Seeking Match At Trade Center
Two of the world's best chess players may battle for supremacy within the glass-enclosed observation deck of the World Trade Center in a match starting in early September.
Negotiations are nearly finalized for the champion of the Professional Chess Association, Garry Kasparov of Russia, to defend his world title against Viswanathan Anand of India, according to Allen Morrison, a spokesman for the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey, which owns the World Trade Center.


Midlife Crisis for the JVC Festival?
This summer's JVC Jazz Festival, in its 41st year, was remarkably unfestive and unadventurous, offering little to anybody who had even a cursory knowledge of New York's jazz clubs.
With few exceptions, the festival, which ended on Sunday, was a mishmash of jazz's last big names, New York regulars and free outdoor concerts that served as living billboards for the rosters of the record companies that underwrote them.
Running nearly concurrently with the JVC, Michael Dorf's What Is Jazz? festival at the Knitting Factory was a genuine festival, with music bubbling on several stages at once, offering a mix of some of the club's regular performers and out-of-towners who are rarely heard here.
It was packed with crowds taking advantage of the low cover charge and the broad variety of music that comes less under the heading of jazz than of improvised music.
It was an event, one that got the blood running, while the JVC Jazz Festival frequently sagged.


With the Owner Watching, Another Rookie Makes Yanks Squirm
With George Steinbrenner sitting beside their dugout waving his hand in disgust and their newest player sitting by himself in the bullpen and the dugout tonight, the Yankees watched in amazement as another young starter was humiliated early.
At least Andy Pettitte waited until the second inning before disintegrating.
After one inning, the Yankees and Texas Rangers were scoreless.
After two innings, the Rangers had a 5-0 lead.
After three innings, the Rangers had a 10-0 advantage and Pettitte was trying to forget that 200 of his friends and relatives were squirming in their seats.
They had traveled from Deer Park, Tex., to watch the 23-year-old rookie, but they saw him suffer a 10-0 defeat to Bob Tewksbury and the Rangers.


Downing of U.S. Fighter Over Bosnia Is Tied to Shortcoming of NATO Plane
American military officials knew a hostile missile radar was tracking Capt.
Scott F. O'Grady's F-16 fighter jet several minutes before he was shot down over Bosnia last month, but could not alert him because of a technical shortcoming on a NATO early-warning plane, military officials said today.
A Pentagon report on the causes of the downing concludes that the NATO Awacs, which would have relayed the warning to the pilot, did not have equipment to transmit and receive highly classified electronic messages from American intelligence officials.


How an Error in Salk Polio Vaccine Caused a Boston Epidemic
To the Editor:
Re "How the March of Dimes Got Behind Dr. Salk" (letters, July 1) and your June 24 obituary of Jonas Salk:


Dow Gallops Past 4,700, Riding on Fed's Rate Cut
Just two days after the Dow Jones industrial average first topped the 4,600 mark, it soared past 4,700 yesterday, as the stock market enjoyed its best week since last August.
The Dow closed at 4,702.73, up 38.73 points for the day and 146.63 points for the week.
Less than five months ago this key indicator exceeded 4,000 for the first time.


Japan Joins U.S. to Block Fall by Dollar
Seeking to prevent the Federal Reserve's Thursday interest-rate reduction from weakening the dollar, the Japanese Government pushed down interest rates slightly in Tokyo today and then intervened in American currency markets with the United States to prop up the dollar.
The combined effect was a sharp rise in the dollar's value against the yen, as many traders concluded that Washington and Tokyo were more closely coordinating their economic policies and would prevent any further fall in the dollar.
In late trading, the dollar had surged 1.80 yen, to 86.76 yen to the dollar.


Corrections
A map on Tuesday showing the military bases with the biggest job losses from actual or potential closings located the Alameda Naval Air Station incorrectly.
It is in the San Francisco Bay area, not in Southern California.


Corrections
A picture caption yesterday with an article about a Roman Catholic priest's role in massacres in Rwanda misstated the date of the photograph in some editions.
The scene, refugees in a church where the accused worked, occurred a year ago, not last month.


Romanian Champion Is Banned for Life
A Romanian women's rowing champion, FANICA HANUSEAC, has been banned for life after she failed a doping test, the Romanian Rowing Federation said yesterday.
The International Rowing Federation banned Hanuseac, 27, who was part of Romania's 1994 gold-medal winning team, after she tested positive for nandrolon, an anabolic steroid, in two separate tests taken this year, according to a federation statement. (AP)


Latin America Now Ignores U.S. Lead in Isolating Cuba
One Brazilian company has a contract to paint the peeling Havana Libre hotel, long a symbol of Cuba's revolution.
Another is shipping an entire cigarette factory to Cuba to revive tobacco production.
Once an obedient follower of the United States trade embargo on Cuba, Latin America increasingly ignores Washington, choosing to develop full economic and diplomatic relations with the Communist Government.
The United States is the only country in the Americas with a trade ban on Cuba and one of only five that do not have formal ties with it.


Religion Journal; A Producer-Priest Rates Hollywood Worthy of Praise
"Lord, a lot of people are mad at us," the Rev.
Ellwood E. Kieser said, beginning an invocation on Thursday in a Los Angeles banquet hall filled with Hollywood luminaries.
"They say we are responsible for the problems of society."
It was a sobering note on which to begin.
But Father Kieser's words opened a festive occasion, one that might have pleased even some of the entertainment industry's sharpest critics -- the 21st annual Humanitas Awards, which honor television and movie scriptwriters for work uplifting humane values.


Injured Driver Begins Rehabilitation
The driver STAN FOX began a rehabilitation program yesterday to continue his recovery from a serious head injury suffered in the Indianapolis 500.
Fox was transferred to Rehabilitation Hospital of Indiana on Thursday from Methodist Hospital.
He was injured in a first-lap crash during the May 28 race. (AP)


Tokyo Stocks Soar by 6.3% on Unexpected Rate Cut
Tokyo stock prices jumped 6.3 percent yesterday, lifted by an unexpected cut in interest rates and investor hopes that the Government would take stronger measures to aid Japan's sagging economy.
But some analysts said they doubted the market's buoyancy would last.
The Bank of Japan surprised financial markets by announcing yesterday that it would lower a key short-term interest rate.
The announcement gave further momentum to the stock market, which had risen during the three prior sessions.


Fluid Improvisation


Transactions
Baseball  American League A.L. -- Suspended Rob Dibble, Chicago White Sox pitcher, for three games for throwing at Milwaukee's Pat Listach in a game on June 29.
BALTIMORE ORIOLES -- Sent John DeSilva, pitcher, to Rochester of the International League.
Recalled Rick Krivda, pitcher, from Rochester.
CALIFORNIA ANGELS -- Placed Spike Owen, infielder, on the 15-day disabled list.
Recalled Rob Correia, infielder, from Vancouver of the Pacific Coast League.
CLEVELAND INDIANS -- Activated Orel Hershiser, pitcher, from the 15-day disabled list.
Optioned Chad Ogea, pitcher, to Buffalo of the American Association.
DETROIT TIGERS -- Sent Todd Steverson, outfielder, to Toledo of the International League, for a 20-day rehab assignment.
KANSAS CITY ROYALS -- Released Dennis Rasmussen, pitcher, after he refused assignment to Omaha of the American Association.
MINNESOTA TWINS -- Traded Scott Erickson, pitcher, to Baltimore for Scott Klingenbeck, pitcher, and a player to be named.
NEW YORK YANKEES -- Activated Pat Kelly, infielder, from the 15-day disabled list.
Designated Dave Silvestri, infielder, for assignment.
Optioned Brian Boehringer, pitcher, to Columbus of the International League.
Recalled Dave Pavlas, pitcher, from Columbus.
Transferred Jimmy Key, pitcher, from the 15-day disabled list to the 60-day disabled list.
SEATTLE MARINERS -- Acquired Bob Milacki, pitcher, from the Kansas City Royals for Dave Fleming, pitcher, and assigned him to Tacoma of the Pacific Coast League.
Claimed Kevin Roberson, outfielder, off waivers from the Chicago Cubs.
National League N.L. -- Suspended Brian McRae, Chicago Cubs outfielder, for two games for bumping and screaming at umpire Brian Gorman in a game June 30.
HOUSTON ASTROS -- Extended the contract of Terry Collins, manager, through the 1997 season.
PHILADELPHIA PHILLIES -- Signed Kevin Elster, shortstop, to a minor-league contract and assigned him to Scranton-Wilkes-Barre of the International League.
PITTSBURGH PIRATES -- Named Gene Lamont scout and adviser to the general manager.
Basketball  National Basketball Association SEATTLE SUPERSONICS-Announced the resignation of Rick Sund, college scout and consultant to the general manager, to become vice president of player personnel for the Detroit Pistons.
Football  National Football League CINCINNATI BENGALS -- Signed James Francis, linebacker, to a one-year contract.
Hockey  National Hockey League ANAHEIM MIGHTY DUCKS -- Signed Pavel Trnka, defenseman, to a multiyear contract.
FLORIDA PANTHERS -- Signed Steve Washburn, center; Jason Podollan, right wing; and Alain Nasreddine, defenseman.
PHILADELPHIA FLYERS -- Signed Kjell Samuelsson, defenseman.
Soccer  Major League Soccer COLUMBUS -- Named Jamey Rootes general manager.
College  ARMY -- Named Jerry Quiller men's and women's cross country and track and field coach.
BUFFALO -- Named Paul Vecchio director of sports information.
DARTMOUTH -- Promoted Ellen O'Neil, women's cross country and track and field assistant coach, to women's cross country coach.


Militant Islam Fills a Governmental Void
To the Editor:
Re "How to Stop Militant Islam" by Michael Field (Op-Ed, July 3):


Minor Move By Yankees Is A Major Deal
The Yankees injected a serious wrinkle today into a season that has hardly been smooth when they recalled Dave Pavlas, a relief pitcher from Class AAA Columbus who defied the players association and his 24 new teammates this past spring by pitching for New York's replacement team.
In attempting to elevate their bullpen with a reliever who had a 0.00 earned run average in 11 innings of replacement games in March, the Yankees might have stepped on the toes of their regular players.
When the players' strike and replacement baseball ended in April, the Yankees retained some strike-breaking players and knew this kind of situation might arrive.
It finally did today, and the other relievers offered the players' initial reaction by not welcoming Pavlas and sitting apart from him in the bullpen during tonight's 10-0 loss to the Texas Rangers.


Worth a Visit
To the Editor:
I was outraged to read the biased and mean-spirited dismissal of Woodstock, N.Y., in your June 30 survey of Ulster County -- both as a journalist and a weekend resident of Woodstock.


Safety-Kleen Corp.(SK,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Jun 17


Panel to Hear Gingrich and Murdoch
The House ethics committee has called Speaker Newt Gingrich and Rupert Murdoch, the publishing magnate, to testify at a closed meeting on the deal to publish Mr.
Gingrich's book "To Renew America."
No dates have been set for their testimony, but the committee hopes it can settle the complaints about Mr.
Gingrich's deal with a book company controlled by Mr.
Murdoch before Congress goes on vacation in August.


Older, Wiser, and Again in the Wimbledon Final
A decade ago, a strapping, freckled and fearless 17-year-old loose cannon from Germany turned Wimbledon into his own personal demolition derby, rising from the ranks of the anonymous and crashing his way to the 1985 championship.
It was a phenomenal launch for what has been a nonpareil career, especially here at Wimbledon, the Grand Slam tournament he uses as his touchstone, his looking glass and his motivation to continue hauling his jaded bones around the tennis circuit.
He does it all for the chance that he might win this Grand Slam event one more time.


Germans' Ozone Concerns and Love of Speed Meet Head On
What passes for summer -- a muggy gasp from the jaws of the Rhine -- has settled in here, and with it has blossomed a remarkably passionate debate that pits two sides of Germany's soul against each other: the right to speed against the right to breathe; a pious regard for the environment at the ballot box against foot-down frenzy at the steering wheel.
At issue is smog, the blanket of toxic fumes produced when sunlight combines with chemicals from car exhaust and industrial plants to yield perilous levels of ozone at ground level.


A Way to Know Who's Calling?
The State Board of Public Utilities has authorized Bell Atlantic to start a six-month trial in the 201 and 908 area codes of a service known as CALL 54.
It tells callers the name and address attached to any phone number, excluding unlisted numbers and those of other customers who ask not to be included.
The trial should be starting in a week or two.
Another service approved yesterday is Caller ID Deluxe, which displays a caller's name and phone number -- including those of customers with unpublished numbers who do not request to be blocked.
The board also told Bell Atlantic it could increase monthly rates for unpublished numbers to $1.44 from $1.04.


Angus McDonald, China Specialist, 53
Angus W. McDonald Jr., a specialist in the Communist revolution in China and founder of the Asia Education Center in Minneapolis, died on Monday at his home in Minneapolis.
He was 53.
The cause was amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, or Lou Gehrig's disease, said Archibald Spencer, a friend.
Dr.
McDonald graduated from Amherst College in 1965 and earned a doctorate in Chinese history at the University of California at Berkeley.


CHRONICLE
JOEY BUTTAFUOCO pleaded no contest yesterday to soliciting sex from an undercover officer posing as a prostitute near Sunset Boulevard in Hollywood in May.
He was ordered to pay $1,715 in fines and fees, undergo testing for the AIDS virus and complete an AIDS education class.
He was also placed on two years' probation.


CHRONICLE
CORAZON C. AQUINO, the former President of the Philippines, did not attend the christening yesterday of her daughter's child by an actor nearly 20 years her senior, Reuters reported.
Only one sister of Mrs.
Aquino's daughter KRIS AQUINO showed up for the christening of the child, JOSHUA PHILIP ANTHONY JOSEPH AQUINO.
His father is PHILIP SALVADOR, an actor who has three other children with his wife and one with another woman.


T-Shirts and Politics Mix on Mall


Industrial Arts Program to End
Citing declining enrollment, a high dropout rate and failure to meet state standards, the Board of Education has abolished its industrial arts department after 34 years.
The department is no longer preparing students for vocations "at the entry level," said Peter Fischbach, the assistant superintendent of schools.
Students seeking jobs as electricians, carpenters, auto mechanics and plumbers will be accommodated at vocational schools in Hudson County, he said.
JOE SHARKEY


Needle-Container Recall
Becton Dickinson &amp; Company said today it would recall thousands of containers used to dispose of contaminated hypodermic needles after an advocacy organization, Public Citizen Health Research Group, found that the needles could pierce the thin containers.


ICF Kaiser International Inc.(ICF,N) reports earnings for Qtr to MAy 31


Conservatives' New Frontier: Religious Liberty Law Firms
Following their thrust into national politics, religious conservatives are creating their own legal organizations to combat what they see as a broad assault on religious liberties.
More than half a dozen religious liberty law firms, some founded in the 1990's, are waging battles in courts, schools and city halls to carve out a greater public space for religious activity -- be it for student Bible clubs in schools, for the display of crosses in public parks or prayers at graduation ceremonies.


Judge Chides City Officials On Squatters
New York City suffered a minor setback yesterday in its efforts to evict squatters from two buildings it owns on East 13th Street in Manhattan, but it also received a major tongue-lashing from a State Supreme Court justice for its militarylike handling of evictions from two other buildings on the same street in May.
"I will not permit you to use another ruse to get into another building to create mayhem," said Justice Elliott Wilk in denying an emergency petition by city lawyers to clear squatters from two of its buildings, at 537 and 539 East 13th Street.


School Official Denies Rancid Turkey Report
A report last month alleging that school food officials approved huge shipments of rancid food to cafeterias is as flimsy as a "house of cards" and contains a flawed analysis, according to the school system's top food-service official, who was removed from his job because of the report.
The official, Kevin F. Gill, contends through his lawyer, John F. Kaley, that investigators misunderstood documents and had no proof to support their charge of deception.


Brown Tide Returns to Eastern L.I.
The bays and estuaries of eastern Long Island are being invaded by a vast bloom of brown algae for the first time in a decade, devastating fragile scallop beds and causing tourists to turn away in disgust.
The algae is not a health hazard to humans, officials say.
But the baymen who depend on the scallop for a good part of their seasonal income -- and who had one of their best years last year -- say this year's crop is a disaster.
Article, page 24.


Bengals Re-sign Francis for One Year
The free-agent linebacker JAMES FRANCIS signed a one-year contract yesterday with the Cincinnati Bengals that is reportedly worth $2.5 million.
The Bengals had designated Francis as their transition player, meaning the team had the right to match any other offer he might have received. (AP)


For Greenpeace Guerrillas, Environmentalism Is Again a Growth Industry
After being lowered from a helicopter, Micheal O'Cadhla and three other Greenpeace commandos had barricaded themselves onto an oil-storage platform as it was being towed toward its ocean grave.
Royal Dutch/Shell, its owner, was about to scuttle the disused 460-foot tower of steel and concrete in the North Atlantic.
Greenpeace sent Mr. O'Cadhla and his team to prevent this.


Middle-Aged Machinations Frustrated by Young Love
The play's the thing at the Vineyard's 26th Street Theater, 309 East 26th Street, Kips Bay, where the National Asian-American Theater Company has revived Moliere's comic masterpiece "The School for Wives."
In an eloquent translation by Richard Wilbur enacted on a serene garden set designed by Sarah Lambert, Stephen Stout's direction unfolds once more the wise and witty tale of the middle-aged Arnolphe, who so relishes the marital misadventures of others.
Not for him the horns of a cuckold.
No, indeed.
He has a foolproof plan: to wed his young ward, convent-raised under his instructions to be ignorant, innocent, dependent and naive.


Penguins Are Letting Free Agents Leave
The unrestricted free agents JOE MULLEN, KJELL SAMUELSSON and TROY MURRAY will not be coming back to the Pittsburgh Penguins.
Samuelsson rejoined the Philadelphia Flyers yesterday, and the Penguins will not be making offers to the other two, General Manager CRAIG PATRICK said.
The Penguins also chose not to make the qualifying offers necessary to keep their rights to the free agents PAUL DYCK, GREG HAWGOOD, WAYNE McBEAN, PATRICK NEATON, MIKE HUDSON, JIM McKENZIE and BRIAN FARRELL. (AP)


Out of Sight, Out of Mind, but Not Out of Work; Town Finds Space for Welcome Mat, Postage-Stamp Size, for Immigrant Laborers
In the century that this community has existed, crises have often been resolved with bluster and bravado.
In the 1980's, Glen Cove taunted the Soviet Union with the ultimate municipal threat -- canceled beach passes.
In the 1990's, city officials sought to rid their downtown of large groups of Central American day laborers with a tough ordinance aimed at ousting undocumented workers who used the community's street corners as outdoor hiring halls.


L.I. Boy, 13, Is Killed in Fall From Elementary School Roof
A 13-year-old boy playing with friends on the roof of an elementary school Thursday night was fatally injured when he fell through a skylight, the police said today.
The victim, James Clifford, who was to have celebrated his 14th birthday today at a Rollerblade party, climbed to the roof of the Gatelot Elementary School on Gatelot Avenue near his home in Lake Ronkonkoma, L.I., around 9:30 P.M., accompanied by two companions, said Detective Lieut.
John Gierasch, chief of the Suffolk County police homicide squad.


JOBLESS RATE FELL
The job market perked up in June as employers added 215,000 payroll jobs while the unemployment rate edged down slightly to 5.6 percent, the Labor Department reported today.
Despite a stronger overall performance than most analysts expected, there were some pockets of weakness.
Factory jobs -- which tend to be better paying than most -- dropped 40,000, the third straight sizable decline.
Such unevenness blunted the second-guessing by some analysts and investors of the Federal Reserve's decision on Thursday to reverse course and cut short-term interest rates for the first time since 1992.
The Fed acted before it was fully aware of the latest report, which suggested that the current economic slowdown is unlikely to turn into a recession.


Corrections
Because of a production error, an article yesterday about Government approval for the marketing of the first drug for the treatment of impotence included scrambled passages in some editions.
A corrected copy appears today on page 7.


Rate Setters Miss Data, Just Barely
While Federal Reserve officials were meeting Thursday morning to decide whether to cut short-term interest rates, another agency was quietly putting the finishing touches on the most important set of monthly economic figures published by the Government.
By a quirk of the calendar, the central bank's Open Market Committee missed knowing by a few hours that the Labor Department would report today that employers' payrolls expanded by 215,000 in June and that the unemployment rate edged lower.


Preserve Grant's Tomb
To the Editor:
Re "Parks in Peril" (editorial, July 4): New Yorkers should know what the Hefley-Vento bill's proposal to discontinue national parks means for our area.


A Slight Figure Seems To Grow and Get Power
Pilar Rioja is by now a New York dance institution with a loyal and loving following, an ensemble of familiar musical collaborators and an atmospheric little home at the Gramercy Arts Theater, 138 East 27th Street, where she performed on Thursday night.
One of the best reasons to see Miss Rioja, who will reopen her engagement at the theater for seven weeks beginning on July 24, is the intimacy and warmth of her program and its setting.
The other reason is that Miss Rioja offers quite a lesson in performing.
There are good dancers and good performers, and sometimes the two are mixed in a single artist.
But with age there is necessarily some loss in the kind of technical facility that helps to make good dancers.
Accommodations must be made, even in flamenco, which can be performed well past the quitting age for most dance techniques.
Miss Rioja has not just made accommodations.
She seems to have seized the chance to explore the realm of performing, at times before one's eyes onstage.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Unemployment Falls As Job Market Grows The job market showed surprising strength in June as employers added 215,000 payroll jobs, and the unemployment rate eased to 5.6 percent.


Screaming About Dogs and Disasters
Courtney Love, leader of the Seattle rock band Hole and widow of Kurt Cobain of Nirvana, has a revenge tactic she likes to use to spite jaded record-company personnel who contribute to on-line computer message boards.
She simply writes the word "paw" followed by a long string of ha-ha's.
The joke is that Paw, from Lawrence, Kan., was one of the first hard-edged alternative-rock bands signed to a major label in the wake of Nirvana's success in 1991.
They went on to receive all the promotional hype that such a band would merit but have yet to receive any success justifying it.
On Tuesday afternoon in Bryant Park, Paw and another band with a Seattle sound, Our Lady Peace, from Toronto, performed a free concert.
Wearing an Uncle Sam costume to celebrate (or perhaps denigrate) Independence Day, Paw's Mark Hennessy screamed lyrics about dogs, disasters and abusive relationships.
The band played the kind of tuneful heavy metal that probably excited record executives looking for the next Nirvana, especially with its sudden shifts from restrained singing to riotous guitar riffing and angrily rasped choruses.
The band slipped a couple of songs from its forthcoming album, "Death to Traitors" (A &amp; M Records), into the set, showing that its songwriting has improved since its first record, "Dragline."


ALUMINUM COMPANY OF AMERICA (AA,N)
The Aluminum Company of America said yesterday that higher metal prices helped quadruple earnings in the second quarter,
Alcoa, the world's largest aluminum producer, earned $219.4 million, or $1.23 a share, in the quarter, up from $45.4 million, or 25 cents, in the comparable quarter a year earlier.
The per-share results for 1994 were restated to reflect a 2-for-1 stock split.


Bond Prices Fall on Data Showing Jobless Rate Drop
Prices of Treasury securities slipped yesterday after a stronger-than-expected employment report raised concern that the Federal Reserve might not again cut rates any time soon.
The Labor Department reported yesterday that the nation's unemployment rate fell to 5.6 percent in June from 5.7 percent the previous month.
The report even led some bond traders to question if the Fed was justified in cutting short-term interest rates on Thursday.
The Fed lowered its Federal funds target rate, or the rate banks charge each other for overnight loans, by 25 basis points, to 5.75 percent.
A basis point is one hundredth of a percentage point.


Special Olympics Athlete Is Feared Dead
Hundreds of police officers, lifeguards and volunteers waded into cold chest-deep water for up to two hours today off the beach at Hammonasset State Park, holding hands to form a human chain in their search for the body of a 21-year-old mentally retarded athlete from Nepal who disappeared on Thursday while taking a break from the Special Olympics World Games in nearby New Haven.
Ramesh Mali, a soccer player, floundered and disappeared under the water about 60 yards offshore in Long Island Sound around noon Thursday, the state police said.
The Coast Guard announced this morning that it believed Mr.
Mali was dead.
The surface rescue effort was suspended just after 10 A.M. today, with divers and volunteers taking over the search for a body.


Orange County Gets a Reprieve On Paying Debt
A key component of the financial recovery plan for Orange County, Calif., was approved yesterday when a majority of the county's short-term note holders agreed to accept a one-year delay in the repayment of $800 million in debt.
Without this agreement, the county, which filed for bankruptcy protection in December after losing $1.6 billion on risky investments, would have been forced to default immediately on short-term borrowings coming due this month.
The plan, called a "rollover," gives the county an extra year to face these obligations.


International Briefs; Compagnie de Suez To Seek Chairman
The chairman of Compagnie de Suez S.A., Gerard Worms, who has been under fire from unhappy shareholders, received a stay yesterday until at least July 31.
The board approved Mr.
Worms's suggestion that a committee of five board members suggest a new chairman at a board meeting on July 31.


Gulliver's Japanese Travels; Hitting the (Narrow) Road in Two U.S. Behemoths
The attendant, his eyes squinting and his head cocked to one side, peered at the car from the front.
He walked around to the back and peered at it from there.
He consulted with a co-worker.
Then he crossed his arms in front of him to form an "X." The Cadillac Concours was not going to be allowed into his department store parking lot.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, the Real Estate column on Wednesday about an office building under construction in Chicago for the headquarters of Blue Cross and Blue Shield of Illinois referred incorrectly in some editions to the amount of space leased by the organization at its current headquarters, in Two Illinois Center.
It is 75 percent of the building, not 90.


Music Contrived To Ease The Angst
As he introduced his songs on Thursday night at Radio City Music Hall, Yanni, the Greek keyboardist and composer of symphonic easy-listening music, said that one song was about romancing life, another about the power of dreams and a third about the bond that exists among all human beings.
These are all healthy and worthwhile ideas, but as Yanni and his 40-piece orchestra played feel-good instrumentals full of ornate but empty virtuosity, the concert began to seem like a musical medicine show.
The snake oil Yanni hawked for three hours on Thursday was advertised to heal the soul.
It was an exotic oil, filled with extracts from far-off lands, from the low didgeridoo piping of Australia to the hot salsa rhythms of Cuba to the close-knit harmonies of South Africa.
Except, like all snake oils and sugar pills, it created only the illusion of healing.
What it actually did was distract -- and, at its most effective, anesthetize -- the listener, blotting out the pain, confusion and conflicts of the world.


Former Baylor Assistants Get Probation
Three former Baylor University assistant basketball coaches embraced and cried tears of joy in a Federal courtroom yesterday as they were sentenced to probation for helping junior college recruits cheat on tests.
GARY THOMAS, TROY DRUMMOND and KEVIN GRAY were sentenced to three years' probation and assigned 50 hours of community service.
Thomas was fined $1,500, while Drummond and Gray were each fined $1,000. (AP)


After Civilians Are Killed, Chechens Break Off Talks
The Chechen delegation broke off peace negotiations today with Russian officials to protest the killing of seven civilians, including two little girls and an old man, by men dressed in Russian uniforms.
The Russian military denied involvement in the killings and said that they were intended to derail the peace talks, which are the most serious effort so far to end the war in the breakaway region in southern Russia.


Donald Sinclair, 84, Inspiration For Herriot's Veterinary Tales
Donald Sinclair, an English country veterinarian who was the model for a character in books by James Herriot, including "All Creatures Great and Small," and in the television series of the same title, died on June 28, The Scotsman, an Edinburgh-based newspaper, reported on Monday.
He was 84 and lived in Thirlby in Yorkshire.
Mr.
Sinclair was the inspiration for Siegfried Farnon, a character who has been called twinkly, avuncular and a bit absent-minded in his television incarnation.


Emilio Nunez Is Dead at 91; A Pioneering Hispanic Judge
Justice Emilio Nunez, who blazed a trail for Hispanic Americans in the judiciary of New York, rising from New York City magistrate to the Appellate Division of the State Supreme Court, died on Thursday at Lenox Hill Hospital.
Mr.
Nunez, who lived in Manhattan, was 91.
After retiring from the bench in 1977, he returned to the private practice of law as senior counsel to the firm of Sullivan &amp; Liapakis of Manhattan, a post he held at the time of his death.


Leaving Workers Cripple Jersey D.M.V. Units
The long and bitter fight over Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman's plan to privatize motor vehicle offices continued to the last day of state operation today, as disgruntled workers sabotaged computers at five offices and failed to show up in large numbers, leaving six other offices too undermanned to function, authorities said.
The job actions crippled operations at nearly half the 23 branch offices that on Monday will open under private agents and new staffs hired as part of Gov.
Whitman's privatization campaign to save the state $4 million in salary, health benefit and pension costs of D.M.V. workers.


News Media in Belgrade Mute Their Nationalism
As the former Yugoslavia began its descent toward war in the early 1990's, the pro-Government Serbian press played a crucial role in whipping up nationalist fervor and hatred of non-Serbs.
Newspapers were full of vivid stories, many of them exaggerated and others completely false, recounting gruesome atrocities committed against Serbs in Bosnia and Croatia.
Television news programs broadcast propaganda daily, never missing a chance to show a destroyed village, a sobbing widow or a distraught refugee.


Dan Friedman, Graphic Designer, 49
Dan Friedman, a graphic designer, author and teacher, died on Thursday at St.
Luke's-Roosevelt Hospital Center in Manhattan.
He was 49 and lived in Manhattan.
The cause was AIDS, said his brother, Kenneth Friedman.


Harry S. Tishelman, 71, Banker And a New York Finance Chief
Harry S. Tishelman, who as a New York City finance official earned a tribute for helping the city get the biggest returns on its investments, died on Thursday in Phelps Memorial Hospital in North Tarrytown, N.Y.
A New York City native, he was 71 and had lived in Tarrytown in recent months.
The cause was cancer, his family said.


No Headline
"I know we are supposed to be free now. I mean we are free now. At least it seemed that way for a while. They can't lock us up anymore. But that's about it. We are still considered scum here. I think we always will be." -- ALEKSANDR KOROTKOV, at a gay disco in St.
Petersburg.  [ 1:5. ]


2 Youths Stole Bus, Police Say, For a Wild Ride in Harlem
Normally, the out-of-service bus would have been parked in a locked yard in Harlem.
But since another driver was scheduled to pick it up in just a few hours, it was left in front of the depot, at Amsterdam Avenue and 129th Street.
Before the new driver could take the wheel, though, two teen-agers stole the 40-foot bus and went on a raucous joy ride through Harlem Thursday night, the police said, smashing into cars and finally running the bus up against a subway entrance.


Serena's Song Heads the Field of Coaching Club Fillies
Serena's Song, the filly star of the D. Wayne Lukas barn, will give her next performance en route to the filly championship when she runs today as the prohibitive favorite in the Coaching Club American Oaks at Belmont Park.
She has won seven straight races against fillies, a streak that was interrupted when she ran 16th against the colts in the Kentucky Derby.
But two weeks later, Serena's Song bounced back from that defeat to win the Black-Eyed Susan Stakes at Pimlico by nine lengths, and three weeks after that to capture the Mother Goose Stakes at Belmont by three lengths.


INSIDE
A Role for Wild Fires
A year ago wild fires ravaged the West; now the Clinton Administration is endorsing using such fires as a land management tool.
Page 6.
China Arrests Dissident
Harry Wu, a Chinese-American who has alleged rights violations in China, was arrested in Wuhan and formally charged with spying.
Page 2.
Sampras and Becker in Final
The Wimbledon final is set: Pete Sampras (no surprise) against Boris Becker (big surprise).
Page 27.


Bridge
The second women's team to represent the United States in the world championships in Beijing in October consists of a Federal judge, Amalya L. Kearse, and Jacqui Mitchell, both of Manhattan; Tobi Deutsch and Mildred Breed, both of Austin, Tex., Jo Morse of Tucson, Ariz., and Joyce Lilie of Las Vegas, Nev., with Phillip Alder of Manhasset, L.I., as nonplaying captain.
The same squad won the team trials in 1992 and played in the World Team Olympiad in Salsomaggiore, Italy.
In the secondary playoff in Alexandria, Va., on Tuesday, the Alder team won by 62 imps.
Opposing them, after a string of excellent results in the first five days of play, was a group from Seattle: Jean Anderson, Sharon Colson, Janet Dowling, Careen Hinds, Judy Pede and Broma Lou Reed, with Gene Simpson as nonplaying captain.


Doubling Up in Prison Cells Saves Money but Stirs Inmates Anger
Like many inmates throughout New York State's sprawling prison system, Steven Duffen is upset about a new policy to double up inmates in cells designed for one person.
"I'm 6-foot-1 and I weigh 330 pounds," said Mr.
Duffen, a convicted forger imprisoned at the Clinton Correctional Facility near the Canadian border.
"My cell is approximately 6 feet by 8 feet. In that space is a toilet bowl, a sink, a six-foot bed, a tall gym locker and a chair."


Journal; The Middle Ground
If there were any real doubts about where Bill Clinton stands as he runs for re-election, they ended this week.
In a Thursday morning speech delivered at Georgetown University, the President spoke the phrase "middle class" two dozen times and referred nearly as often to his idea of an American "common ground." Middle class, common ground, middle ground, whatever -- the center, as usual in Presidential races, is definitely the place to be.
The discursive, hourlong speech itself was mainly witnessed by C-Span shut-ins and was all too predictably lost in a news cycle in which Marcia Clark, praise be, finally rested her case.
But the significance of Mr.
Clinton's words was advertised by his venue -- G.U., his alma mater, was also the site of his theme-setting "New Covenant" speech for the '92 campaign -- and by his subsequent efforts to get his message out.


Getting Tan in a Real-World Environment
To the Editor:
Re "Don't Bother Me: I'm Catching Some Rays" (Week in Review, July 2), on sunbathing:


PHP Healthcare Corp.(PPH,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 30


Why Can't Tennis Be Like The N.B.A.?
Sports seasons are like great stories.
They begin with an introduction, have a full cast of characters and end with a climax.
Football ends with the Super Bowl, baseball has the World Series, hockey culminates with the Stanley Cup and basketball has the N.B.A. finals.
Tennis, on the other hand, has no season.
It just keeps going and going.
Furthermore, there are dozens of top tournaments all over the world, and the system is set up to favor the top-seeded players.
This isn't good for scrappy new players coming up in the ranks, which means fewer exciting upsets, and that isn't good for the fans.


Fair Funding for New York City Schools
New York State's highest court has agreed to let a legal challenge to the system for financing its public schools go forward.
The case will offer the first serious judicial consideration of the state's unfair school aid formulas in a decade.
Gov.
George Pataki concedes that the formulas need "dramatic changes." He and the State Legislature would do well to jump out ahead of the courts to stop shortchanging many of the state's schoolchildren.


International Briefs; Investors Snap Up Shares of Usinor
Investors sought more than twice as many shares in Usinor Sacilor as the French Government offered as part of the privatization of Europe's largest steelmaker, the Finance Ministry said today.
It said individual investors had oversubscribed the shares reserved for them by 2.1 times and institutional investors oversubscribed the much larger amount of shares set aside for them by 2.35 times.
The privatization will generate just over 17 billion francs ($3.5 billion).


Driver Is Charged in 4 Deaths
Four counts of aggravated manslaughter were filed yesterday against Kevin R. Price, 24, the Basking Ridge man already accused of drunken driving in a head-on crash that killed four people in a church van on Monday on the Garden State Parkway.


Evidence Is Powerful, but He's Still O.J.
Almost six months ago, prosecutors began the O. J. Simpson murder trial by trying to knock the defendant off his pedestal.
That effort was an implicit acknowledgment that before a jury would consider what prosecutors called the "mountain of evidence" against Mr.
Simpson, they had to drain the deep reservoir of good will he had created for himself on the football field and on the screen.
To most legal experts, the prosecution has produced the mountain it promised, built of DNA evidence and bloody shoe prints, hairs and shirt fibers, carpet threads and reams of testimony.
But as the state concluded its case on Thursday, there were questions as to whether that mountain was big enough, partly, the experts said, because the reservoir of good will still looked intact, even replenished.


An Extra Eye on School Buses
Drivers who pass school buses discharging or picking up children will find themselves appearing on videotape when they go to court.
When school resumes, camera operators will ride Fairview's five buses to capture scofflaws on tape, said David C. Verducci, the School Superintendent.
The decision was prompted by growing complaints that motorists were ignoring the flashing school bus lights.


F.D.A. Approves an Injection To Treat Sexual Impotence
The Food and Drug Administration on Thursday approved the marketing of the first prescription drug for the treatment of impotence, a condition that affects 10 million to 20 million American men.
The drug is administered by injection into the penis shortly before sexual intercourse.
It is not recommended for use more than three times a week or more than once in 24 hours.
Although it is intended for self-administration, "the first injections must be done in a physician's office by medically trained personnel," the F.D.A. said in a statement.


Different Faces of AIDS Are Conjured Up by Politicians
When Senator Jesse Helms explained why he wanted to reduce Federal spending on AIDS care and research, he conjured an image of homosexuals "deliberately engaging in unnatural acts" who had nothing but their own "disgusting, revolting conduct" to blame for contracting the disease.
When President Clinton sought to rebut the Senator, he conjured a different image: that of "Debbie," a 27-year-old woman in a rural area near Orangeburg, S.C., about 75 miles northwest of Charleston, who was served by a county clinic made possible through the Ryan White Comprehensive AIDS Resource Emergency Act of 1990.


James Shriver, 67, Gallup Poll Official
James Shriver 3d, a former managing editor and vice president of the Gallup Poll, died on June 29 at Princeton Hospital in Princeton, N.J.
He was 67 and lived in Princeton.
The cause was throat cancer, said Mackell M. Shriver, his former wife.


Mexican Stock Exchange Is Regaining Lost Ground
The battered Mexican stock market has managed to regain most of the ground it lost after the peso was devalued in December, although stock values in dollar terms are still far below previous levels.
Today, the leading index of the Mexican stock exchange rose for the 11th time in 13 trading days, gaining 54.10 points, or 2.25 percent, to 2,457.18, a high for the year.
While in pesos the market has gained a little more than 1.1 percent since the beginning of the year, in dollars, the exchange is still down more than 18 percent.
The dollar has risen 21.28 percent against the peso for the year.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 2-5  CUBA EMBARGO ISOLATES U.S.
Once an obedient follower of the United States trade embargo on Cuba, Latin America increasingly ignores Washington to develop ties with the Havana Government. 1  CHANGE FOR GAY RUSSIANS
Russia's gay activists are confused, finding it hard to figure out what they want from their new world and afraid that their brief burst of freedoms is starting to end. 1  VICTORY FOR GREENPEACE TACTICS
The environmental group Greenpeace's victory in ending Royal Dutch/Shell's plans to scuttle an oil platfrom seems to vindicate its confrontational tactics. 3  GERMANY FIGHTS AIR POLLUTION
A remarkably passionate debate over air pollution is pitting two sides of Germany's soul against each other: the right to speed against the right to breathe. 3  CHECHENS BREAK OFF TALKS
The Chechen delegation broke off peace negotiations with Russian officials to protest the killing of seven Chechen civilians by men dressed in Russian uniforms. 4  SERBIAN PRESS SHIFTS GEARS
Serbia's pro-Government press, which once played a crucial role in whipping up nationalist fervor and hatred of non-Serbs, has been muted its nationalism.5  Serbian shells fell near a mediator's helicopter in Bosnia. 5  Equipment flaw led to downing of U.S. pilot over Bosnia. 5  Rugby Journal: A schoolgirl upsets old-boy traditions. 4  National 6-8  JOBLESS RATE DIPS TO 5.6%
The nation's job market perked up in June as employers added 215,000 payroll jobs while the unemployment rate edged down to 5.6 percent.
The report helped lift stocks and the dollar.  1  RELIGIOUS RIGHT GETS TOUGH
Religious conservatives are creating their own legal organizations to wage battles in courts, schools and city halls.  1  ASSESSING THE SIMPSON CASE
The prosecution in the O. J. Simpson case has certainly produced the mountain of evidence it promised, but whether it dented the defendant's armor is another matter.  1  FEDERALLY APPROVED FIRES
The Clinton Administration has given its approval to a land management approach that would use fires to help control forest growth, an idea loggers criticize.  6  A LONG JOURNEY ENDS
The space shuttle Atlantis landed at the Kennedy Space Center, with six Americans and two Russians on board.  6  A COMMITTEE CALLS
The House Ethics Committee wants Speaker Newt Gingrich and Rupert Murdoch, the publisher, to give it the details of the deal they struck for Mr.
Gingrich's book, "To Renew America." 7  THE AIDS DEBATE
A Senator's criticism of AIDS spending and the President's response show the many faces of the disease.  7  SUSPICIOUS, BUT NO SUSPECT
A man who was acting suspiciously at the scene of a fatal mail bombing is not the suspect in the Unabom case, investigators said.  7  HOORAY FOR HOLLYWOOD
The oft-bashed entertainment industry showed a side that even its conservative critics might like, at the Humanitas Awards, which honor script writers for work uplifting humane values.  8  Metro Digest 21  CITY CRIME RATE PLUNGES
In a dramatic acceleration of a four-year trend, the rate of reported crime in New York City has plunged since January to the lowest level since 1970, according to preliminary Police Department statistics. 1  MAJOR HOSPITAL SEEKS MERGER
Harold R. Neumann, airplane pilot who won speed-racing titles.
Editorials/Op-Ed 18-19  Editorials  Your attention, please.
The next step in Belfast.
Open the Packwood hearings.
Fair funding for city schools.
Letters  Frank Rich: The middle ground.
Russell Baker: The diversity cuisine.
Stanley Hill: The city's unions have given plenty.
Joshua Shapiro: Why can't tennis be like the N.B.A.?
David J. Kalke: It's our duty to give away condoms.
Chronicle 20  Bridge 14  Crossword 14


Unemployment Rates Little Changed in Region
While the national job market showed signs of strength yesterday, employment figures for the New York-New Jersey region were largely stagnant.
The unemployment rate for New York State fell to 5.9 percent in June from 6.3 percent in May.
But New Jersey's unemployment rate rose to 6.6 percent from 6.5 percent, and New York City's rate slipped to 8.1 percent from 8.2 percent.
The national rate fell to 5.6 percent, from 5.7 percent.
The number of people on payrolls remained steady in both states.


Why Banks Have to Remain Impartial Lenders
To the Editor:
In opposing evaluations of the Glass-Steagall laws, Marc Intrater ("Banking Laws Keep an Industry Down," letter, July 2) and John W. Moscow ("Bigger Banks, Bigger Problems," Op-Ed, June 28) focus solely on safety and soundness.
The safety and soundness of our banks and banking system may be important, but it is a peculiarly defensive ground on which to justify or condemn regulation.


CHRONICLE
Call it typecasting.
MOE FONER, 79, who for 35 years was the executive secretary of Local 1199 of the hospital and health care workers' union, and his brother, HENRY FONER, 77, retired president of the Fur, Leather and Machine Workers, are making their movie debuts playing (what else?) labor union leaders.
For the last two days, they have been appearing before cameras in "I'm Not Rappaport," the film version of Herb Gardner's play.
Their scene shows a flashback to the 1909 garment workers' strike and a meeting of such prominent labor leaders as Samuel Gompers.
On the dais with them are the Foner brothers.


Grant S. Lewis, 53, New York Lawyer
Grant S. Lewis, a partner in the law firm of LeBoeuf, Lamb, Greene &amp; MacRae, died on Wednesday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 53.
He died after a prolonged illness, said Samuel M. Sugden, the firm's chairman.


Bonilla's Words Serve As Mets' Wake-Up Call
Bobby Bonilla wants to know what's going on. And he's not talking about 1996.
Tonight's comeback from a five-run, seventh-inning deficit may not have changed things for the Mets.
But maybe, just maybe, it's a start.


COMPANY BRIEFS
ITT CORP., New York, announced that its Caesars World casino unit planned to spend about $250 million to add rooms and other amenities to its Atlantic City casino hotel.
PRICELLULAR CORP., New York, said it intended to buy a 98 percent stake in a cellular telephone license owned by Parkersburg Cellular Telephone Co. for $17.5 million.
The license area covers a section of West Virginia and Ohio.


Dodgers' Nomo May Get All-Star Start
If Atlanta's GREG MADDUX cannot start for the National League in the All-Star Game next Tuesday, his choice for a replacement is the Dodgers' HIDEO NOMO.
"I think more people want to watch him pitch than me," said Maddux (8-1), who injured his groin slightly Thursday in the Braves' 1-0 victory over the Dodgers and might miss the All-Star Game at Arlington, Tex.
Nomo is 6-1 and leads the league in strikeouts with 119. (AP)


Subway Train Hits Man
A northbound No. 3 subway train packed with some 1,500 passengers last night struck and killed a man who was crouching on the express tracks of the IRT line just south of Columbus Circle, transit officials said.
The victim, identified only as a black man in his 40's, was dead at the scene, the officials said


A 'New Man' Convicted in an Old Slaying
A former cocaine addict who had turned his life around after murdering a Chelsea lawyer in 1982 was convicted of the crime on Thursday, largely on the basis of a seven-hour videotaped confession made by a dying prisoner.
The defendant, William Seals, 31, and his Jersey City boyhood friend, Kenneth Arch, had followed different paths since their troubled times in the drug world.
In the last decade, Mr.
Seals completed a drug rehabilitation program, married and opened a photo shop in Bayonne, N.J.
But Mr.
Arch became a career criminal, winding up in the Bergen County jail, stricken with AIDS.


International Briefs; Elektrowatt to Buy Electron of Britain
Elektrowatt A.G. of Switzerland said yesterday that it had agreed to acquire Electron House P.L.C. of Britain in a merger valued at 115 million Swiss francs, or $100.6 million.
Elektrowatt is an electrical utility and electronics company controlled by the Swiss company CS Holding A.G.


5 Music Giants Drop Plan To Start a Rival to MTV
A tentative plan to start a rival music cable channel to MTV has been dropped by five of the world's biggest music companies.
The companies -- Time Warner, Sony, Thorn EMI, Bertelsmann and Polygram, which is controlled by Philips Electronics -- had planned the service with a partner, the Ticketmaster Corporation.
But executives confirmed yesterday that the plan, which was initially disclosed last year, had been shelved.
The move was reported yesterday in The Wall Street Journal.


Open the Packwood Hearings
Senator Bob Packwood told the Senate Ethics Committee this week that he does not want public hearings on the allegations of sexual and official misconduct pending against him.
That is an understandable preference on his part.
But the committee should be guided by the public interest.
It should exercise its right to order an open airing of the evidence against the Senator.
The committee's unanimous report in May -- the equivalent of an indictment -- found "substantial credible evidence" that Mr.
Packwood engaged in a degrading pattern of unwanted sexual advances toward women dating back to 1969, pressed lobbyists for jobs for his wife and tried to obstruct the panel's investigation by tampering with evidence.


Hello to West Brooklyn? Well, Manhattan to You
"EXCUSE me," said Danny Perasa politely to the waitress at the new Brooklyn Diner on 57th Street in Manhattan, "but have you ever heard of Carl Erskine?"
"No, I haven't," said the waitress, who was clearly born years after the old Dodger pitched his last inning.


Rugby Journal; Old School, New Day, With Girl As Head
For generations of British public schoolboys, the "head boy" inspired a respect born largely of fear.
Chosen by the faculty and headmaster to set an example and mete out discipline, he was the most powerful figure in his class, combining the muscular virtue of a church deacon with the authority of a prison warden.
But now that some of the traditional boarding schools have gone coeducational, times are changing.
These days the head boy tries to "communicate" rather than chastise, often chatting up new parents like a junior public relations officer.


Benefits Given Coors Workers' Gay Partners
The Coors Brewing Company, considered by many a bedrock of conservative views, has decided to offer full benefits to employees' unmarried domestic partners, including homosexual companions.
The proposal to extend such benefits was made by a group of Coors employees known as the Lesbian and Gay Resource Group, or Lager.
The company's board approved the change, by unanimous vote, on May 11.
The change was disclosed to Coors employees on June 21.


Leading Academic Hospital, Squeaking by, Seeks Merger
Convinced that it cannot survive on its own in a medical marketplace racked by budget cuts and dominated by managed care, Presbyterian Hospital, one of the city's leading academic hospitals, is actively looking to merge with another medical center.
Executives at Presbyterian, the hospital at Columbia-Presbyterian Medical Center, have begun discussions with two other leading centers, the New York Hospital and New York University Hospital, and hope to cement a partnership within a year, said Dr.
William Speck, President of Presbyterian.


A Charge of Attempted Murder
The 16-year-old wounded by a police officer on Thursday in an exchange of gunfire was charged with attempted murder yesterday, said Lieut.
Bruce Price of the Paterson Police Department.
The youth, whose name was not released, remained in the hospital with a gunshot wound in the arm.
Lieutenant Price said that Officer Jesus Garcia, 31, was on East 18th Street when he heard shots and encountered a group chasing the young man, who had apparently shot at several people during an altercation over a dice game.
The suspect then fired a shot at the officer, who returned fire.


The Next Step in Belfast
The violence that erupted again in Belfast this week was contained and predictable.
The Irish Republican Army seemed to encourage a frustrated community to let off steam after the British Government released Pvt.
Lee Clegg, who was serving a life sentence for killing an Irish teen-ager.
These events should not be allowed to deflect the peace process.
All parties -- the British and Irish Governments and the loyalist and Republican paramilitary groups -- need to find ways to push forward.
One issue stands in the way.
The British Government insists that Sinn Fein, the political wing of the Irish Republican Army, commit itself to decommissioning the arms of the I.R.A. before all-party talks can begin.
Decommissioning is essential to a peace settlement, but making it a precondition for all-party talks needlessly holds up the negotiating process.


U.S. to Use Fire in Managing Its Lands
A year after deadly wildfires charred the forests of the West, the Clinton Administration has proposed a new policy that would promote the use of fire in managing Federal lands.
The policy emphasizes the natural role of fires in improving the ecological health of overgrown forests, and would use both naturally occurring fires, like those caused by lightning, and controlled fires set wherever land managers determined they would be beneficial.


Attack Victim Leaves Hospital
A Russian Orthodox priest was released from the hospital yesterday after treatment for a gunshot wound suffered when three gunmen kidnapped him in front of his Philadelphia church on Thursday night.
The police said assailants of the Rev.
Mark Schinn, 48, pushed him into his van and drove him across the river to Camden, where they shot him in the back.
"They knew I was a priest," the victim told The Associated Press.
"They were laughing and whooping and having a grand time." The Camden police arrested Jose Casiano, 23; Alfredo DeJesus, 20, and a 15-year-old whose name was withheld.
All were charged with aggravated assault and robbery.
Inside the van, the police found three handguns and a sawed-off shotgun.


Ethics Panel Wants Gingrich to Testify
The House ethics committee wants to hear about Speaker Newt Gingrich's much-debated book deal directly from the two major players.
The committee has called Mr.
Gingrich and Rupert Murdoch, the publishing magnate, to a closed meeting to testify about the agreement they struck for "To Renew America," a book detailing Mr.
Gingrich's views on what direction the country should take.


National Beverage Corp.(POPS,NNM) reports earnings for Year to Apr 29


Nelson Spends Busy First Day With Knicks
With General Manager Ernie Grunfeld behind the wheel, Don Nelson visited the Knicks' practice facility at SUNY-Purchase yesterday.
He proceeded to shake hands with fans, borrow three videocassettes of Knicks games to peruse over the weekend and -- in his spare time -- meet with the former coach Pat Riley's three assistants and assure them they are in no danger of losing their jobs.
During his introduction as the Knicks' 17th coach on Thursday, Nelson said he was "rested and ready to go." But few could have imagined as whirlwind a first day on the job as this one.


Murder Rate Plunges in New York City
In an acceleration of a four-year trend, the murder rate in New York City has plunged sharply since January, to the lowest level in 25 years, according to Police Department statistics.
In the first 25 weeks of the year, reported murders have fallen by nearly a third, to 563 from 826 in the same period last year.
If the trend holds through the rest of the year -- even accounting for the normal surge of summertime mayhem -- 1995 will record the fewest slayings since 1970, when 1,117 people were killed.


Stylistic Opposites Bring a Final of Contrasts to Center Court
It's the battle of the sulky German with the bad back against the bouncing Spaniard with the good attitude and, except for the fact that they have never fought this particular battle at Wimbledon before, it truly is a matter of deja vu all over again for the female finalists Saturday.
For the 14th straight time, Steffi Graf, the world's top-ranked woman, is facing Arantxa Sanchez Vicario in a tournament final.
The last time they met, Graf reclaimed the French Open title, and the No. 1 ranking, with a 7-5, 4-6, 6-0 victory in Paris that also brought her a 16th Grand Slam singles crown.


Arrest Is Made in Brooklyn Shotgun Blast
The police arrested an 18-year-old Brooklyn man last night in connection with a Fourth of July shotgun blast that wounded a 6-year-old girl and seven men who were playing dominoes on a Bushwick sidewalk.
The man, David Ratliff, who lives at 62 Covert Street in Bushwick, was charged with reckless endangerment and criminal possession of a weapon, said Detective Mark Patterson of the New York City Police Department.


Observer; The Diversity Cuisine
"Smoking or nonsmoking?"
The smart-aleck in me always wants to reply, "None of your business."


RESULTS PLUS
GOLF  Haas Grabs Lead by 2
Jay Haas birdied the final two holes yesterday to take the second-round lead in the Western Open in Lemont, Ill., while Paul Azinger moved into contention with what he considered his best PGA Tour round since beginning his comeback from cancer 11 months ago.
Haas, who trailed Tom Watson by one stroke after the opening round, shot a four-under-par 68 for a two-day total of seven-under 137.
Watson was two back along with Steve Lowery.
Azinger, diagnosed with lymphoma in his right shoulder at the end of his outstanding 1993 season, had five birdies and no bogeys in shooting a 67 and was at 141.
"I really feel like I'm all the way back," he said.
Tiger Woods, the 19-year-old United States Amateur champion, shot a 71 for a 145 total.
Woods is playing his first event since withdrawing from the United States Open with a wrist injury. (AP) 64 FOR HILL: Mike Hill shot a seven-under-par 64 to take a two-shot lead after the first round of the $900,000 Kroger Senior Classic in Mason, Ohio. (AP) TRACK  Ankle Foils Record Bid
After two wind-assisted triple jumps of more than 59 feet in successive weeks, Jonathan Edwards of Britain was hoping to break Willie Banks's 1985 world record of 58-11 1/2 last night in the Mobil I.A.A.F.
Grand Prix meet in London.
But a slight left ankle strain stopped him after his winning third jump of 58- 1/2.
In other events, Steve Backley edged the world and Olympic champion Jan Zelezny with a javelin throw of 290-6; Jamaica's Merlene Ottey won the women's 200 meters in 22.32 seconds and Canada's Donovan Bailey won the 100 in 10.16. (AP)


Islet Lore: Soldiers, Prisoners, the Rich, the Dead and, Perhaps, the Devil
There are 20 islands in and around Long Island Sound that are within the borders of the Bronx.
The islands were once known as the Devil's Stepping Stones; according to fable, Indians were chasing the Devil across the sound, and every time he put his cloven hoof down, an island was formed.
Most of the islands are little more than unpopulated, rocky outcroppings, but others have rich histories.
City Island


Irene E. Siotka, Matthew Kasman
Irene Ellen Siotka, a daughter of Nicholas C. Siotka of Red Bank, N.J., and the late Joanne S. Siotka, was married yesterday to Matthew Bennett Kasman, the son of Helen and Larry Kasman of New York.
Rabbi Irwin Lownheim performed the ceremony at the Sea Grill, a restaurant in New York.


K. B. Richardson, Christian Roth 4th
Kathryn Brandy Richardson, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
David C. Richardson of Sanibel Island, Fla., and Kennebunkport, Me., was married yesterday to Christian Gordon Roth 4th, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Roth of King of Prussia, Pa.
The Very Rev.
M.
L.
Agnew Jr. performed the ceremony at St.
Anne's Episcopal Church in Kennebunkport.


Train Service To Stamford
To the Editor:
Train service to Stamford, Conn., began on Dec. 17, 1848, when the New York and New Haven Railroad commenced service from the Canal Street terminal of the New York and Harlem Railroad in New York City to Mill River Junction in New Haven, Conn.


Manhattan Renters Find Tighter Market
MOBILITY is theoretically the beauty of renting.
There's no need to worry about selling in order to relocate.
But what if there's nothing much out there to rent?
Inveterate renters who insist on staying in Manhattan -- to say nothing of outsiders relocating to the city -- are finding shrinking availabilities and higher prices these days.
The situation was foreseeable, and widely foreseen, even five years ago during the depth of the doldrums in the real-estate market.
It was a buyer's market then in sales as well as rentals.
But gradually vacancies were absorbed.


Spanning the Parks
Sports Tours gives new meaning to the term seventh-inning stretch, with trips for baseball fans that stretch all over the United States and Canada.
The company's tours include tickets to three to seven major league games, accommodations and transportation between stadiums.
A Great Lakes tour from Aug. 2 to 6, for example, includes games in Pittsburgh, Cleveland, Detroit and the luxurious Skydome in Toronto for $625 a person, double occupancy.


Ms. Landon, Mr. Messinger
Gillian Blair Landon, the daughter of Joyce and Dr.
Elliot Landon of Port Washington, L.I., was married on Monday evening to Matthew Aron Messinger, a son of Rita and Leonard Messinger of Hillsdale, N.J.
Rabbi Andre Ungar performed the ceremony at Oheka, the former Otto Kahn house in Cold Spring Hills, L.I.
Mrs.
Messinger, 25, is a candidate for a Ph.D. in clinical and school psychology at Hofstra University.
She graduated magna cum laude from Lehigh University, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa.
Her father is the Superintendent of the Long Beach City (L.I.) School District and the president of the Nassau County Council of School Superintendents.
Her mother teaches mathematics at the Robert Finley Middle School in Glen Cove, L.I.


A Winning Artist at the Ives Center
MANY young artists have risen to fame on the wings of international prizes, but competitions are not the only road to recognition.
Emerging instrumentalists are also grateful for the Avery Fisher Awards, where the recipients are chosen by peer recommendations rather than by specific audition; a similar method guides the selection process at the Marian Anderson Awards for singers.
Since 1990, when Ms.
Anderson herself attended the awards concert, the winning artists have been presented at the Charles Ives Center for the Arts, and at 8 P.M.
Saturday, the tradition continues with a showcase introduction to the 1994 laureate, Patricia Racette.
The concert circumstances are quite different this year, though: instead of singing a group of arias the soprano will be featured as Violetta in a concert version of Verdi's "Traviata."


At the Casinos
What's happening on stage at all the Atlantic City casinos this week.
Tickets are available through Ticketmaster, (800) 736-1420.
Bally's Park Place  Boardwalk and Park Place. (800) 225-5977.
PARK CABARET "Legends in Concert," impersonations of Neil Diamond, Judy Garland, Whitney Houston, Tom Jones, Elvis Presley and the Blues Brothers.
Sunday through Thursday at 7:30 and 10 P.M.; Saturday at 8 and 10:30 P.M.
Tickets: $20; $25 on Saturday.
Caesars Atlantic City  2100 Pacific Avenue. (800) 677-7469.
CIRCUS MAXIMUS THEATER Taylor Dayne.
Today at 8 P.M.
Tickets: $35.
Gladys Knight.
Friday at 10 P.M., Saturday at 9 P.M. and next Sunday at 8 P.M.
Tickets:$40.
Claridge Hotel  Boardwalk and Park Place. (800) 257-8585.
PALACE THEATER "Magic and Beyond" with Brett Daniels.
Monday and Tuesday at 7:30 P.M.; Wednesday, Thursday, Saturday and Sunday at 7:30 and 10 P.M.
Through Aug.
Tickets: $15; $19 on Saturday.
One-drink minimum.
The Grand  Boston at Pacific Avenue.  (609) 340-7200.
CAMBRIDGE BALLROOM Paul Anka with Stewie Stone, comedian.
Wednesday and Thursday at 8 P.M., and Friday at 9 P.M.
Tickets: $25.
Saturday at 9 P.M. and next Sunday at 7 P.M.
Tickets: $30.
Harrah's Hotel Casino  Harrah's Boulevard and Huron Avenue. (800) 242-7724.
ATRIUM LOUNGE Michaels and Mitchell.
Today.
Alan Dale.
Through July 16.
Gina Roche.
Starts tomorrow.
Through July 30.
Rick Hardeman.
Starts tomorrow.
Through Aug. 6.
BROADWAY-BY-THE-BAY "Guys and Dolls." Through Sept. 3.
Tuesday through Sunday, 7 and 10:30 P.M.
Tickets: $20.
Merv Griffin's Resorts Casino Hotel  1133 Boardwalk. (609) 340-6830.
COMING UP Tom Jones, July 19-23.
Sands Hotel and Casino  Indiana Avenue and Brighton Park. (800) 257-8580.
COPA ROOM "Sophisticated Rhythms." Clint Holmes covers hits by the Mills Brothers, Smokey Robinson, Louis Armstrong, Nat King Cole, the Pointer Sisters and the Supremes.
Sunday through Wednesday at 3:30 and 8:30 P.M.; Saturday at 8 and 11 P.M.
Tickets: $20.
Showboat Hotel Casino  Delaware and Pacific. (609) 343-4000.
MARDI GRAS SHOWROOM "The Basin Street Follies," a revue with song, comedy and magic, with new acts every month.
Featuring Bobby Arvon and Lori Dobson, singers, and the Great Tomsoni and Company, a comedy and magic act.
Monday through Saturday at 8 and 10:30 P.M.
Tickets: $10.
Tropworld  Boardwalk and Brighton Avenue.  (800) 257-6227.
SHOWROOM "Always . . . Patsy Cline," a two-woman, two-act show detailing the story of the friendship between the country singer and one of her fans.
Wednesday and Thursday at 8 P.M., Friday at 9 P.M., Saturday at 8 and 11:30 P.M. and next Sunday at 7 P.M.
Tickets: $28.50.
Trump's Castle Casino Resort  Huron Avenue and Brigantine  Boulevard. (800) 777-8477.
CRYSTAL BALLROOM The Beach Boys.
Today at 9 P.M.
Tickets: $50.
One-drink minimum.
KING'S COURT SHOWROOM Dick Clark's "American Bandstand Live: The Beat Goes On." Four decades of rock-and-roll, presented through song, dance, magic, comedy and novelty acts.
Through Sept. 21.
Monday through Thursday and Saturday at 7:30 and 10:30 P.M.; Sunday at 9 P.M.
Tickets: $12.50 on weekdays and $15 on Saturdays.
One-drink minimum.
VIVA LOUNGE Cozy Morley, comedian.
Tuesday through Saturday, 8 P.M.
Free with a one-drink minimum.
Through Sept. 2.
Trump Plaza  Boardwalk at Mississippi Avenue. (800) 759-8786.
PLAZA SHOWROOM Donna Summer.
Today at 8 P.M.
Tickets: $45.
The Temptations with Pam Matteson.
Tuesday through Thursday at 9 P.M. and Friday at 10 P.M.
Tickets: $35.
Saturday at 7:30 and 11 P.M.
Tickets: $40.
Next Sunday at 8 P.M.
Tickets: $35.
COMING UP George Carlin, July 18-23.
Vic Damone, July 25-30.
Trump Taj Mahal  1000 Boardwalk at Virginia Avenue. (609) 449-1000.
CASBAH "A Tribute to the Platters." Through July 30.
Monday through Thursday and Saturday and Sunday at 7:30 and 10:30 P.M.
Tickets: $12.50; $15 on Saturday.
MARK G. ETESS ARENA Dion and Brenda Lee.
Friday at 9 P.M. and Saturday at 8 P.M.
Tickets: $25.


Sharing Laughs and Attire


Melissa Campbell, E. A. Gullicksen
Melissa Klopp Campbell and Edward Alan Gullicksen were married yesterday at the home of the bride's parents, Mr. and Mrs.
Hazard K. Campbell, in East Aurora, N.Y.
The Rev.
Mark Hollingsworth Jr., the archdeacon of the Episcopal Diocese of Massachusetts, performed the ceremony.


Marianne Benn, Fred A. Farkash
Marianne K. Benn, a daughter of Dolores and John Benn of Commack, L.I., was married on Tuesday to Fred A. Farkash, the son of Jeanne Farkash of Brooklyn and the late Harold Farkash.
The Rev.
Pamela Taylor-Fogel, a nondenominational minister, performed the ceremony at the Westbury Manor, a catering establishment in Westbury, L.I.
The bride is a receptionist for Lenox Hill Neighborhood House, a community service organization in New York.
Her father, now retired, was a police officer in the 34th Precinct in New York.
Her mother retired as a registered nurse at the North Ridge School in Commack.


Rifle Association Can't Deliver on Promises to Life Members
To the Editor:
Re the June 26 front-page article on the financial situation at the National Rifle Association ("Aggressive Strategy by N.R.A. Has Left Its Finances Reeling"):


Correction
A report in the Travel Advisory column on June 18 about tours to Kykuit, the Rockefeller estate in Pocantico Hills, N.Y., referred incorrectly to the cost of a box lunch on New York Waterway's day cruises.
The lunch is not included in the $50 price of a cruise; it is an additional $9.50.


Get Out of Town
To the Editor:
I fail to see the new charms of Paris as described by Herbert Muschamp in "The New Paris: Growing Accustomed to Its Face"  [ June 18 ] .
The recent spate of building, inspired by the monarchal whims of French political leaders intent on leaving their imprint on Paris, has resulted in a series of architectural monstrosities.
Most notable has been the Pompidou Center, mercifully distant from the glorious Champs-Elysees.


Corrections
A map last Sunday showing the site of a gathering of hippies who call themselves the Rainbow Family misspelled the name of the locale and the name of a nearby town in some editions.
As noted in the article, the site was Carson National Forest in New Mexico, not Carlson, and the town was Vallecitos, not Vallectos.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
PRAYERS FOR BOBBY  A Mother's Coming to Terms  With the Suicide of Her Gay Son.
By Leroy Aarons.
HarperSanFrancisco, $22.


Wildlife Volunteers Save the U.S. Millions; The Twinkling TV's
To the Editor:
"National Parks Become a Place to Park R.V.'s" (July 2) hardly strikes me as front-page news.


Tracy L. Patrick, C. M. Panchelli
Tracy Lee Patrick, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John R. Patrick of Ridgefield, Conn., was married there yesterday to Christopher Mark Panchelli, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Daniel Panchelli of Collingdale, Pa.
The Rev.
Anne Wright Coffman performed the ceremony at the First Congregational Church.
Mrs.
Patrick-Panchelli, 23, and her husband, 29, are nurses.
She is a senior staff nurse at the New York University Medical Center in New York, and he is a staff nurse at the Graduate Hospital in Philadelphia.
The bride graduated magna cum laude from the University of Pennsylvania.
The bridegroom graduated magna cum laude from La Salle University.


Clare B. O'Leary, Dwight McMillan
Clare Booth O'Leary, a daughter of Rosemary Booth and Gerald C. O'Leary of Boston, was married there yesterday to Dwight Joseph McMillan, the son of Marilyn A. McMillan of Winchester, Mass., and the late David R. McMillan.
The Rev.
Jurgen W. Liias, an Episcopal priest, performed the ceremony at the Church of the Advent.
Mrs.
McMillan, 24, graduated from Brown University, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa.
She was until recently an upper school biology and science teacher at Friends Academy in Locust Valley, L.I.
In the fall she is to study medicine at the University of Pennsylvania.
Her father is an electrical engineer and the associate group leader in speech communications at the Lincoln Laboratory of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology in Lexington, Mass.
Her mother is the chief of the systems planning and integration division of the Volpe National Transportation System Center in Cambridge, Mass.


IN SHORT: FICTION
LIGHTNING  By Danielle Steel. Delacorte, $24.95.


'Family Values'
To the Sports Editor:
It seems to be a stretch to see Mickey Mantle as a symbol of post-war America, "early summer afternoon in the American century," as Robert Lipsyte describes it ("Mantle and America: Allies in Vulnerability," The Times, June 11).
More apropos, I think, is to see the reality of his life as the seamy underside of the 1950's family perfection that is much extolled by today's right wing.


Word for Word / NASA; Want to Be an Astronaut? Join the Club, or Try to
SO you've been wowed by the current summer blockbuster "Apollo 13" and enthralled by the recent Russian-American space linkup you saw on TV, and now you're completely astro-nuts.
Time for a career move.


Dark Echoes
To the Editor:
I agree with Richard Taruskin that musical works can have their own political content and that listeners should be skeptical of such political "messages." But his solution -- that works with whose political messages he disagrees should be buried -- is exactly the fate meted out to the works of Weill, Hindemith and others in Nazi Germany.


Summary of Major Actions in the Legislature's 218th Session
The 218th session of the New York State Legislature opened in January with a plea from Gov.
George E. Pataki for more open government and bipartisan cooperation.
It ended at 5 A.M. on June 30 after 26 weeks of backroom maneuvering and sustained partisan squabbling.
Mr.
Pataki, a Republican, scored an early victory when he signed the death penalty into law on March 7 after several weeks of difficult negotiations that soured his relationship with Assembly Speaker Sheldon Silver, a Democrat.


Charting What Lies at the Bottom of the Sound
WHAT'S out there, under water in Long Island Sound?
How did it get there?
What's happening with it?
How do we know?
"All you can see is water, and the seagulls aren't talking," Ralph S. Lewis said.
But it's his job to answer such questions, so early one rainy morning he was at the University of Connecticut's dock in Noank, boarding a boat loaded with "fish," a "pinger" and other equipment.
"These are called fish. They're the on-deck part of the side-scan sonar, the system that allows us to get pictures of the bottom," he said, stepping around two torpedo-shaped devices and the winch that would lower them, on a cable, from the deck of the 46-foot Asterias.
Nearby was the pinger, "a very high-powered bottom finder." He noted that the side-scan sonar does indeed look sideways, along the top of the sediment, while the pinger looks down, into the sediment -- and both devices operate by sending out sound and getting it back.


SUMMER SOLACE
SOME HOUSES BREAK ALL THE RULES OF decorating and look the better for it.
A slope-roofed cottage in the Hamptons is a lesson in the art of un-decorating.
Fabrics don't match; pictures aren't framed.
The antiques are so numerous, some are left propped against walls.
The colors aren't even coordinated.
But they are as luminous and bright as summer itself.
The blue is the blue of dawn; the green looks as if it were skimmed off a pond.


Cold Soups That Lift Summer Appetites
SUMMER demands cold soup.
What could be more colorful, flavorful and refreshing for heat-flagged appetites?
And what a boon for the cook.
Cold soups can be made in advance and need only minimal attention before serving.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
SPARRING WITH HEMINGWAY  And Other Legends of the Fight Game.
By Budd Schulberg.
Ivan R. Dee, $25.


For Macaronis, a Big Wig Was Just Dandy
To the Editor:
In " '. . . And Called Him Macaroni' " (editorial, July 4), on the roots of "Yankee Doodle," you ask whether a macaroni is in fact an "it" or a "him."


Parisians' Summer Getaway
SAY "Belle-Ile" with a lilt and you're chanting a favorite French mantra for peace of mind.
Beginning in May, and continuing through October, every couple of hours the ferryboat Guerveur crosses the Bay of Biscay to disgorge a hundred passengers in the island's main port of Le Palais.
Almost all of them, it seems, buy the makings of a picnic lunch, rent a bicycle and set off in search of 5,000-year-old Celtic standing stones and panoramic views.
In what amounts to a miracle of distribution, Belle-Ile -- about 11 by 5 miles at its widest -- absorbs them all without sacrificing its sunny character.
About a five-and-a-half hour trip from Paris, Belle-Ile has long been the Parisian's summer getaway, ever since the revels of Nicolas Fouquet, Minister of Finance for Louis XIV, in the island's main town of Le Palais.
Today it is home to a world-class thalassotherapy spa, the Hotel Castel Clara at Port Goulphar, that draws the Range Rover crowd.
But there's nothing exclusive about the island's beaches, cliff walks, flowering moors and Breton villages.


A Feline Friend Is Gone, Sprightly Whiskers and All
To The Editor:
What a shock to read my favorite cat's obituary, "Mr. Bigelow, 18: Cool Cat, Poor Mouser" (June 18).
I was one of the many Village residents who made a habit of dropping into Bigelow's Pharmacy just to visit with Mr.
Bigelow.


Autry and Angels' Year May Turn Out to Be Year of the Indian
Is it Gene Autry's fate that when the California Angels seem surprisingly good enough to reach the World Series for the first time the Cleveland Indians have put together an awesome team after 40 mostly miserable years?
The Indians, with only 11 winning seasons since winning 111 games in 1954, entered yesterday's games with a 12-game lead in the American League's Central Division.
The last time a team had that big or bigger a lead at the All-Star break was in 1986, when the Mets led the National League East by 13 games.


'Then I Asked For a Raise . . .  '
Your memo on the Burton case left him agog.
Your landing of the Grigsby account put him in awe.
And your plan for redeploying the 3d floor credenzas?
Why, he embraced it at once.
So march in there and ask for a raise!
If you have a story about that toughest of all business decisions -- requesting a fatter paycheck -- send it to On the Job, Money and Business, The New York Times, 229 West 43d Street, New York 10036.
Or by E-mail to onthejob@nytimes.com.
Include your phone number.
All submissions become the property of The Times and may be republished in any medium.


Efforts to Legalize DEET Products Blocked
For the second time in six weeks, a State Supreme Court justice has blocked the Pataki administration's efforts to legalize the sale of insect repellents with high concentrations of the chemical DEET.
The temporary restraining order issued by Justice Joseph C. Teresi on Friday means that repellents with high concentrations of DEET will remain illegal in New York State, said Assemblyman Richard L. Brodsky, a Westchester Democrat who has been challenging the state's policies on DEET.


CHATTER: Should the Devils Stay or Go?; Leave It to the Fans
I do not favor using any taxpayer money to keep the Devils in New Jersey.


Honor for Life's Work Buoys Gay Advocate
Dr.
Henry D. Messer was receiving a lifetime achievement award at the annual gay and lesbian Pride Banquet in Detroit on June 15.
But he felt a protest was in order.
"Wait a minute," said the 67-year-old retired neurosurgeon, who joined the homosexual civil rights movement in the early 1960's and is now treasurer of the Triangle Foundation, a gay and lesbian advocacy group he helped found.
"My lifetime ain't over yet."


You Can't Cure Addiction by Willpower Alone; Many Kinds of Help
To the Editor:
You have done a great service by your attention to drug abuse in prisons (series, front page, July 2 to 4).


EARNING IT &lt;HEADLINEA Champion of the Technically Challenged and Overwhelmed
AT first blush, it's your basic Silicon Valley success story: brash, 30-something executive markets breakthrough product and leads tiny company to fame and profit.
Then again, there's a lot in the tale of John J. Kilcullen and the " . . . for Dummies" publishing phenomenon that could have come straight from Broadway.
For starters, take the concept itself -- a line of how-to computer and personal finance books written specifically for people willing to admit, indeed to glory, in their own ignorance and technophobia.
Major booksellers and publishers, who said readers wouldn't buy books about their inadequacies, now clamor to stock or to imitate the bright yellow and black paperback volumes that take the side of people challenged by the complexities of modern life, making the series "a reference for the rest of us."


Mo Vaughn: Still Smiling After All These Years
For someone who has known him for almost 20 years, there is one enduring image of Maurice (Mo) Vaughn, the slugging first baseman of the Boston Red Sox: that of a roly-poly 9-year-old, forever smiling, whether at bat or in the field, and launching prodigious drives at the Honeyhill School Little League diamond in Norwalk, Conn.
Nowadays, the perpetual smile is gone, replaced by a serious mien and an almost menacing look that bespeaks Vaughn's intensity as one of baseball's brightest new stars, one who began the weekend tied for the major league lead in home runs, with 24, and runs batted in, with 59.
Deep down, though, he said recently, he's still having nearly as much fun as he did while playing in the Cranbury Little League in his hometown of Norwalk.


Airborne


Iraq Asks Delay on Destroying Missile-Linked Machinery
Less than a week after Iraq confessed to producing large quantities of biological weapons in the years just before the Persian Gulf war, it is asking the United Nations Security Council to delay enforcing a demand that it destroy machinery that could be used to make ballistic missiles.
In a letter to the Council today, Iraq's representative at the United Nations, Nizar Hamdoon, said that the Government of President Saddam Hussein had told a team monitoring the dismantling of all its weapons of mass destruction that it wanted to put off a final decision on five pieces of machinery "until the biological file is disposed of positively."


A Breakdown On the Highway To the Moon
Species Ben Kingsley, Natasha Henstridge, Michael Madsen Directed by Roger Donaldson R 111 minutes
When scientists fabricate a segment of D.N.A. from instructions sent from outer space and combine that with a human egg, they create Sil, the half-female, half-alien creature they keep ina secret lab.
Sil (in human form, Ms. Henstridge) escapes and specialists give chase.
The problem is that in weeks Sil matures from a young girl to a grown woman, eager to reproduce.
And she has a nasty temper when crossed.


A Photographic Message That Feeds Stereotypes
To The Editor
I have been trying to figure out the point behind the July 2 Photographer's Journal, which shows a group of black boys in Paterson looking out at the reader from behind bars.
While the boys seem playful and none of them is more than 7 or 8 years old, the setting has the unmistakable look of a jail.


Starting Today For TV Viewers in the City
The Times's Television section now provides channel numbers for the five New York City cable systems, making it easier to find the programs you choose to watch.
The channel numbers appear on the left side of the grid under each station's call letters, and a key on the bottom of each left-hand page lists the cable companies.
The order and typeface of the numbers in the grid correspond to the order and typeface in the key.
Once you find which number works for your cable company - say, the second number (16 for A&amp;E or 32 for AMC) - use the number in that spot for each channel.
The section also offers:  Listing for six additional cable channels: Comedy Central, the Cartton Network, E!
Entertainment, the Learning Channel, the Sci-Fi Channel and VH1.
Expanded movie listings, on consecutive pages.
A cover story and frequently and additional article on the back page.
Highlights for children and notable sports coverage.
More detailed information about prime-time programming.


Model Citizen
THE SHALLOW MAN  By Coerte V. W. Felske. 243 pp. New York: Crown Publishers.


Nuclear Deal With Russia Is Reshaped
Major progress has been made in repairing an East-West deal in which the nuclear material from thousands of Russian warheads is to be transformed into a peaceful bonanza of nuclear energy, Federal officials say.
But private experts assert that the undertaking is still in doubt and might fall apart.
The deal, hammered out three years ago after the Soviet Union collapsed, would have the United States pay Russia $12 billion for diluting 500 metric tons of bomb-grade uranium from nuclear arms into reactor fuel that would be used for generating electricity in America.
The deal was hailed as a significant step in reducing the risk that bomb ingredients could be stolen in Russia and sold to terrorists or to countries seeking to develop a bomb.


Surveilling Maskirovka
IN "BETRAYAL: THE STORY OF Aldrich Ames, an American Spy," three of my New York Times colleagues in Washington explore the tangled-web world of deception.
Quoting the Civil War General Thomas (Stonewall) Jackson's strategic advice to "mystify, mislead and surprise," the authors -- Tim Weiner, David Johnston and Neil A. Lewis -- note that the craft of misleading "was deeply respected within the K.G.B., which had an entire branch devoted to maskirovka, or deception techniques."
What a beautiful word, pronounced mas-kir-OAF-ka.
The United States Army's 1955 Glossary of Soviet Military Terminology defines maskirovka as "camouflage; concealment; disguise." Leo Carl's 1990 International Dictionary of Intelligence agrees that it was a World War II term for camouflage, but takes it into the modern intelligence era by defining it as "Soviet G.R.U. jargon for deception," and notes that the Soviet Military Encyclopedia divides maskirovka into "strategic, operational and tactical deception."


LOOKING FOR A DONOR TO CALL DAD
We're losing all our ties.
The extended family is already a myth and the nuclear one is headed that way.
Now, even the importance of our genetic connections is questioned.


Stainless Is As Stainless Does


Habitats/38th Street; The View From 54
THERE is a perfection in the scene: an ideal match.
If a casting director for an urban television series were looking to put a star and a location together, the choice couldn't be better.
First, take a handsome, hard-working young doctor whose name is -- yes, really -- Doug Noble.


Two Collectors Bound by Marriage But Not by Tastes
ABOVE THE SINK IN THE KITCHEN of Marilynn and Ivan Karp's 150-year-old farmhouse outside this upstate New York city hang rows of food choppers, beaters and graters.
The walls in one bathroom are covered with boldly graphic tin signs hawking products of a century ago.
Other parts of the house contain collections of painted country furniture, quilts, maps and old photographs.
And hidden away in drawers are root beer mugs and old medicine bottles.
The Karp's marriage in 1963 brought together their disparate possessions.
"My dowry was my collections," said Mrs.
Karp.
"The Coca-Cola trays were mine, the tools were his, the marbles were mine, the stoneware crocks were his. We shared and got into each other's fantasies."


PRESENT SHOCK
I enjoyed Claudia Dreifus's article "Present Shock" (June 11), on Third Wave futurists Alvin and Heidi Toffler and their relationship with Newt Gingrich.
However, I was struck by Ms.
Toffler's comment that Gingrich is obviously tolerant because he hasn't disowned his lesbian sister.


Cowboys Are Back in the Saddle, But Only for About 8 Seconds or So
Every summer Saturday night, there is a rodeo at Cowtown Arena near Woodstown, a farming community in Salem County.
Although some of the contestants are local, the contest is not: Cowtown is on the Professional Rodeo Cowboys Association circuit, and the top money-winners go to national finals in Pocatello, Idaho, and Las Vegas in the fall.
On a typical evening, the top bronco rider will make $800 for an eight-second ride.
The audience of 3,000 or so sit on bleachers or on covered boxes marked Chestnutt Hill Farms or WFK Trucking or Woodstown Ice and Coal and watch handsome men with very short hair, white hats and P.R.C.A.-regulation long-sleeve shirts ride bucking broncos and bulls, rope calves, and wrestle steer to the ground.
Cowgirls compete in the barrel race, a three-cornered obstacle course for horses.


The Magic in Bad Penmanship
THE two bookstores could not be more different.
Barnes &amp; Noble, at Fifth Avenue and 48th Street, boasts some 150,000 computer-inventoried titles.
Shelves brim with best-sellers, investment guides and celebrity biographies -- staples of a chain synonymous with superstore.


A Breakdown On the Highway To the Moon
The Little Princess, The Little Colonel At the Walter Reade Theater, 165 West 65th Street, Lincoln Center, "The Little Princess," today at 2 P.M.; "The Little Colonel," July 15 and 16 at 2 P.M.
Shirley Temple
"The Little Princess" is the 1939 version of Frances Hodgson Burnett's tale, with boarding school when her father goes to war.
Also part of this series is "The Little Colonel," with Miss Temple as the stubborn Miss Lloyd Sherman, who lives with her irascible grandfather (Lionel Barrymore) in Kentucky in the 1870's.


Inspired By the Produce Of Portland
IF a city could be designed by chefs, Portland might be the result.
Ringed by mountains, pristine rivers, woods and fields, and the Pacific Ocean, Oregon is a virtual food laboratory.
"I can't believe the products that we get from farmers every day," said Philippe Boulot, the former chef at the Mark Hotel in Manhattan who recently moved to Portland's Heathman Hotel.
His current menu features local products like Oregon morels, local bay shrimp, native salmon, fresh game and arugula that is still glistening with morning dew.


River Towns Trolley


Famous in France. Just Another Plain Face in the U.S.
IT IS PROBABLY FORTUNATE that Michel Blanc thinks it would be tedious to play "the handsome, positive, conquering, courageous, screen hero." Being short, a trifle puny and very bald, the 43-year-old French actor hasn't been given that option.
"I can't step in for Paul Newman, and he can't step in for me, so that's fine," he said.
Instead, he has carved himself a niche.
By playing self-deprecating anti-heroes in a series of French film comedies and dramas, Mr.
Blanc has found his appearance working to his advantage.
"He has always played the tiny, poor little guy who suffers because he is ugly," said Carole Bouquet, his co-star in "Grosse Fatigue," which opens in New York on Friday.
"He's extremely well known for those parts. People say 'poor Michel.' "


New in This Section
This issue of Televison introduces some new features and some improvements on familiar ones.
You'll find channel numbers for New York City cable systems on the left side of each grid, making it easier to find the program you choose.
You may have to test them.
Once you find which number works for your cable company - say, the second from left (16 for A&amp;E and 32 for AMC) - use the number in that spot for each channel.


Essaying a Musical Role 'That Wreaks Havoc'
IN "Splendora," a musical that will have its premiere at the Bay Street Theater in Sag Harbor on Wednesday, Joan Copeland plays a role that in some ways feels familiar.
"I often am asked to play parts that wreak havoc," Ms.
Copeland said, flashing a wicked smile in a conversation in her apartment on the Upper West Side of Manhattan.


Science Fiction
It may be just coincidence that Orson Scott Card has completed his grandly conceived Homecoming Saga in five books, the same number as the Torah.
Then again it may not.
Mr.
Card, a practicing Mormon, has always been dead serious about the religious under pinnings of his science fiction -- which, for all its trappings of space travel and sentient computers, might more accurately be labeled "conscience fiction." EARTHBORN (Tor/Tom Doherty, $23.95), like the previous volumes in the Homecoming series, takes as its theme what moral philosophers call right action: how to live in an imperfect world without violating one's own moral principles.


Bumping
To the Editor: As travelers who have often received vouchers, or cash or both in return for agreeing to be bumped from flights my wife and I agree with all but one of Betsy Wade's suggestions in "Passengers Play the Airlines' Bumping Game" (Practical Traveler, May 21).
That suggestion was that would-be volunteers not check bags ahead of time.
Whenever we plan to volunteer for bumping we check our luggage but take a small carry-on bag with necessities for an overnight stay.
This way, we minimize handling our luggage, and when we finally arrive at our destination our bags are waiting.


A Mover of Markets
The red digital clock pulses 12:30:00, and Dan Dorfman's image beams into this smooth and sterile control room of the CNBC cable network like some sort of wayward space alien disrupting a NASA launch.
It's six minutes until Dorfman, a columnist for Money magazine, presents his daily dose of stock market news, rumors and tips on CNBC.
A technician has switched on a remote camera in Dorfman's office at Money, and the small, balding man with black electric tape eyebrows appears on a control-room monitor scribbling furiously on a legal note pad.
At 12:34, Dorfman is writing away as CNBC gives its regular update on the O. J. Simpson trial.
When the clock blinks 12:36, Kevin McCullough, the gray-haired anchor, introduces Dorfman.


Los Angeles Schools Go in Summer
While many students were enjoying the uninterrupted liberty of long summer days, students here at Garfield High School began the '95-'96 school year on Wednesday.
July and August are no different than October and November here.


Cynthia A. Wolak And C. J. Hamer
Cynthia Anne Wolak, a daughter of Edward J. Wolak of Old Greenwich, Conn., and the late Janice Swensen Wolak, was married yesterday to Christopher Jon Hamer, a son of Judith and Edward J. Hamer of Saratoga Springs, N.Y.
The Rev.
Edmond J. Trench performed the ceremony at the Roman Catholic Church of the Sacred Hearts of Jesus and Mary in Southampton, L.I.
Mrs.
Hamer, 35, is the director of marketing at Nickelodeon Video and Audio Works, the home entertainment division of the cable service in New York.
She graduated from the College of the Holy Cross.
Her father retired as a pilot with Pan American World Airways in New York.


RECORD BRIEFS
Perle: Piano Concerto No. 2, Six Etudes; Danielpour: 'Metamorphosis'  Michael Boriskin, pianist; Utah Symphony conducted by Joseph Silverstein (Concerto, "Metamorphosis").
Harmonia Mundi France HMU 907124; CD.


Judith R. Beck, Adam A. Wagner
Judith Rose Beck, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Paul Beck of Manhasset, L.I., was married on Monday to Adam Asher Wagner, the son of John Wagner of New York and Yaffa Wagner of London.
Rabbi Eugene Lipsey performed the ceremony at the Garden City (L.I.) Hotel.
Mrs.
Wagner, 33, is an associate at the New York law firm of L. A. Grossman &amp; Associates.
She graduated from the University of Arizona and received her law degree from Touro College.
Her father is an obstetrician and gynecologist in Brooklyn and is the chief of gynecological laparoscopy at Brookdale Hospital Medical Center, also in Brooklyn.


July 2-8: Too Cheap to Sell?; A Vitamin Theory For Curbing Heart Disease
In a world of expensive drugs, it may be almost too much to believe that a vitamin costing pennies a day might also prevent heart disease.
But with the rediscovery of a long-ignored hypothesis, the vitamin theory of heart disease is ascendant.
Yet there seems little commercial incentive to explore its implications.


Island Woos Visitors to Ease Budget Crunch
Thousands of New Yorkers gathered on Manhattan rooftops and the East River Drive to watch last week's Fourth of July fireworks display, but arguably the best view in the city was from a little-known spot on Roosevelt Island.
Nearly 2,400 people paid $10 apiece for a seat with a view on the southern tip of the island across the river from the United Nations.
The event was simply the latest in a burst of recent public activity on Roosevelt Island, with a serious purpose: finding ways to bring in money to make up for that lost to state budget cuts.
In 1994, $1.6 million of the island's $9.2 million operating budget came from the state.
This year, the state reduced its contribution to just over $1 million.


Video on the Road
To the Editor: I write about the paragraph on Budget Rent a Car's Autovisions video-tape player on the Travel Advisory page on May 28.
Parents who rely on devices such as Autovisions to occupy their kids during a road trip effectively cancel instructive conversations and enjoyable teaching about the trip the family is taking and the sights the car is passing.


Ruth Reichl's Picnic Menu: Not What a Doctor Orders
To The Editor:
If the Ruth Reichl writing in "Experts Pick The Ways (and Wheres) to Picnic" (July 2) is The New York Times's restaurant reviewer, HELP!
She serves up everything the doctor wouldn't order -- junk food to go from the city's street vendors.
And the smell from their carts in the heat of summer is enough to make one ill, especially after looking at the hands of the "chef" you picture.
Ruth Reichl, you should be ashamed -- some picnic.
JULIA HAIBLEN  Manhattan


Battle Over Kashmir Seems Only to Worsen
From sandbagged bunkers that line the winding streets in this old city, Indian troops watch nervously for the enemy: Muslim separatist guerrillas who dart forward, tossing grenades or loosing bursts of automatic fire before vanishing into the bazaars.
For India, ruling Kashmir has come down to something much like an occupation: an army and police force of at least 300,000, bunkers everywhere, search operations that paralyze daily life and shoot-to-kill orders.
Kashmiri human rights groups say two-thirds of the 30,000 people killed in the five-year conflict have been civilians.


No Headline
"The bunks are pretty much falling down, and I think that if you were so stuck up, you wouldn't want to go to my camp." LAUREN LEYDEN, 15, in her seventh year at Raquette Lake.  [ 1:2. ]


Rubber Trees Being Planted in Brazil, the Source
A thousand miles from the Amazon, a new chapter in Brazil's rubber epic is being written in modern plantations where rubber trees are planted like corn.
Defying history and Henry Ford, the plantations are thriving, placing Brazil back on the road to self-sufficiency in rubber for the first time since 1950.
A century ago Brazil controlled the entire world's rubber supply.


He's Stymied


Yikes! Roger Corman Is Back, Still
THE human brain cannot tolerate a steady diet of high-class entertainment.
This is a proven scientific fact, and it is the reason that Roger Corman is still around after 40 years of cranking out low-budget shockers like "The Pit and the Pendulum," "Not of This Earth," "A Bucket of Blood" and "She Gods of Shark Reef."
His name, synonymous with the cheap thrill, is the official schlock seal stamped on the 13 horror and science-fiction movies that make up "Roger Corman Presents," a weekly series that begins on Showtime on Tuesday at 9:30 P.M. with "Suspect Device." The series can be thought of as a kind of virtual drive-in, just in time for the summer season.


Jennifer A. Brown And Neal J. Simon
Jennifer Amy Brown, a daughter of Linda and Stephen Brown of New York, was married last evening to Neal Jerry Simon, a son of Sylvia and Donald Simon of New York.
Rabbi Tom Weiner officiated at the Plaza in New York.
Mrs.
Brown Simon, 27, is an associate at McKinsey &amp; Company, the management consulting concern, in Washington.
She graduated summa cum laude from Yale University and received master's degrees in business administration and public policy from Harvard University.
Her father is a vice president and the senior counsel at Champion International, the paper company in Stamford, Conn.
Her mother teaches art at Public School 117 in Briarwood, Queens.


Who's Being Disgusting on AIDS?
It is no surprise that Senator Jesse Helms is seeking to inflame passions over the AIDS crisis and pit one American versus another in a fight over how to allocate Federal health funding.
The pity is that Republican leaders in Congress have been slow to challenge him.
The North Carolina Republican displayed his customary malice in slowing action on a Federal funding bill for the care and treatment of people with AIDS.
That bill, known as the Ryan White Care Act, would extend programs that currently allocate $633 million for AIDS treatment around the nation, including some $70 million in New York, mostly for outpatient care for uninsured people.
This worthy legislation deserves passage despite Mr.
Helms's maneuvers.


MOVIES THIS WEEK
THREE Hollywood stalwarts strut their stuff in two films each on television this week.
John Barrymore devours his roles in Harry D'Arrast's TOPAZE (1933) and Howard Hawks's TWENTIETH CENTURY (1934) like juicy pomegranates.
Both pictures are highlights of Hollywood's golden era.
In the droll "Topaz" (from Marcel Pagnol's play), he's a naive Paris pedagogue who learns corporate wiles, turns rich mogul and calmly annexes a victim's mistress (the charming Myrna Loy).
Barrymore's gradual transformation and the film's sly ironies are enthralling - Thursday at 1:30 P.M. on American Movie Classics.
In the raffish "Twentieth Century" he lets fly hilariously with tasty, ham-spiced flamboyance as a Broadway egomaniac, matched every step of the way by Carole Lombard, as his ex-mistress.
Here is one co-starring duo straight from heaven (via Hecht-MacArthur's stage hit) - Saturday/Early Sunday at 12:05 A.M. on Channel 13.


Amanda Stebbins, Charles Sharpless
Amanda Lee Stebbins, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John W. Stebbins of Newtown, Mass., was married yesterday to Charles Maxwell Sharpless, the son of Dr.
Elizabeth A. Sharpless of New York and Dr.
Thomas K. Sharpless of Philadelphia.
The Rev.
William J. Manseau, an Episcopal priest, performed the ceremony at the Stebbinses' house in Falmouth, Mass.
The bride, 27, is a biostatistician in cardiology at the Duke University Medical Center in Durham, N.C.
She graduated from Smith College and received a master's degree in biostatistics from Harvard University.
Her father is a principal in Cambridge Seven Associates, an architectural firm in Cambridge, Mass.
Her mother, Louise Stebbins, is a psychiatric nurse in Falmouth.


Susan H. Choo and Chul Chung
Susan Hyunkyung Choo, a daughter of Yang Hyae Choo and Yoon Suk Choo of Tenafly, N.J., was married yesterday to Chul Chung, a son of Jung Hwa Chung and Dr.
Tai Chung of Bloomfield Hills, Mich.
Chae-Kyung Oh, a former minister in the government of President Syngman Rhee of South Korea, performed the civil ceremony with Mayor Walter Hamburger of Tenafly at the Tamcrest Country Club in Alpine, N.J.
The bride and her husband work for investment banks in New York.
She is a corporate analyst at Lehman Brothers.
He is an associate at Goldman Sachs &amp; Company.
The bride graduated cum laude from Williams College.
The bridegroom graduated from the University of Michigan and received a law degree from Georgetown University.


News Media Concentration Takes Its Toll on Workers
To the Editor:
The problems discussed in your July 2 article "In Jersey Journal Labor Fight, Publishing Giant Has All the Cards" reflect larger national problems.
One is the continuing concentration of the news media.
The Jersey Journal, which is run by the Newhouse chain, in the recent past swallowed its smaller long-time competitor The Hudson Dispatch.
Some years earlier, the other paper in the chain, The Star-Ledger of Newark, swallowed and eliminated The Newark News.


Get Rid of Corporate Welfare
Not since Neil Armstrong walked on the moon in 1969 has the Federal budget been in balance.
Inertia propelled Apollo 11 through space to the moon.
The Federal budget is similarly subject to the forces of nature.
Once set in motion, Government programs tend to keep on going, regardless of their utility, fairness or importance.
Achieving a balanced budget by the year 2002 depends on an unyielding commitment to scrutinize each program every year.


Rented Space Buys Trouble For a Business
In a city where all kinds of businesses operate next to each other or share space in blissful ignorance, peaceful coexistence is occasionally punctured when the notoriety of one neighbor spills over onto the next.
Take the case of Terri Ash, a retired teacher who runs a small travel agency called Travel Plans Unlimited.
For four years, Ms.
Ash quietly sold package deals to Mexico and the Caribbean from the office she rents in the back of Park West Realty on Seventh Avenue.


Glorious Shade
To the Editor: Ah! What refreshingly cool words in W. D. Wetherell's breezy end-piece.
As for the ranking of shade trees, my International Book of Trees (Hugh Johnson) lists more "broadleafs" than "conifers," but this includes European trees.
However, all maples are indeed most restorative in shading.
But surely the palmate leaves of the horse chestnut also give beautiful shade.
As children, we used them as fans.
A hammock between two trees made the entire area "air-conditioned."


Stray Dogs Wounded in Attacks
Curly was stabbed two months ago, Larry was bludgeoned last month, and Moe was sliced up two weeks ago.
The three injured dogs with the Three Stooges names had roamed the neighborhood in peace for years, fed most nights by John Contino, a Coney Island dog lover who feeds strays and runs Mighty Mutts, a nonprofit animal adoption agency. .
Mr.
Contino discovered their wounds on his nightly feeding rounds.


The Nation; Congress, Spare Our Benefits or Else
HOME last week for the Fourth of July recess, Democratic senators and representatives made the rounds of senior citizen clubs and retirement communities.
Senator Bill Bradley of New Jersey, for example, went to a seniors' meeting in Monroe Township and retirement homes in Cliffside Park and Dover Township.
Rhode Island's Democratic Congressmen, Patrick J. Kennedy and Jack Reed, went to community centers for the elderly in 10 towns across the state.
Their message was basic: The Republicans in Congress are out to demolish Medicare to pay for tax cuts for the wealthy.


Step 1 for a Rustic Trellis: Find Some Woods
I am making rustic trellises for my roof garden in Brooklyn, from the jungle of vines and trees that border the stream on our family farm in Maryland.
It felt like the Amazon there last week, as I cut my way through briars and wild roses one muggy afternoon best suited for skinny-dipping in the cold creek.
But no, there I was in long pants and a long-sleeved shirt, sturdy shoes and socks, and heavy work gloves, yanking on grapevines that twined 40 feet up into the walnut trees, and doing a little judicious pruning of the willows along the stream bank.
Wild grapevines and young willow shoots are easily bent into the loops so familiar to rustic designs.
I was also on the lookout for saplings or prunable branches of maple, locust, walnut, sycamore or whatever else I could find for the posts and crosspieces.
I carried pruners, a handsaw and loppers to gather my materials, and to disentangle myself from the wild rose canes. (This is why you can't run, skimpily clad and unarmed, into a Maryland woods in deep summer. Unless you want to be attacked by briars and fall howling into the poison ivy.)


Graboski Recalled
To the Sports Editor:
Recent articles dealing with Kevin Garrett mention only Moses Malone, Darryl Dawkins and Bill Willoughby as players who went directly from high school into the pros.
But Joe Graboski went directly from high school to the Chicago Stags of the Basketball Association of America for the 1948-49 season. (The B.A.A. became the N.B.A. in 1949-50 after a merger with the National Basketball League.) Graboski had a rather successful career in the N.B.A., averaging 11 points per game over 13 seasons.
CHUCK JOHNSON  Westport, Conn.


Corrections
A listing of summer events in city parks last Sunday misstated the date of a New York Philharmonic concert, followed by fireworks, on the Great Lawn in Central Park, and misstated the information phone number.
The concert is at 8 P.M. on July 31, not July 30.
Information: (212) 875-5709.


Cone Beans McGwire As Blue Jays Batter A's
Blue Jays 9, Athletics 6
The beaning of the Oakland star Mark McGwire and the ejection of two pitchers yesterday overshadowed Paul Molitor's two-run homer in the seventh inning that broke a tie and led the Toronto Blue Jays to a 9-6 victory over the host Athletics in the opener of a doubleheader.
After McGwire was hit by a David Cone pitch in the third inning, Oakland pitchers Doug Johns and Mike Harkey were ejected for throwing at Blue Jays hitters, and both benches emptied in the seventh after Joe Carter was hit by a pitch two batters after Molitor's sixth home run broke a 3-3 tie.
There were no fights.


Diana K. Telling, Paul S. Riske
Diana Kathryn Telling, the daughter of Judith and John E. Telling 3d of Westfield, N.J., was married yesterday in New Providence, N.J., to Paul S. Riske, the son of Barbara and Paul K. Riske of Wall, N.J.
The Rev.
Bryan D. Burton performed the ceremony at the Presbyterian Church of New Providence.
Mrs.
Riske, 27, graduated from Lehigh University.
She is a senior account manager in New York in the private banking division of the Bank of Boston International.
Her father is a bond salesman at Wertheim Schroder &amp; Company, the securities brokerage in New York.


In One Part Of Bronx, Gunfire Has Eased
When Clark Fleming first arrived in the Bronx four years ago, robbers preyed on his building at 170th Street and Morris Avenue, drug dealers prowled the streets and gunshots echoed through the nights.
"Every night by my window I was terrified," said Dr.
Fleming, who grew up in Lynchburg, S.C., and finished his medical residency in New York.
"I would hear gunshots and see drug deals going on."


July 2-8; Pork Over the Pentagon
The Pentagon and politics, never far apart, wound a little tighter last week.
Defense Department officials crafted a plan to save jobs at a large California Air Force base and political face for Bill Clinton in a state with 54 electoral votes that is crucial to his re-election hopes.


AIDS and Ryan White
To the Editor:
I was saddened to read that Senator Jesse Helms is against the full funding of the Ryan White Care Act ("Helms Puts the Brakes to a Bill Financing AIDS Treatment," news article, July 5) because, he said, "deliberate, disgusting, revolting conduct" is responsible for those with AIDS.
Does the Senator not know that Ryan White contracted AIDS through a blood transfusion, as did Arthur Ashe?
JIM SMITH  Staten Island, July 5, 1995


Susan McLellan, Donald F. Harris
Dr.
Susan Redman McLellan, an owner of Lenox Hill Veterinarians in New York, was married yesterday to Donald Frederick Harris, the systems manager in corporate human resources for The New York Times Company.
The Rev.
Dr.
Robert E. Heffner performed the Lutheran ceremony at the West Kortright (N.Y.) Center.
The bride, 50, graduated from the University of Illinois at Champaign-Urbana, from which she also received her degree in veterinary medicine.
She is a daughter of Agnes Redman of Montrose, Colo., and the late Capt.
Emil Redman, a Navy chaplain.


Elizabeth Tamerin And Gad Grieve
Elizabeth Nathan Tamerin, the daughter of Barbara J. Tamerin of New York and Dr.
John S. Tamerin of Greenwich, Conn., was married on Thursday to Gad Grieve, the son of the late Carole and Zissel Grieve.
Rabbi Shmeul Weissman performed the ceremony in the garden at the Moshav Ora reception hall in Jerusalem.
Mrs.
Grieve, 26, is a student at Eyaht Women's Yeshiva of Aish-Ha-Torah in Jerusalem.
Her father is a psychiatrist in Greenwich and a clinical associate professor of psychiatry at Cornell University College of Medicine in White Plains.
Her mother is a private dealer of contemporary art in New York.
The bride's stepmother, Dr.
Naomi Tamerin, is the medical director of laboratory medicine at the Hudson Valley Hospital Center in Peekskill, N.Y.


A Flat Tax: Is It a Threat To Retirees' Security?
PROPOSALS for a flat tax -- one with a uniform low rate and few deductions -- have raised two big worries among the public.
Will a flat tax do away with the deduction for home mortgage interest?
And will it cripple the municipal bond market, where tax-free returns are the main attraction?
To get answers, taxpayers must await the outcome of the political debate over this issue.
But, as they wait, they can add a third, underpublicized concern to list: the fate of their golden years.


Lisa Jan Finkler, Stephen Bandler
Lisa Jan Finkler, the daughter of Barbara and Martin Finkler of Pomona, N.Y., was married yesterday evening to Stephen Joseph Bandler, a son of Sandra and James Bandler of New York.
Rabbi Harvey Tattelbaum performed the ceremony at the Dellwood Country Club in New City, N.Y.


Do the Movies Get New York Right?
"I ACTUALLY feel pretty comfortable in New York," says a man with a tumble of curls and a deadpan delivery, as he leans against the counter of local cigar store.
"I get scared, like, in Sweden." He has his reasons.
Sweden is that frightening country where "it's kind of empty" and "everything works." What self-respecting New Yorker would want to live in a place like that?
That unnamed man has an attitude city dwellers can identify with, and the strange thing is that it comes from a movie.
"Blue in the Face" (opening in October) is a spinoff of the current "Smoke," set in the same congenial store in the Park Slope neighborhood of Brooklyn.
A plotless series of anecdotes, "Blue in the Face" is a valentine to the voices of New York.
That the local man is played by Lou Reed (whose voice is more familiar for singing, "Hey, babe, take a walk on the wild side") only enhances his credentials as a guy with a broad view of New York's possibilities.


The Comfort Zone: Upper West Side
AMSTERDAM'S BAR AND ROTISSERIE * (212) 874-1377; 428 Amsterdam Avenue, near 80th Street; $$; all major credit cards


Correction
Because of an editing error, a chart with a front-page article on June 11 about the difficulties in filling two vacancies on the Securities and Exchange Commission, referred incorrectly to Isaac C. Hunt Jr., one of the leading candidates for commissioner.
He was not the first black to have graduated from the University of Virginia Law School; John F. Merchant, who graduated in 1958, was the first.


At Peace in the Lonely Realm of the Oboe
THE MUSIC WORLD, EVERYONE CALLS IT, as if it were one big, amorphous body of like-minded, similarly skilled fiddlers and pipers.
In fact, it is an unwieldy agglomeration of highly specialized enterprises, each a world unto itself.
Thus the stereotypes and thinly veiled antagonisms that flourish within orchestras, spawning viola jokes and, more recently, trombone jokes.
Few worlds are as mysterious even to other instrumentalists as that of the oboe.
Oboists are indeed a breed apart, a closed society of craftsmen-musicians, subject even more than their fellow reed players (clarinetists and bassoonists) to the fickle favors of a fragile medium: cane.
"You don't have to be crazy to play the oboe, but it helps," goes an old saw in the trade.


On Sunday; For 3 Rabbis, 2-Way Street Turns to Maze
IN what might have been the strangest conversation of his life, the rabbi remembers the exchange this way:
"C'mon, Rabbi," the police officer said, "why don't you take us to an electronics store, and, you know, get us a nice deal?"


Clothes That Aren't to Die For
WHAT Customized bulletproof leather coats, jackets, vests and pants made by Urban Body Armor of Jersey City.
"The whole idea was to invent nonconspicuous soft body armor that can be worn daily and blend into urban environments without giving a person's protection away," said Darryl Barnes, 32, the company's president.
WHO WEARS IT Especially popular among hip-hop artists, including Tupac Shakur, who happened to be wearing a vest the night last year when he was shot. (He was wounded in parts of the body unprotected by the vest.)


LOOKING FOR A DONOR TO CALL DAD
In 1981, I founded Single Mothers by Choice and have worked with hundreds of our members who have conceived a child by donor insemination.
Our organization is setting up a sibling registry so that half-siblings conceived with the same donor can find one another, if both mothers are willing for the information to be released.
JANE MATTES New York


Many Japanese Women Are Resisting Servility
For centuries, Japanese women have trailed behind their husbands, scrubbing away their muddy footprints, preparing and draining their baths and, once upon a time, paying for infidelity with their delicate heads.
They bore their femininity proudly, even blackening their teeth in the 17th century in a bow to fashion.
The servitude was so extreme that a Spanish trader in the 16th century described the women as "pious" and "excellent," and the Japanese men as "cruel."


Sports of The Times; Three Sets Later, Monica Who?
IN the far-off state of Connecticut, Monica Seles was preparing her comeback speech, but suddenly there was no great urgency.
For one glorious afternoon, women's tennis was alive and well without her.
Who needed Seles to save the entire industry of female athletes swatting fuzzy tennis balls?
Here on the scuffed lawn of southwest London, the world had Arantxa Sanchez Vicario against Steffi Graf, and that was quite good enough.


POSTINGS: $3 Million and Up; For Top Co-ops, Peak Prices
Sale prices for at least one type of New York City co-op -- ultra-luxury, high-end properties -- have finally climbed back to, and in some cases now exceed, the peak of the market in the late 80's, according to Lawrence Sicular &amp; Associates, an appraiser and researcher in Manhattan that surveyed 41 apartments that sold for at least $3 million in 1994 through mid-May.
"It's a fairly small universe," Mr.
Sicular said, noting that because of the low number of apartments in the study he was not able to calculate a median sales price for this rarefied niche or an overall percentage increase over the last five or six years.


Losing Big In a Hot Mutual Fund
Past performance, as the prospectuses say, is no guarantee of the future.
But if you understand what produced the results, it can help in forecasting.
Nowhere is that more clear than when a small mutual fund has got hot.
It pays to learn not just the percentage gains the fund has racked up, but to figure out how many dollars were involved, and what investment decisions really produced the gains.
Maybe the manager was good; maybe lucky.
But if a fund has grown rapidly, a strategy that once worked may be impossible to repeat, a fact that many investors learn only after they have leaped into the fund.


'The Front Page' in Revival at the Phoenix
THE setting is the press room of the Criminal Courts Building in Chicago.
Notice the roll-top desk, just the spot where a scheming editor and his star reporter can stash an escaped anarchist while everyone (the moronic sheriff, the crooked Mayor, the supporting cast of newspapermen) goes gunning for the convict who got away on the eve of his scheduled trip to the gallows.
See the three connecting windows (one would be skimpy for the elaborate suicide leap in Act II) and six telephones, ever off the hook.
Most essentially, the double doors at stage center allow maximum space for the entrances and exits of a cast (count more than 20) that never stops bolting.


The Joys of Camp, Despite Asthma
IT looked like any summer camp check-in: parents and children lugged sleeping bags, pillows and duffel bags; forms and permission slips were handed over and pictures taken.
But several children also carried small, white machines, and their parents were toting plastic bags full of bottles, boxes and implements.
On a recent Sunday 80 asthmatic boys and girls, ages 9 to 13, arrived at Camp Treasure Chest for a week of typical camp activities -- and intense medical supervision.
The camp, sponsored by the American Lung Association of Connecticut, is held jointly with the Y. M. C. A.'s Camp Hazen, which has 120 campers at the same site in Chester.


Bernard F. Riess, Professor Dismissed in McCarthy-Era, Dies at 87
Dr.
Bernard F. Riess, a prominent psychologist whose dismissal from the Hunter College faculty in 1952 for refusal to answer Senate questions in the heyday of McCarthyism was redressed by New York City 30 years later, died on Monday at his home in New Preston, Conn.
He was 87.
In a career that spanned more than 60 years, Dr.
Riess was a university teacher, a therapist with private and community-clinic practices, the director of mental health centers, an industrial consultant, the author and editor of scores of articles and books, and a lifelong advocate of progressive causes.


Clark Kent Suits Up For the 90's
THE silver-gray sweater clings to the body and swoops down at the chest.
What the late Lana Turner was to knitwear in her heyday, this model can match.
Enter the Sweater Boy.
That look was from the taste maker Giorgio Armani, whose show had pastel sweaters molded to the pectorals and a suit worn over a bodysuit.


MATRONS OF HONOR
Bliven's article reminded me of a particular style of hat that is worn by just about every woman in Germany past a certain age.
It resembles a somewhat flattened, inverted flowerpot and is placed with great precision squarely in the center of the head, worn slightly forward.
Talk about formidable.
HERBERT J. TEISON Dobbs Ferry, N.Y.


Official Balks At Releasing Waco Papers
The director of the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms has objected to recent Congressional requests for the personnel records of all employees who were involved in the Government raid on the Branch Davidian compound near Waco, Tex., in 1993.
The objections by the director, John W. Magaw, were set out in a memorandum to Edward S. Knight, general counsel for the Treasury Department, which has jurisdiction over the firearms agency.
Mr.
Magaw urged resistance to the Congressional requests, and a Treasury official said today that Mr.
Knight probably would adopt that position.


Race-Tinged Furor Stalls Arthur Ashe Memorial
City officials seriously consider ousting a statue of Christopher Columbus from a Richmond park.
A white man wearing Civil War medals lectures the black-majority City Council on the sensibilities of the "Confederate-American population." And the usually courtly L. Douglas Wilder, former Governor of Virginia, calls an idea from the city's Mayor "moronic."
All this heat is being shed on a matter that less than two weeks ago was considered settled: A statue of the black tennis pioneer Arthur Ashe, the city's best-known native son, was to join those of five pre-eminent Confederates on Richmond's Monument Avenue, a boulevard that the National Park Service has called "the South's grandest commemorative precinct dedicated to the heroes of the Lost Cause."


A Great Quarter Except for Japanese Gold Mines
How good was the second quarter?
It was very good for funds that aim to shine in a bull market.
Only two diversified funds in that group -- Robertson Stephens Emerging Growth and Goldman Sachs Small Cap Equity -- actually lost money.
Almost exclusively, the worst performers in the period were funds that specialize in Japanese or gold stocks.
Other funds with negative returns, like the Calvert and Dreyfus strategic growth funds, and Rydex Ursa, are intended to take advantage of something the quarter did not offer: a weak market for equities.


2d Special Olympics Athlete Reported Missing
The police in Connecticut were searching yesterday for a Special Olympics athlete from the Dominican Republic who was last seen Friday afternoon by his teammates in New Haven.
A spokesman for the Special Olympics World Games said the police in Hamden, Conn., where the Dominican athletes were staying, believe that the missing basketball player, Juan Carlos Balbuena, 20, might be trying to seek asylum in the United States.


CHATTER: Should the Devils Stay or Go?; Leave It to the Team
If the Devils want to stay, let the Devils pay.
The state can't afford to spend millions to keep the team.


Private Security Proposal Is Fading
When the developer Howard P. Milstein began promoting his vision of a private security force for the entire Upper East Side last year, he did not anticipate the furor it would provoke or the vocal opposition of so many civic groups and local elected officials.
Now Mr.
Milstein, the plan's originator, has dropped it.
He announced his decision in recent letters to community leaders and the more than 100 neighborhood condo and co-op buildings managed by his real estate company, Douglas Elliman Gibbons &amp; Ives.


You Can't Cure Addiction by Willpower Alone
To the Editor:
"A Change in Governors Stalls Model Drug Program in Texas" (front page, July 4) quotes Emmitt W. Hayes of the Texas Commission on Alcohol and Drug Abuse describing a "changing of attitudes" that is stalling the rehabilitation of criminals and potentially reinstituting "tougher punishment" to treat drug abuse in Texas prisons.


Watching Mr. B
FOLLOWING BALANCHINE By Robert Garis.
Illustrated. 260 pp.
New Haven: Yale University Press. $30.


Enrollment Bulge Forces Schools to Scramble for Space
As recently as 1988, schools across New Jersey were closing as the birth rate leveled off and enrollments dwindled.
But now, many districts are reopening abandoned buildings and hurriedly expanding others to accommodate an elementary school population that is growing faster than anyone expected.
A combination of residential development, immigration and a baby boom that began in the mid-1980's is swelling enrollments, especially in newly developed suburbs that are attracting young families.
School districts of all sizes are holding bond referendums, hoping to build new facilities and additions to existing schools.


Arts Suffering In Bombing In Oklahoma
One of the casualties of the terrorist bombing of the Federal Building on April 19 was the annual festival that raises money for this city's arts programs.
It was to have begun on April 25 but was canceled as the city mourned the 167 people who died in the explosion.
Overnight, the Arts Council of Oklahoma City, which has been financially in the black for 29 years, found itself $170,000 in debt for the thousands of printed programs it could not use and such items as the $8,000 worth of paper cups it would have to store.
Suddenly, it had no money to meet its payroll or support summer arts programs for children.
In all, it faced a loss of $550,000.


Melanie Shulman, Marc A. Feigen
Dr.
Melanie Shulman, the Javits Fellow in behavioral neurology at Boston University, was married last evening to Marc Alan Feigen, a management consultant at McKinsey &amp; Company in New York.
Rabbi Richard S. Chapin performed the ceremony at Temple Emanu-El in New York.
The bride, 31, graduated magna cum laude from Harvard University and received a master's degree in the history of medicine from St.
John's College in Cambridge, Mass.
She received her M.D. degree from the University of Pennsylvania.
She is a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Abraham Shulman of Hollis Hills, Queens.
Her father, a professor emeritus of otolaryngology at the State University Health Sciences Center in Brooklyn, is the founder and director of the Martha Entenmann Tinnitus Center in Brooklyn.
The bride's mother, Arlene Shulman, is the leadership chairwoman for the Queens region of Hadassah.


Jack and John: 2 for The Road At G.M.
ONE Saturday last February, a bunch of high-powered General Motors executives, board members and their spouses divided into teams and spent the next few hours building cars out of plastic pipe and glue.
Then, with teammates pushing or pulling, they took turns driving their handiwork around a racetrack in the Arizona desert.
At stake were prizes for the fastest and best-looking vehicles.
When one car fell apart after 30 yards, what little was left of their executive dignity dissolved in a burst of snickers, hoots and guffaws.
Some contestants thought this whole exercise, designed to encourage the directors to know G.M. managers and become more familiar with the company, a bit silly.
But their presence in the desert that day says a lot about the power of the nonexecutive chairman of the board, John G. Smale, at America's largest company.


H.M.O.'S REFUSING EMERGENCY CLAIMS, HOSPITALS ASSERT
As enrollment in health maintenance organizations soars, hospitals across the country report that H.M.O.'s are increasingly denying claims for care provided in hospital emergency rooms.
Such denials create obstacles to emergency care for H.M.O. patients and can leave them responsible for thousands of dollars in medical bills.
The denials also frustrate emergency room doctors, who say the H.M.O. practices discourage patients from seeking urgently needed care.
But for their part, H.M.O.'s say their costs would run out of control if they allowed patients unlimited access to hospital emergency rooms.


POSTINGS: A New Use for an Old Folly; A Learning Center for the Belvedere Castle
Central Park's Belvedere Castle is getting a $340,000 rehabilitation as part of $3 million in education grants from the Henry Luce Foundation and the Lila Wallace Readers Digest Fund.
The castle, perched on a rock outcropping overlooking the Delacorte Theater near West 79th Street, is to reopen next May as the Luce Learning Center, with exhibits and programs centered on the park as a natural habitat.
The castle, a Gothic style Calvert Vaux folly from 1872 that now houses only a weather station (the castle's tower is the highest structure in the park), will get new doors and windows, and repairs to its granite and schist stonework.
The project, under the auspices of the Central Park Conservancy, is directed by the architectural firm of Campagna &amp; Russo, which designed the castle's northwest pavilion restoration.


Meredith Klein, Peter J. Kosann
Meredith DuBow Klein, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Milton Klein of Harrison, N.Y., was married on Monday to Peter Jay Kosann, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Steven Kosann of New York.
Rabbi Norton Shargel performed the ceremony at the Essex House in New York.
Mrs.
Kosann, 22, graduated magna cum laude from the University of Pennsylvania, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa.
She is to attend the New York University School of Medicine in the fall.


Elka Beth Klein and Yoseff Francus
Elka Beth Klein, the daughter of Dr.
Martin Klein and Suzanne Silk Klein of Toronto, is to be married today to Yoseff Francus, a son of Rabbi Israel Francus and Dr.
Tova Francus of New York.
The bridegroom's father is to perform the ceremony at the Charles Hotel in Cambridge, Mass.
The bride, 29, is a Ph.D. candidate in medieval history at Harvard University.
She graduated summa cum laude from Yale University, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa.
Her father is a professor of African history at the University of Toronto.
Her mother, a lawyer, is a manager in the employment conditions and labor market policy branch of the Ontario Ministry of Labor in Toronto.


As the Fountain Splashes: Left, 2, 3, Right . . .
NEW YORK has salsa and disco clubs, places that swing and places that tango.
But can you think of a club that focuses on all these styles in the span of four days?
And teaches you how to dance?
And sits right in front of the Metropolitan Opera?


A Halfway House
To the Sports Editor:
Yankee Stadium is now the Halfway House that Ruth built.


A Director Whose Stagecoach Came In
IN the long film-making future that P.J.
Pesce envisioned for himself, someday - when he was 40, 50 or 60 years old - he would get the chance to make a western, a genre he has loved since childhood.
Life doesn't always go according to plan. Mr. Pesce is 31.


A Way to Hold On to Those Stock Profits
AS the bull market ages, many investors worry that a downturn is imminent and that their profits may quickly turn to dust.
On the other hand, they don't want to miss out on the fun if the market keeps rising.
It's the eternal quandary of investors: Hold or sell?
There is a third way.
Just as some people buy options on individual stocks to guard against falling prices, investors can buy options on indexes to insure their portfolios against broader market drops.
With options in hand, investors can profit if the market rises, but they can cut some of their losses if it falls.


Assembly Delays Revaluation Bill
A CLOSELY watched bill to revalue all property in Westchester -- which was expected to set a precedent for other counties in the state to follow -- failed to make it to the floor of the State Assembly late last month.
But county Legislators stressed that the bill was not dead.
Rather, they said, they needed more time to study what is a complicated and critical issue.


Golden Bri Upsets 1-5 Serena's Song
Serena's Song, the queen of the fillies, may have run one race too many.
And she showed it in the homestretch at Belmont Park yesterday when she was run down and defeated by Golden Bri in the $250,000 Coaching Club American Oaks, a race billed as a milestone on her path to the filly championship.
But it was a milestone on a path that stretched for a mile and a quarter, a distance that Serena's Song had run only once before -- in the Kentucky Derby, when she led the colts for one mile before also fading in the stretch to finish 16th.
It's no disgrace not to be able to run 10 furlongs, and it may not even cost her the 3-year-old championship.
But for one afternoon, at least, the magic of the D. Wayne Lukas wand did not produce a winner.


Plymouth Rock, 375 Years Later
For the 375th anniversary of the arrival of the Pilgrims in Plymouth, Mass., a series of events is planned by several organizations, including the Plymouth Chamber of Commerce, the Plymouth County Development Council and Plimoth Plantation, a re-creation of the 17th-century settlement.
On July 19, a reproduction of the Mayflower, the Mayflower II, will sail from Plymouth to Provincetown, where the Pilgrims first saw land in 1620.
On July 20, the signing of the Mayflower Compact will be re-enacted on board.
On the Plymouth waterfront, Supreme Court Justice David Souter is scheduled to swear in 102 new United States citizens, a salute to the 102 passengers who arrived on the Mayflower.


Moral Dimension
To the Editor:
As a son of the composer Sergei Prokofiev and an ardent student of his musical legacy, I take exception to Richard Taruskin's article "Great Artists Serving Stalin Like a Dog"  [ May 28 ] .
In this article he urges that "Ivan the Terrible," the 1944 film by Sergei Eisenstein with music by Prokofiev, be "buried" because he believes that "it is a blatant piece of Stalinist triumphalism" and a "glorification of the N.K.V.D.," the secret police.


Corrections
An article last Sunday about the first anniversary of the death of Rabbi Menachem Mendel Schneerson, leader of the Lubavitch Hasidim, misstated the position of Rabbi Shmuel Butman.
He is director of the Lubavitch Youth Organization and chairman of the International Campaign to Bring Moshiach; he is not an official spokesman for the Lubav itchers.


As Jade Is to China, Rubble Is to Williamsburg
Whether they are carving ivory in Africa, jade in China, marble in Greece or lava in Hawaii, sculptors often reveal a great deal about their surroundings by the materials they use.
This is also true in Williamsburg, where artists like Boaz Vaadia and Tim Main draw inspiration and materials from the streets beneath them and the world around them.


Wildlife Volunteers Save the U.S. Millions
To the Editor:
"Of Cabbage Whites and Monarchs" (editorial, July 2) describes how thousands of volunteers are fanning out across the United States this month to survey migrating butterflies.
The volunteers who perform this service provide the data to the scientists at the Interior Department's National Biological Service, whose analyses provide scientific bases for natural resource management and protection.


Ideas &amp; Trends; Our Man in Shanghai Rents a Pad
LOOKING for a compact two-bedroom apartment?
If you're lucky you might get one for $5,000 a month.
Insist on a steady supply of water and electricity?
You might have to spend twice as much.
Funny thing is, we're not talking about Paris or Tokyo.


Robin E. Buckley, James L. Olds
Robin Elizabeth Buckley, a senior account executive at Ogilvy Adams &amp; Rinehart, a public relations firm in Washington, was married yesterday to Dr.
James Leland Olds, the chief of the imaging unit at the adaptive systems laboratory of the National Institutes of Health's Neurology Institute in Bethesda, Md.
The Rev.
Earl Brooks, a Presbyterian minister, performed the ceremony at Great Oak Manor in Chestertown, Md.
The bride, 33, graduated from Ohio State University.
She is the daughter of Robert and Sally Buckley of Sylvania, Ohio.


A Stage Bursting With Actors
THE setting is the press room of the Criminal Courts Building in Chicago.
Notice the roll top desk, just the spot where a scheming editor and his star reporter can stash an escaped anarchist while everyone (the moronic sheriff, the crooked mayor, the supporting cast of newspapermen) goes gunning for the convict who got away on the eve of his scheduled trip to the gallows.
See the three connecting windows (one would be skimpy for the elaborate suicide leap in Act II) and six telephones, ever off the hook.
Most essentially, the double doors at stage center allow maximum space for the entrances and exits of a cast (more than 20) that never stops bolting.


INSIDE
IN PERSON  A songwriter rises from Colonia, exploring everyday life. 4 THE GREAT OUTDOORS  Saving a wild river -- for tourists, among others.
And: the other shore. 6 MUSIC  Easy listenin'?
Yes.
Froth?
Not for this flutist. 10 SOAPBOX  Why did Whitman and the Legislature play obstetrician? 15


Now About Those Weeds, Before It's Too Late
SOMEONE once defined a weed as a "plant out of place." Often enough, quite right.
Many respected wild flowers are thought of as weeds.
Beauty seems to be in the eye of the beholder.
The temptation is to consider these plants as botanical intruders.
But one thought should be in the weeds' favor.
Many of them have had vital roles in the establishment of civilizations over the centuries.
In a certain sort of way, weeds deserve some respect.


Emily Christenfeld, Michael Grad
Emily Sarah Christenfeld, a daughter of Stanley S. Christenfeld of Brooklyn and the late Evelyn A. Christenfeld, is to be married today to Michael Jonathan Grad, the son of Betty Grad-Gross of New Rochelle, N.Y., and the late Dr.
Harold Grad.
Rabbi Gerald I. Weider is to officiate at the Hotel Plaza Athenee in New York.
The bride is the vice president of investment banking at Lipper &amp; Company, an investment company in New York.
She graduated from Brown University, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa, and received an M.B.A. and a law degree from Harvard University.
Her father retired as a partner in Halpern &amp; Christenfeld, a former clothing manufacturer in New York.


All Aboard!
The Forbes family and 130 guests dining under the fireworks on the East River, July 4.


Baltimore
H.
L.
Mencken, that old charmer, dubbed his hometown "Charm City." And in this, at least, he was right.
Baltimore is lousy with history and nice views of the Chesapeake, of course.
But if you are a fan of diners, John Waters movies, Edgar Allan Poe and Elvis (who's inexplicably big here), you might think this is the hippest city in America.
And surely the only one with a nine-foot bronze statue of Billie Holiday.
Baltimore definitely does not inspire that just-got-off-the-Interstate-and-could-be-anywhere state of mind.
French fries drenched in gravy are a local specialty, as is calling people "hon," as in "More fries, hon?" Last year, a hon enthusiast who came to be known as Hon Man repeatedly spray-painted the sign at the edge of the city, which said "Welcome to Baltimore, Hon" after he got through with it.
He was invited to meet the mayor.


Experiment in Green; Officials Dole Out Chunks of Riverside Park, And Corps of Volunteers Pick Up the Pieces
In the tangled northern reaches of Riverside Park, Bette Midler pays a 10-person crew to pick up trash.
Tennis players groom the clay courts themselves near 96th Street.
An old man who calls himself "the phantom trash collector" patrols the lower 17 blocks of the park every day.
A 10-year-old girl has adopted the Kossuth Statue at 113th Street.
New York City, it seems, has found a new solution to litter, obsolete equipment and ragged pruning in public parks: give them away, piece by piece.
From gardens to tennis courts to fountains, some 39 chunks of Riverside Park, which stretches from 72d Street to 158th Street along the Hudson River, have been parceled out to volunteers to groom, clean and partially finance.


Cyndi J. Wolfman and David Scott
Cyndi Joy Wolfman and David Scott, producers of television talk shows in New York, are to be married today in Tarrytown, N.Y.
Rabbi Joseph Potasnik is to perform the ceremony at Tappan Hill.
Ms.
Wolfman, 29, is a daughter of Mikki and Paul Wolfman of Marlboro, N.J.
A graduate of Syracuse University, she is the senior producer of "The Gordon Elliott Show" on the Fox Network.


Heather Koerber And Jake Nunes
Heather Jean Koerber, a daughter of Susan and Kenneth C. Koerber of Dunbarton, N.H., was married yesterday to John Kenneth Nunes, a son of Clare and Geoffrey Nunes of Cambridge, Mass.
The Rev.
Rachel Anderson, a Unitarian Universalist minister, performed the ceremony at the bride's parents' home.
Mrs.
Nunes, 26, is a kindergarten teacher at the Essex Elementary School in Essex, Mass.
She graduated from Harvard University and received a master's degree in education from Lesley College.
Her father is an electrical-optical engineer at the Kollsman Instrument Company, a manufacturer of electro-optical and night-imaging equipment in Merrimack, N.H.
Her mother is the director of the Woodside School, a preschool in Concord, N.H.


Streetscapes/'Historical Building Construction'; The Nuts and Bolts Behind New York's Facades
TO judge from a shelf full of three decades of books on New York, we have not come much further than a cursory understanding of construction technology.
The typical history of New York building, it seems, is a history of exterior style.
But now a practicing engineer, Donald Friedman, has written "Historical Building Construction" (W. W. Norton, 1995), the first work to try to explain how New York's buildings have gone up -- and occasionally come down.
Tread carefully, because Mr.
Friedman wrote the book for construction professionals, and half of the volume is lost on anyone not familiar with concepts like "gravity moment" and "eccentric loading." But stick with it and you will be rewarded by the other half, a useful primer on the complicated and sometimes contradictory path taken by the engineers and architects who have had to use brick and steel to solve real estate problems of finance and law.


Tenant Versus Landlord
FOR most homeowners, the answer to a warped floor, a broken window or a leaky pipe is fairly obvious: Hunker down and fix the problem, or hire someone to fix it for you.
But what happens when home is a rented apartment and the person responsible for fixing things is the landlord?
What happens when that warp or break or leak is not inherently dangerous but just annoying enough to drive you crazy?
And what happens when the landlord either ignores your plea for help or flatly refuses to make a repair?


Life on the Loaf
To the Editor:
In 1975 I practically ran away from home to work as a waiter at Bread Loaf.
It was a raucous, uplifting time.
One way I kept my "customers" in the dining hall satisfied was by bringing a bottle of vodka to breakfast -- just a wee bit in the juice set the tone for the day.
And I hazily (though fondly) recall some vigorous fumbling about with a stranger or two in somebody's bedroom.
As Joseph Brod sky, who visited one weekend, wrote: "My youth comes back. Sometimes I smile. Or spit."


Leta E. Dinkel, Aaron Meyerson
Leta Elizabeth Dinkel, a daughter of Mrs.
Ridgely Manning Foster of Palm Beach, Fla., and Edward J. Dinkel of Tampa, Fla., was married yesterday to Aaron Harvey Meyerson, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Aubrey Jay Meyerson of Pacific Palisades, Calif.
The Rev.
Harold Weicker, an Episcopal minister, officiated at Grace Cathedral in San Francisco.
Rabbi Alan Levinson took part in the ceremony.
Ms.
Dinkel, 33, is keeping her name.
She and her mother are partners in Leta Austin Foster &amp; Associates, an interior design firm.
Ms.
Dinkel works in the firm's San Francisco and New York offices and her mother, Leta Austin Foster, at its headquarters in Palm Beach.
The bride graduated from Georgetown University.
Her father is a partner in Macfarlane Ausley Ferguson &amp; McMullen, a law firm in Tampa.


Better Finances, but Not Better Test Scores
Six years ago, dead people collected health benefits from the school system here.
Contractor payoffs dogged the maintenance department, though some classrooms had not smelled of fresh paint in 30 years.
Then the state took over and that sort of thing largely ended.
Six years ago, the students in Jersey City also scored badly on standardized tests, dropped out at three times the state average and had poor attendance records.
After the state took over, they still do.


In a Classic, Graf Captures Wimbledon On Sheer Will
Steffi Graf, despite a recalcitrant physique and a suspicion that suffering for her tennis may not be the only way to live, captured her second Grand Slam crown of 1995 today, winning Wimbledon in a memorable match on a steamy afternoon.
Once again, just as it had been a month ago when she fought her way to the French Open championship, Graf's opponent was second-seeded Arantxa Sanchez Vicario, the plucky Spaniard with whom she has already exchanged the No. 1 ranking six times this year.


2 Restaurant Dynasties Join to Open Steakhouse
TWO Long Island restaurant dynasties will join forces this summer when the Boulder Creek Family Steakhouse opens in Syossett.
The Scotto family, which owns the Westbury Manor, the Fox Hollow Inn in Woodbury and other local restaurants, and the Sbarros, who operate an international chain of 176 Italian fast-food franchises, along with Sal Moscato, owner of the Irga Pastry factory in Bethpage, are partners in the venture.
Neither Mario Sbarro, chairman of Sbarro's, nor Anthony Scotto, the major partner who directs his family's business, have released details about the enterprise.
But the first of two Boulder Creeks is being built on Jericho Turnpike, where the Moonraker and El Torito had been.


As a Beat, Business Is Booming
IRVING R. LEVINE STILL shivers at the memory of Jan. 8, 1971.
That was the day NBC News asked him to try his hand at business reporting.
Mr.
Levine had just completed a lengthy tour as a foreign correspondent in Moscow, Rome and London.
He wanted to cover the State Department next.
But his bosses handed him the economics and business beat.
"It was a barren time," Mr.
Levine, who is 72, said the other day.
"Producers just weren't interested in those stories."


RESULTS PLUS
GOLF  Ogle and Lowery Share Lead
Brett Ogle birdied the 18th hole yesterday to tie Steve Lowery for the lead after three rounds of the Western Open in Lemont, Ill.
Ogle shot a three-under-par 69 and Lowery a 70 to move past the second-round leader Jay Haas with a three-day total of 209.
Haas led until the 16th hole but bogeyed the last two to fall one shot back.
Bob Estes and Grant Waite were another stroke off the pace.
Tom Watson, looking for his first PGA Tour victory since 1987, headed a group of five golfers three shots back. (AP)


POP BRIEF
Paula Abdul: 'Head Over Heels' Captive/Virgin.


Baseball Talks May Resume
The baseball labor negotiations that disappeared more than three months ago could come back soon.
A management person close to the owners' negotiating committee said the committee hopes to resume talks "in some form" in 10 days to two weeks.
That timetable in mind, the committee has a meeting scheduled for tomorrow in Dallas.
Participating in the meeting will be Rob Manfred, who had been the owners' No. 2 labor lawyer but who will apparently become No. 1.
He would replace Chuck O'Connor, his associate at the Washington firm of Morgan, Lewis &amp; Bockius, who was dismissed by Bud Selig, the acting commissioner.


Sinister? U.N.'s Simply in the Dark
OVERNIGHT, a message was left on an office answering machine at the United Nations.
Is it true, a West Coast caller wanted to know, that the organization has changed its motto from "Swords into Plowshares" to "Peace and Security"?
Say what?


Katherine Huggin, William A. Schulz
Martha Katherine Huggin, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
David McKown Huggin of New York, was married yesterday to William Andrew Schulz, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Fritz A. Schulz of Sao Paulo, Brazil.
The Rev.
Richard D. Leonard performed the ceremony at the Unitarian Church of All Souls in New York.
Mrs.
Schulz, 28, is known as Katherine.
She is a clinical social worker at the Center for Mental Health at the Carolinas Medical Center in Charlotte, N.C.
She graduated from Kenyon College and received a master's degree in social work from Columbia University.
Her father is a senior partner in Sullivan &amp; Cromwell, the law firm, in New York.
Her mother, Nancy Lassiter Huggin, is the vice president for development at the Union Theological Seminary in New York.


Corrections
A picture caption in the Neighborhood Report last Sunday with an article about Berlin, a Harlem club that attracts gay black men, misidentified a woman pouring a drink behind the bar.
She was Deborah Hall, a bartender, not Miva, a hostess.


Rebecca Gambrill, David D. Alden
Rebecca Greenwood Gambrill, a daughter of the Rev.
James H. Gambrill of York, Me., and Johanne Gambrill of Tenafly, N.J., was married yesterday to David Douglas Alden, a son of Vernon and Marion Alden of Brookline, Mass.
The bride's father, a lawyer and an Episcopal priest, performed the ceremony at St.
Peter's-by-the-Sea Church in Ogunquit, Me.
Mrs.
Alden, 28, is a photographer in Weston, Mass.
She graduated from Goucher College.
Her father is an associate at Engel, Gearreald &amp; Gardner, a law firm in Exeter, N.H.
Her mother teaches mathematics at the Dwight-Englewood High School in Englewood, N.J.


New Yorkers &amp; Co.
Living Well Lady Plans Extra-Large Club From his Houston headquarters, Peter Magee runs 54 Living Well Lady health clubs around the country, including three in Manhattan.
Most are about 5,000 square feet and all limit their membership to women.
In an effort to compete with the mega-health clubs opening throughout the city, Mr.
Magee is installing a 16,000-square-foot club at One East 43d Street, just off Fifth Avenue, which he plans to open by the end of the summer.
He's calling it Living Well, but the no-men-need-apply edict will stand.
The club will feature a 4,000-square-foot aerobics floor, Mr.
Magee said.


A Literary Critic and Truths About Incest
LOUISE DESALVO and I are sitting on the beach at Sagaponak.
As we speak we are sifting the sand through our fingers, the way people do when they talk half to each other and half thinking their own thoughts.
I am thinking about the Greek notion of catharsis.
Or rather I am thinking about the way we first learned about it in junior high school: that if people saw re-enacted on the stage their most treacherous wishes, it would cleanse them of their own dangerous desires for revenge; it would relax them and relieve them.


Ideas &amp; Trends; A Surprising Muse For the Stage: Science
"YOU cannot stir things apart," observes a 13-year-old prodigy in Tom Stoppard's "Arcadia," which is playing in New York City.
She points out that if you stir jam in rice pudding, you cannot unstir it by moving the spoon backward.
"Do you not think this is odd?"
Indeed it is.
It seems to violate a principle of simple Newtonian physics, that all motion is reversible and all stirring unstirrable.
And odder still is the idea that "Arcadia" and other recent theatrical events should encompass the weighty world of science at all.
Nuclear fission, chaos theory and encryption procedures can sometimes seem to be replacing such familiar fare as love and death.


A Middle East Milestone
Word from the long-running peace talks between Israel and the Palestine Liberation Organization is encouraging.
The two sides have agreed in principle to begin a more ambitious phase of Palestinian autonomy that would change the map of Israel and the Middle East.
Details could be worked out by the end of this month.
The Israeli Army would then begin withdrawing from major West Bank cities, allowing Palestinians to organize national elections for an administrative council.
If these timetables hold, the Oslo peace framework signed nearly two years ago on the White House lawn would take a mighty step from promise to reality.
By next year, remarkably, the overwhelming majority of Palestinians in the territories occupied by Israel since 1967 could be under elected Palestinian rule.
In return Israel expects the P.L.O. to fulfill a commitment to eliminate the section of its charter calling for the destruction of Israel.
Credit for getting matters this far belongs chiefly to Israel's Prime Minister, Yitzhak Rabin, and the P.L.O.'s chairman, Yasir Arafat, with useful encouragement from the Clinton Administration.


Gerri Lieberman, Andrew Sommers
Gerri Melissa Lieberman, a daughter of Patricia and Michael Lieberman of Plainview, L.I., was married on Monday to Andrew Sommers, a son of Lesley and Ronald Sommers of New City, N.Y.
Rabbi Aaron Petuchowski performed the ceremony at the Jericho (L.I.) Jewish Center.
Mrs.
Sommers, 25, and her husband, 26, graduated from the University of Michigan.
The bride received an M.B.A. from Harvard University last month.
In August, she is to become an associate at Lehman Brothers, the New York investment bank.
Her father is a packaging consultant in Plainview.
Her mother teaches a first-grade Alpha class, a program for gifted and talented students, at Public School 165 in Flushing, Queens.


Corrections
A picture caption last Sunday with an article about a day in the life of Central Park misidentified the body of water photographed at dawn.
It was the Lake, not the Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis Reservoir.


The Whitman Effect
In political terms, Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman of New Jersey has had a sensational first year and a half in office.
With a recently enacted $16 billion budget, she has cut income taxes as promised in two years instead of three, without shredding local aid or social programs.
Small wonder that she is being talked about for the national Republican ticket.
But these achievements are accompanied by genuine risks to the long-term financial health of the state.
Looked at closely, Mrs.
Whitman's fiscal practices reflect less of a Republican revolution in downsized government than the same old game of spending now and paying the price later.
The Governor's first year in office was marked by a reduction in annual payments to the state employee pension fund, which allowed her to implement the first phase of her promised 30 percent cut in the income tax rate.
This page was critical of that move as certain to raise the state budget liability for pensions drastically in future years.
But Mrs.
Whitman persuaded the legislators, if not the bond-rating agencies, that the pension system was "overfunded" and that it was a matter of equity that current taxpayers not have to foot the bill for future retirement costs.
She was unfortunately employing a dubious practice to which desperate governors and mayors across the country have been turning in these years of fiscal stringency.


Why Couples Choose To Live Together
To the Editor:
Your article on the trend toward increases in living-together sexual relationships (July 6) omits some important research information that sociologists have been gathering on this topic for more than 20 years.


At Lincoln Center . . .
A night of big bands, June 28.


Elizabeth Gray, Jonathan Erickson
Elizabeth Cureton Gray, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Charles Augustus Gray of Winchester, Mass., and Princeton, N.J., was married yesterday to Jonathan Loyal Erickson, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Edwin Bacaue Erickson 3d of Newtown Square, Pa.
The Rev.
Cynthia Jarvis performed the ceremony at the Nassau Presbyterian Church in Princeton.
Mrs.
Erickson, 27, graduated from Williams College and received a master's degree in management from Northwestern University.
Next month she is to become a marketing associate at American Express in New York.
Her father is a vice president of the Cabot Corporation, a chemical company in Boston.
Her mother, Rachel Davis Gray, is the associate director of the Institute for Advanced Study, the research organization, in Princeton.
Mr.
Erickson, 29, graduated from the University of Pennsylvania.
He is an associate in investment banking at CS First Boston in New York.
His mother, Katherine Erickson, is the technical director of the Corning Clinical Laboratory, a medical lab in Trevose, Pa.
His father is the Executive Director, or chief administrator, of Delaware County in Media, Pa.


Junior Achievement
THE power and influence of New Jersey's delegation to the House of Representatives is etched in stone, literally: dozens of important buildings erected over many years with Federal dollars and the federally subsidized roadways that helped define the state.
The delegation's members were also immortalized by Congressional longevity of legendary proportions and their ability, year after year, to herd billions of dollars to their home turf.


For the L.A. Ballet, Three Lives (So Far)
ALONE IN A MAMMOTH SPACE that was once a storage plant, John Clifford breaks into a run, marking off the 50-foot-by-60-foot boundary that will be his main studio.
It is, he says, "as large as the stage at Lincoln Center's State Theater." Never one to feign modesty, Mr.
Clifford, the former New York City Ballet principal for whom George Balanchine and Jerome Robbins created a total of nine ballets in the late 1960's and early 70's, talks with unbridled optimism.
In fact, Mr.
Clifford is so enthusiastic that a visitor would never guess that his Los Angeles Ballet is regenerating itself for the third time in 20 years.
Its latest incarnation, a 46-member troupe with contracts calling for a 40-week minimum season, seems to be on firm ground.
What's more, this ingeniously capitalized enterprise comes at a time when most performing-arts troupes face crimped budgets.


IN SHORT: FICTION
PLAYING OUT OF THE DEEP WOODS Stories.
By G. W. Hawkes.
University of Missouri, paper, $14.95.


Glorious Shade
To the Editor: Spotting the reference to W. D. Wetherell's essay "Shade, Glorious Shade" on the front page of the May 28 Travel section, I turned to the piece immediately.
A blue-eyed blonde of the blondest sort -- natural, thank you -- I had found a co-sufferer in the author.
"Sun and fun" -- hah!
Sun and pain, more like.
Throughout childhood I longed for the 19th century when, so I read, proper ladies stayed pale as white summer linens under their parasols.
Not only more graceful, the parasols wouldn't have the sticky feel and overripe smell of suntan lotion.


Michele Magnone, David S. Cohen
Michele Marie Magnone, the daughter of Sylvia Magnone of Schenectady, N.Y., and the late Alfred Magnone, was married on Thursday to David Scott Cohen, a son of Barbara and Arnold Cohen of North Woodmere, L.I.
Judge Jack B. Weinstein of the United States District Court for the Eastern District of New York, in Brooklyn, officiated at the Plaza in New York.
Mrs.
Cohen, who works in New York, is a vice president of Grupo Nacional, an insurance company in Mexico City.
She graduated from the State University College at Cortland, N.Y.


Accessible Broadway: The Cheap Seats
Tickets to Broadway shows may cost more than $65 apiece these days, but reduced-price tickets for many shows are available at the two TKTS booths -- the main one in Duffy Square at 47th Street and Broadway, and a satellite at 2 World Trade Center.
Tickets for selected shows are sold at Duffy Square beginning at 3 P.M. on the day of performance for evening shows and at 10 A.M. for Wednesday and Saturday matinees, noon for matinees on Sunday.
The World Trade Center booth opens at 11 A.M. and also sells matinee tickets for the next day.
Tickets cost either 50 percent or 75 percent of box-office prices, determined by the producers, plus a $2.50 service charge per ticket.
Only cash and traveler's checks are accepted.
Information: (212) 768-1818.


'Does Anyone Here Think Tnis Baby Can Live?'
The Brigham doctors had tried to prepare the DeCostas for both possibilities when Jennifer first arrived at the hospital three days earlier, having inexplicably gone into labor in her 23d week of pregnancy.
Gathering around her bedside like benevolent priests, the doctors told the young couple that, yes, a fetus has been known to live after only 23 weeks' gestation, but that its chances of surviving without severe abnormalities are vanishingly small; a normal pregnancy, after all, lasts about 40 weeks.
The doctors said they wouldn't know until they actually saw Jennifer's baby in the delivery room -- because maybe it would be closer to 24 weeks old, in which case the odds improved dramatically.
But they explained that every borderline infant must be considered something of a medical experiment.
Jennifer is a pretty, spirited 22-year-old with a mop of curly blond hair and wide green eyes.
At home in Abington, Mass., taking care of her first child, an 18-month-old daughter named Siarra, Jennifer had seemed mature beyond her years, filled with the uncommon energy and grace it takes to be a good mother.
But lying in her hospital bed at Brigham and Women's, hardly showing in her oversize maternity gown, she looked childlike herself, far too young to be facing such grim prospects for her family.


Telling Stories, Going Farther
AS the stage lights dim to an intimate glow, a man dressed in black steps up to the lone microphone.
"This song is about the land of my people," he says gravely.
He steps back and strums his guitar softly.
A plaintive look crosses his face as he sings, "I'm from New Jersey."


MARKET TIMING
Monday The Federal Reserve reports May consumer credit. Forecast: up $9 billion.


MOVIES THIS WEEK
THREE Hollywood stalwarts strut their stuff in two films each on television this week.
John Barrymore devours his roles in Harry D'Arrast's TOPAZE (1933) and Howard Hawks's TWENTIETH CENTURY (1934) like juicy pomegranates.
Both pictures are highlights of Hollywood's golden era.
In the droll "Topaz" (from Marcel Pagnol's play), he's a naive Paris pedagogue who learns corporate wiles, turns rich mogul and calmly annexes a victim's mistress (the charming Myrna Loy).
Barrymore's gradual transformation and the film's sly ironies are enthralling - Thursday at 1:30 P.M. on American Movie Classics.
In the raffish "Twentieth Century" he lets fly hilariously with tasty, ham-spiced flamboyance as a Broadway egomaniac, matched every step of the way by Carole Lombard, as his ex-mistress.
Here is one co-starring duo straight from heaven (via Hecht-MacArthur's stage hit) - Saturday/Early Sunday at 12:05 A.M. on Channel 13.


A Breakdown On the Highway To the Moon
Apollo 13 Tom Hanks, Kevin Bacon, Bill Paxton, Gary Sinise, Ed Harris, Kathleen Quinlan Directed by Ron Howard PG 135 minutes
Three astronauts (Mr. Hanks, Mr. Bacon and Mr. Paxton) are headed for the Moon when alarms go off in the spacecraft and just about every system on board seems to be broken.
The three try to be brave while the fellows at Mission Control (including Mr. Harris and Mr. Sinise) figure out how to get the astronauts home alive.
VIOLENCE -- None, but there are a number of scary moments when systems start failing.
SEX -- Fleeting banter that is over the head of most children.
PROFANITY -- A moderate amount, increasing as the tension does.
For Which Children?
AGES 3-7 -- They could be bored by all the talk.
AGES 8 and up -- Youngsters with any interest in space travel should appreciate this story.
ANITA GATES


Ideas &amp; Trends; An Awful Milestone for the Golden Gate Bridge
THE chief engineer of the Golden Gate Bridge, Joseph B. Strauss, predicted that his master work, finished in May 1937, would be "practically suicide-proof."
Mr. Strauss has been proved wrong a thousand times over -- or thereabouts.


Long Island for the Young
Mark D. Zimmerman ought to know where to go on Long Island to entertain children.
He lives in Melville and has two daughters, ages 9 and 12.
To share his experience, he has published "Zim's Guide: A Survey of Family Attractions" ($10.95, Zimco Creative Arts).
The 120-page paperback rates more than 200 attractions, ranging from parks to pizza restaurants, for cleanliness, value and safety.
Other families' opinions are also included.


July 2-8: Acting Like a Criminal; Former Prosecutor Guilty Of Aiding Drug Dealers
Experts in legal ethics talk about the fine line that defense lawyers must walk to remain advocates for their clients without becoming their confederates.
Donald L. Ferguson knows about that line, and the abyss on the other side.
Mr.
Ferguson, 48, pleaded guilty last week to reduced charges of money laundering and conspiring to obstruct justice to help Colombian cocaine traffickers.
He will be sentenced to prison (guidelines call for seven to nine years) after he testifies against two other lawyers who, the Government says, also crossed the line to aid cocaine smugglers.


The Curse of Eros
SECRET LIFE An Autobiography. By Michael Ryan.  356 pp. New York: Pantheon Books. $25.


Affirmative Reaction; For the Civil Rights Movement, A New Reason for Living
DEFEAT can be demoralizing; setbacks can rejuvenate.
After a string of adverse rulings by the Supreme Court, civil rights groups and their political allies are now trying to figure out whether they have opportunity or only despair.
As they do, a small number -- mind you, a very small number -- of liberal strategists and thinkers, black and white, are moving beyond the hand-wringing that has greeted the Court's decisions last month limiting Federal affirmative action programs and the drawing of election districts to concentrate minority votes.
To these contrarians, the decisions may give a new sense of urgency to a movement whose influence and membership have waned and whose leadership has often been ineffective.


Champions Share Skill And Mighty Coincidence
This is a story of remarkable coincidences, and never mind that in China, as elsewhere, some children are retarded or burned or maimed or abandoned.
But all four happening to a boy and a girl whose lives have since coincided?
And who became the best table tennis players in the Special Olympics World Games here this week?
And who together won the gold medal in mixed doubles with, between them, two left hands and no right?
His name is Yong Xi.
Her name is Peng Kai.
Both are 21.
They were abandoned months apart at age 2, he in the Shanghai railroad station and she at a Shanghai orphanage.
Their parents could not be found, so they grew up in the same orphanage.
Before he was abandoned, fire had destroyed his right hand, leaving a stump, and had badly scarred the right side of his face.
Before she was abandoned, fire had destroyed her right hand, leaving a thumb and a stump.
It also left her unable to grow hair, so she wears a black wig with bangs.


The Table Is Set for Hungry Finalists
Just after he was informed that Pete Sampras, Wimbledon's mild-mannered defending champion and his opponent in this year's grand finale, had described his appetite for a third consecutive title as "ravenous," Boris Becker asked for an exact definition.
Becker, a three-time Wimbledon champion himself, smiled an enigmatic smile and then issued a subtle challenge to Sampras on the subject of the bragging rights to the 1995 championship.


Penny Simon and Edwin Russell
UNLIKE the stereotypical Secret Service agent who is barely more animate than a Mount Rushmore figure, Edwin Russell is emotional, confessional and often downright silly.
At 46, he carries around plastic cockroaches to use in pranks and is more interested in talking about his definition of true love than about guns or assassinations.
Working from an office in New York, he is part of the team that protects President Clinton on visits to Manhattan and in the past has guarded such notables as Marilyn Quayle on diving expeditions and Ron Reagan when he was a member of the Joffrey Ballet.


Lemon Squeeze
Lemons, like most edible aspects of modern life, are no longer constrained by seasons.
The most acidic of all citrus fruits, lemons are arguably at their best from December to March.
Nevertheless, during the winter lemons barely squeeze their way into the season's typically rich dishes.
In the spring, when ingredients and cooking techniques are delicate, the personality of lemons is most apparent, most insistently young, most indisputably alive.
There is something eternal about the freshness a lemon imparts, though Her Royal Yellow Bitterness is actually a fairly contemporary fruit.
Botanists are divided as to whether the fruit was initially cultivated in Malaysia, China or the Indus Valley, but they agree that lemons haven't been grown for much more than 2,000 years.
Lemon trees grow best in semidry, constantly warm climates, like the Mediterranean, especially Sicily, as well as California and Arizona.
The tree itself is a subtropical evergreen with tender leaves and an intoxicatingly fragrant flower.
But the fruit of the lemon tree, as the song goes, is "impossible to eat."


A Culinary Salute to a City Tradition
BOWDEN SQUARE lives.
The landmark Southampton restaurant that flourished for half a century has been revived.
For three seasons, Sfuzzi, an upscale Italian chain, held forth on the premises.
Now, a team of traditional restaurateurs, with ties to the old days of the "21" Club in Manhattan, has brought back the old Bowden Square.
It has restored more than just the name.
This is once again a conservative American-continental restaurant.
It even has a private club ensconced in its main dining room.
The public is consigned to the barroom and the wide, gracious porches.
They offer the most pleasant dining experience, with their flagstone floors, black-and-white stripped awnings and views of the flower-filled garden.
White napery, long-stemmed crystal and floral nosegays complete the summery scene.


New Treatments Offered for Sufferers Of Sleep Disorders
BRIAN MARKS used to snore so loudly that he woke himself up several times every night.
"I never got a good night's sleep," Mr.
Marks said.
"I walked around constantly with black circles under my eyes."


Filly Wins at Yonkers
CR Kay Suzie became the first filly to win the Yonkers Trot in 39 years tonight, easily capturing the first leg of trotting's triple crown in a stakes-record time of 1 minute 56 seconds.
Driven by Rod Allen on a warm, breezy evening at Yonkers Raceway, CR Kay Suzie, an overwhelming favorite, had no trouble leaving from the difficult No. 8 post in the eight-horse race, bursting to the front of the pack by a length and a half at the quarter pole, and breezing uncontested the rest of the mile, 7 1/2 lengths ahead of Abundance, and 10 1/2 in front of Deliberate Speed.


Partition of Palistine
With the world's attention turned elsewhere, it has been easy to lose track of what the Israelis and Palestinians have been up to lately.
That is a mistake.
Because what they have been up to is weaving an agreement of immense importance.
It is an agreement to begin the partition of historic Palestine -- a division of the territory between the Jordan River and the Mediterranean Sea into two states, one Jewish and the other Arab.
When Israel agreed to turn over control of the Gaza Strip to Yasir Arafat nearly two years ago, it was getting rid of a problem, cutting off what Israelis thought of as a cancerous limb.
But the draft understanding announced last week between Israel and Mr.
Arafat is something different.
It involves Israel's ceding of control to Mr.
Arafat in four major West Bank Arab towns -- Jenin, Nablus, Tulkarm and Qalqilya -- as well as phased-in Palestinian control in three others -- Ramallah, Bethlehem and Hebron.


The Supper Club
There are six of us now -- women of the same generation, give or take a few years, whose lives are loosely bound by similar interests and a tenacious fondness for one another.
In the beginning there were only two, each of whom thought that the other should know her best friend.
The first menu consisted of recipes from small-town American women's-club cookbooks (for which the member who grew up abroad was assigned the deviled eggs).
Since then, we've convened on an irregular basis for potluck suppers and conversation about topics of urgent interest: work, for example, and marriage, real estate, E-mail, clothes.
The focus of the evening, however, is invariably the food -- not so much the cooking as the planning and finally, enthusiastically, the eating.
From time to time, there's a motion to introduce boyfriends and husbands to the proceedings, but it is always tabled, not because we couldn't speak so freely in their presence but because we couldn't eat so freely.


Tonilomawacana? How Is That Pronounced?
To The Editor:
Tom Wolfe may think himself clever in coining the term WeVar ("Pioneers Head West, Far West, Past Varick," May 14), and realtors may drool over the potential profits generated in a district they would love to call the South Village, but those of us who live west of Varick between Houston and Canal Streets cling to a more ancient, if highly questionable, heritage.


Kristen Creaven, Joseph Ferrarese
Kristen Marisa Creaven, the daughter of Carole and John Creaven of New York, was married yesterday to Joseph Louis Ferrarese, a son of Eileen and Louis Ferrarese of Demarest, N.J.
Msgr.
Robert L. Stern, a cousin of the bride, performed the ceremony at the Church of St.
Ignatius Loyola in New York.
Mrs.
Ferrarese, 27, is a registered nurse at the Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center in New York.
She graduated from the College of New Rochelle.


Nelson's Running Game Means New Roles for Everyone
The business of finding a suitable replacement for Pat Riley is over, enabling the Knicks to move on to other matters of personnel.
As to how long the mercurial John Starks can keep misfiring until being seated and how many minutes 33-year-old Derek Harper can play without water, they will soon learn.
Their new taskmaster, Don Nelson, has taken several videotapes with him to Lithuania (where he is visiting family) with the notion of learning which Knicks have been naughty, which have been nice and which can be put on the trading block immediately.


LOOKING FOR A DONOR TO CALL DAD
Donor insemination is no longer the only option.
Centers that treat infertile couples have aggressive programs for severe male infertility.
These treatments include intracytoplasmic single-sperm injection (ICSI) into individual eggs, followed by intrauterine transfer of successful embryos.
At our facility, ICSI has been taken a step further, when male ejaculate shows virtually no sperm.
A simple surgical procedure is used to obtain selected, viable sperm directly from the testes for in vitro fertilization of individual eggs in a laboratory setting.
Our first such such patient's baby -- a healthy boy -- was born last year.
MATAN YEMINI, M.D.
ARIE BIRKENFELD, M.D.
Irvington, N.J.


BEHIND THE WHEEL/Acura NSX-T; Refreshment for Two In a Pop-Top Container
IT goes without saying that exotic cars require money.
But the four-wheeled fantasies of the world also call for something more.
They require time.
When you drive such a beastie, there is no short stop for gas, no drop-it-and-run at the parking garage.
Whatever the destination, you have to allot time to talk about The Car.


New &amp; Noteworthy Paperbacks
MY IDEA OF FUN: A Cautionary Tale By Will Self.
Vintage International, $12.
Is Ian Wharton a murderer -- or about to become one?
Did he really make a pact with the Devil incarnate?
These are among the questions raised by the hallucinatory story Ian tells.
Last year our reviewer, George Stade, praised this novel "for intelligence and ambition, for inventiveness, comedy, heartbreak and ferocity."


Privatization Is Faulted For Accidents in Russia
Negligence, poor maintenance of equipment and lax safety standards are the main reasons for a rise in air and train crashes in Russia last year, according to a senior official.
At a news conference in Moscow, Aleksandr Godunko, in charge of monitoring violations of transport laws at the Russian Prosecutor's office, said that the number of air and train accidents was up 40 percent from 1993.


It's Sign One, Draft One For the Busy Islanders
The Islanders signed one top draft choice and didn't trade another, although they could have.
With forward Todd Bertuzzi safely under contract and defenseman Wade Redden in their web, they probably are a better team now than they were before today's National Hockey League draft.
But although they also had two picks in the second round, the busy Long Island team didn't make the big deal at the annual gathering of executives and future stars at Northlands Coliseum.


Alice L. Hanson, Christopher Kopac
Alice Lloyd Hanson, a daughter of Mrs.
John L. Macdonald 4th of Watch Hill, R.I., and John L. Hanson of State College, Pa., was married yesterday to Christopher Paul Kopac, the son of Cecelia A. Bender and Paul L. Kopac, both of Hollidaysburg, Pa.
The Rev.
April Greenwood, an Episcopal priest, performed the ceremony at St.
George's School Chapel in Newport, R.I.
Mrs.
Kopac is to begin her senior year at Bucknell University in the fall.
Her father is a trust investment officer at Mellon Bank Central in State College.


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
ARTISTIC WHO'S WHO
Some exceptional paintings that are rarely removed from the National Arts Club in Manhattan may be seen at the Florence Griswold Museum in Old Lyme through Sept. 3.
Titled "A Noble Tradition: American Painting from the National Arts Club," the exhibition contains some 35 pictures, mostly portraits and figures by a Who's Who of late 19th- and early 20th-century American artists.
They include Robert Henri, Charles Hawthorne, Colin Campbell Cooper, Harry Willson Watrous, Wayman Adams and William MacGregor.
Several others, including Robert Vonnoh, Frank Bicknell, Oscar Fehrer and Harry Hoffman, were members of the Old Lyme Art Colony, which maintained close ties to the National Arts Club.


Costly Pullout in Bosnia Looms Unless U.N. Can Prove Effective
The United Nations force in Bosnia has only a few weeks left to prove its effectiveness before a costly and dangerous NATO withdrawal of the United Nations soldiers -- involving as many as 25,000 American ground troops -- is almost certain to begin, officials on both sides of the Atlantic say.
Both President Clinton and allied European leaders are making new efforts to support the embattled peacekeeping force and insist that they have not given up hope.


A Shipyard Legend Named Luders
LONG before Interstate 95 paved its way eastward, Long Island Sound served as a nautical highway that ran 100 uncrowded miles from Throgs Neck to Plum Gut.
Shipyards were plentiful from Clason Point in the Bronx to Greenport, L.I., and one that had a great run was the Luders Marine Construction Company in Stamford Harbor.


K. G. Kirkpatrick, Daniel MacGowan
Kathy Gail Kirkpatrick, a daughter of Oran G. Kirkpatrick Jr. of Rye, N.Y., and the late Patricia G. Kirkpatrick, was married yesterday to Dr.
Daniel James Lysaght MacGowan, the son of Helen and Brian F. MacGowan of Stillorgan, Ireland.
The Rev.
Peter M. Larsen performed the Episcopal ceremony at St.
Andrew's Dune Church in Southampton, L.I.
Mrs.
MacGowan, 33, is an assistant vice president and senior financial consultant in the private client group at Merrill Lynch &amp; Company in New York.
She graduated from Colgate University.
The bride is a member of the New Lab group of the Ensemble Studio Theater in New York.
Her father retired as the director of productivity for the General Foods Corporation in White Plains.
The bride is a stepdaughter of Maureen D. Kirkpatrick.


Family Pictures
"SOUNDER" (1972), about black sharecroppers in Depression-era Louisiana, has grit and heart.
The characters' plight - and their love - are superbly evoked by Paul Winfield as a father jailed for stealing, Cicely Tyson as his wife, Kevin Hooks (right, in photo with Tyson) and Carmen Mathews.
Martin Ritt's direction and Lonnie Elder III's adaption of the William H. Armstrong novel shape the drama.
Taj Mahal's spare score sets the mood.
The faces do the rest.
WEDNESDAY at 2 P.M. on DISNEY.
Howard Thompson


LOOKING FOR A DONOR TO CALL DAD
I was a sperm donor in medical school ("Looking for a Donor to Call Dad," by Peggy Orenstein, June 18).
Beyond the money, I thought I was helping infertile couples have their own children, not mine.
If one of "my" kids showed up at my home, he or she would be quickly shown the door (with a subsequent restraining order, if necessary).
These people need to understand that they have parents, the ones who raised them.
The idea of looking for the "donor dad" is an insult to the real parents (Remember "The Wizard of Oz"? There's no place like home? I won't look any further than my own backyard?) In short, grow up and deal with it.
For obvious reasons, NAME WITHHELD


'The Tempest' At Boscobel
THE TEMPEST," eternally magical and endlessly mesmerizing, also happens to be the Shakespearean play of the moment. This year's opening production by the Hudson Valley Shakespeare Festival in the tent theater at the Boscobel Restoration here joins current stagings of Shakespeare's phantasmagoric exit play by Yale University's summer cabaret in New Haven and the New York Shakespeare Festival's Delacorte Theater in Central Park.
Ever the inspiration for innovation, including one-man shows with puppets, miniature sculptures, masks and marionettes, as well as operatic and balletic adaptations, "The Tempest" has the added lure of being a comedy to some, a tragedy to others.
Its mythical enchanted settings, with plots and counterplots that shake the earth, make possible limitless interpretations of big themes, from the mundane (power, revenge and all manner of conspiracies) to the sublime (forgiveness, redemption through art, the triumph of virtue over vengeance, the winning of good in a world of duplicity.)


The Camera As Culprit? Look Again
LIKE A REFORMED DRUNK WHO DECIDES THAT only prohibition can save sinners like himself, Don Hewitt has lately been proselytizing against television in the courtroom, or in certain courtrooms.
On the "Today" show, on CNBC, on "Crossfire" and on the Op-Ed page of The New York Times, the godfather of "60 Minutes" has argued that the camera is not only more powerful than the pen but also too powerful for the public good when it focuses on trials, or at least murder trials, or at least the O. J. Simpson murder trial.
Mr.
Hewitt's reaction to the Simpson spectacle is sounder than his prescription.
In his Op-Ed piece, he resorted to rhetorical questions, those shaky substitutes for argument: "Would freedom of the press suffer if there were no camera?" "Where is it written that the public has a right to know?" Peculiar questions coming from a journalist, and uncompelling ones.


. . . And an Old Tune: Men Look, Women Display
THE CENTER RING OF THE international art circus known as the Venice Biennale is the ambitious exhibition about the human body organized by Jean Clair, commissioner of the Biennale and director of the Picasso Museum in Paris.
This exhibition, called "Identity and Alterity: A Short History of the Human Body and Face From 1895 to the Present," has many things going for it.
It brings together a century's worth of paintings, sculptures, photographs and drawings by artists great, unknown and in some instances undeserving, juxtaposing them with the often sensational visual byproducts of science and pseudo-science.


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
BLACK HERITAGE
The Sixth Annual African-American Heritage Celebration, which has attracted crowds of 5,500 to 8,000 each year, is scheduled next Saturday and Sunday at Trevor Park in Yonkers.
The festivities begin at 1 P.M.
Saturday, but the main event that day, a concert by Force MD, is scheduled for 8 P.M.
Most other major events are set for Sunday.
A parade down Riverdale and Warburton Avenues will step off from Ceratto Park at 1 P.M., led by the grand marshal, Robert Beane, and honorary grand marshals, Roy L. Lawson and Iris Rowe.
The parade will disperse at Trevor Park around 2, when a steady stream of entertainment will begin, provided by Force MD, the Jackie Robinson Steppers, Bokandeye Africa Dancers and the Westchester Invaders.
Ethnic foods and crafts from Africa will be for sale throughout the afternoon at booths.
Three outstanding teen-agers -- Kelly Ali, Quanda Meakeens and Jason Price -- will receive awards at 2 P.M. for extra-curricular activities and essays on "Voting: Our Right, Our Responsibility."
Admission is free, and more information may be obtained by calling 963-0640. 'TEMPEST' TEMPTATION
Westchester high school students are invited to brush up their Shakespeare at a theater party given by the Hudson Valley Shakespeare Festival and Boscobel in Garrison-on-Hudson, where the acting company is in residence.
Sensitive to the bland reception that Shakespeare often receives among the young, festival staff members and students organized the event, titled "If Music Be the Food of Love -- Rock On, Baby," to take place Wednesday from 6 to 11 P.M.
For $25 each, students and any parents who choose to take part will dine and dance, attend a performance of "The Tempest" and conclude with dessert during a reception with the cast.
The party was conceived by a committee of students from Beacon, Carmel, Hackley, Haldane, Roy C. Ketchum and Lakeland High Schools.
To tempt even more young people to Shakespeare, student discount tickets, for $5, are offered for a performance of "The Tempest" on July 19 and for "Two Gentlemen of Verona" on Aug. 2, 9 and 16.
Accompanying adults will be admitted for $10.
For more information, directions or reservations, the box office number is 265-9575.
EVENING OF SONG
Patty Larkin, singer-songwriter from Cape Cod and recording artist for Windham Hill-High Street Records, will appear Friday evening at 7 at 7 Willow Street in Port Chester.
Further information is available by calling 939-1729.
Tickets, which cost $13 in advance, $15 on the day of the show, may be ordered from the same number or through Ticketmaster.
LETTING THE PAINT FALL
Paul Seckel's acrylic paintings, on view from Wednesday through July 20 at the Wildcliff Center for the Arts in New Rochelle, follow a current trend in art toward letting accidents happen.
A native of Germany, Mr.
Seckel was trained at Central School of Arts in London and at Yale University, where he received his master's degree in fine art.
He has done advertising art, cartoons, lithographs and conventional paintings.
In his current work, he has opted for speed, spontaneity and letting the paint drip, smear or apply itself to the canvas.
Sometimes a theme or subject is suggested by what is happening on the canvas, he says, and sometimes he approaches the easel with a theme in mind.
The center is at 44 Wildcliff Road, where a reception for the artist will be held on Saturday from 3 to 5 P.M.
The information number is 235-4459.
BUGS IN THE GARDEN
Children and adults will be amused and intrigued by the 12-foot- high, 25-foot-long ant, and a similarly enormous dragonfly, praying mantis and spider in its 15-by-20-foot web, among other outsized insects on display at the New York Botanical Garden in the Bronx.
Constructed by Dave Rogers, an artist with an affinity for dinosaurs, they are made from Eastern red cedar, black locust and golden willow trees, green saplings, dried branches, roots, vines and bark, and they have been positioned along tree-lined paths or set on hillocks of grass, where they will remain through Oct. 2.
They are part of an Insect Expedition, in progress at the garden through the summer, including a working beehive, butterfly tours, workshops and educational programs.
Hours are Tuesdays through Sundays from 10 A.M. to 6 P.M.
Admission is $3, $1 for students, children and people 65 and older.
Children under 6 are admitted free.
The garden is at 200th Street and Southern Boulevard.
For more information or directions, the number is (718) 817-8700.
CAPTURING NATURE
A landscape painting class for beginners will be given next Saturday and repeated on Aug. 12, both at 2 P.M., at Lenoir Preserve, the wildlife sanctuary in Yonkers.
The workshop, sponsored by the Westchester County Department of Parks, Recreation and Conservation, will be led by Michael Teator, an artist and instructor of traditional and wet-on-wet techniques.
A fee of $30 for each day covers instruction and the use of materials.
Finished paintings will be taken home, but brushes and paints will not.
The number for registration, directions or more information is 968-5851.
NO LANGUAGE BARRIER
Hungarian may be a difficult language to learn, but Hungarian music has universal appeal, as Papai Erika and Sziki Karoly will demonstrate in a performance this evening from 7 to 9 at the Pelham Art Center.
For the last four summers, this duo has come to the United States with a program of songs, poetry and vignettes of comedy and drama that define current social and political trends in Hungary.
The center is at 155 Fifth Avenue in Pelham.
Tickets cost $10.
The information number is 738-2525.
THAT OPERATIC CLOWN
A fully staged and costumed performance of Leoncavallo's "Pagliacci" will be presented by Opera Mobile this evening at 7 P.M. in Schultze Park off Scarsdale Lane in Yonkers.
Admission is free, and audience members should bring seating.
The work's familiar arias -- and its story rife with jealousy, illicit love, revenge and murder in two relatively short acts -- makes it a rousing introduction to opera, says Arlene Saunders, founder of the troupe and director of its productions.
She heads the opera department at New York University and says that she is committed to bringing opera to young people and others who cannot afford a ticket to the Met.
The number for directions or more information is 377-6450. ELEANOR CHARLES


Andrea K. Jewell, James D. Czysz
Dr.
Andrea Karen Jewell, the daughter of Esther and Jerald J. Jewell of Wantagh, L.I., is to be married today to Dr.
James David Czysz, a son of the late Ruth and John F. Czysz.
Rabbi Robert Raab is to perform the ceremony at the Harrison House in Glen Cove, L.I.
Dr.
Jewell, 29, will be keeping her name.
She graduated from Cornell University and received a doctorate in clinical psychology from the University of Denver.
Her father, who retired last year as the director of health and physical education for the Levittown (L.I.) School District, is an adjunct professor of health and physical education at Hofstra University.
Her mother teaches English at Mineola (L.I.) High School.


INSIDE
INVESTING IT /Page 5  How one couple in suburban Chicago, recent parents of triplets, are coping with a "scary" financial future.
By Patrice Duggan Samuels.
INVESTING IT /Page 5  In all the debate about a flat tax, one issue has been largely overlooked: its effect on retirement benefits.
By David Cay Johnston.
SPENDING IT /Page 8  Inheritance -- almost as hard to discuss with your parents as sex.
By Jane Birnbaum.
VOICES /Page 12  Balancing corporate imperatives and environmental protection.
By R. Darryl Banks.


A Shore Where the Crowds Aren't (Don't Forget the Insect Repellent)
At the end of State Highway 55 just south of Millville, shore traffic makes a left turn and heads east for the Atlantic Ocean, even though some of New Jersey's most unspoiled coastline lies just a few miles to the south.
For many beachgoers, the turnoff may not be a bad idea.
The Delaware Bay shore, where insect repellent proves far more useful than coconut oil, is not for the faint of heart.
The beach towns shown on road maps are mostly storm-strewn ruins with only a few buildings, and the beaches themselves are frequently nowhere to be found, especially when the tide comes in.
At the end of the road, there might be a narrow strip of sand or rock or mucky sod topped with deep green marsh grass.


C. B. Greenfield, Andrew E. Kaplan
Chaviva Beth Greenfield, the daughter of Eudice and Seymour Greenfield of Skokie, Ill., is to be married today to Andrew Ezra Kaplan, a son of Lily and Joseph Kaplan of New York.
Dr.
Jacob J. Schacter, a rabbi, is to perform the ceremony at the Palmer House Hotel in Chicago.
The bride, 29, is an administrative assistant at Weinreb Management, a real estate management company in New York.
She graduated from Yeshiva University.
Her father is a research biochemist in the product development division of Abbott Laboratories, a pharmaceutical company in North Chicago.
Her mother is the principal of the Lavin Educational Center, a Jewish elementary school in Buffalo Grove, Ill.


Life on the Loaf
To the Editor:
I am one of those middle-aged paying guests who attend Bread Loaf, as mentioned in Meghan Daum's essay.


Julie C. Weiser, Jeffrey Shlefstein
Julie Caroline Weiser, a daughter of Sylvia and Herbert Weiser of Manhasset Hills, L.I., was married on Thursday to Jeffrey Alan Shlefstein, a son of Marsha and Arthur Shlefstein of Brooklyn.
Rabbi Barry Dov Schwartz officiated at the Woodbury (L.I.) Jewish Center.
Mrs.
Weiser-Shlefstein, 22, graduated magna cum laude from City College.
In the fall she will be a third-year medical student at the Mount Sinai School of Medicine.


July 2-8; Handmade in Russia, Nuclear Disarmament


A Director Whose Stagecoach Came In
IN the long film-making future that P.J.
Pesce envisioned for himself, someday - when he was 40, 50 or 60 years old - he would get the chance to make a western, a genre he has loved since childhood.
Life doesn't always go according to plan. Mr. Pesce is 31.


July 2-8; E-Mail
The Week in Review's electronic mail address is review@nytimes.com


California Spectacular: The Snow Melt
A record Sierra snow pack is melting into shows of water in California, providing exceptional vistas for travelers, thrills for river rafters and impassable roads.
"There are a lot of places in the Sierra this year where the snow will never go away," said Dave Hart, coordinator of California's Cooperative Snow Survey, a division of the California Department of Water Resources.
Mr.
Hart called this year's accumulation -- more than twice as much as usual in some places -- one of the four biggest since 1930.


Andrea H. Nelson, Sean L. Abbott
Andrea Harris Nelson, the daughter of Suzanne Knickerbocker Colt of New York and John Harris Nelson of Manchester-by-the-Sea, Mass., was married yesterday to Sean Lawrence Abbott, a son of Mary M. Abbott and John L. Abbott of Mansfield Center, Conn.
The Rev.
Bruce Anderson performed the ceremony at the Congregational Church of Christ in Norfolk, Conn.
Mrs.
Abbott, 30, is the associate marketing manager for finance books at John Wiley &amp; Sons, the publishing company in New York.
She graduated magna cum laude form Columbia University and received an M.B.A. from New York University.
Her father, now retired, was a private investor.
Her mother is the deputy chief of the Family Court Division of the New York City Law Department.


A Time to Plant And Nab Worms
Start a fall crop of broccoli and Chinese cabbage, beets and carrots.
Plant heat-resistant lettuce, like Apollo, Buttercrunch and Esmeralda.
If you have trouble getting seeds, a good source is Cook's Garden, P.O.
Box 535, Londonderry, Vt. 05148.
Plant a few hills of summer squash and a few cucumber seeds.
One cuke plant is plenty, unless you are a pickle addict.
Plant another row of beans and a fall crop of basil.
Harvest the basil planted in the spring, and above all, don't let it flower. (The leaves will get a harsh resiny taste.) If you cut it back now and give it a dose of fish emulsion, it will make new leaves.


Ms. Hunter And Mr. Roman
Annemarie Hunter, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
James C. Hunter of Stamford, Conn., was married there yesterday to Paul-Peter Roman, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Dolf Roman of Limmen, the Netherlands.
Msgr.
Norman A. Methe performed the ceremony at the Church of the Holy Spirit.
Mrs.
Roman, 29, is a divisional sales manager at Lord &amp; Taylor in Stamford.
She graduated from the University of Florida.
Her father retired as an executive vice president of Saatchi &amp; Saatchi Advertising Worldwide in New York.
Her mother, Ethelmarie Hunter, retired as the executive director of the Volunteer Center, a referral agency in Stamford.


July 2-8; Finally, the Prosecution Rests
Spectators, reporters and even the defendant seemed to nod off periodically during the prosecution's 92-day case in People v.
O.
J.
Simpson.
But last week, it was the prosecution that finally rested.
Nine books and nine prosecutors, 10 dismissed jurors and 11 defense lawyers into the Simpson saga, Deputy District Attorney Marcia Clark announced Thursday that the people's case was complete.
Their case ended where much of it had taken place: under a microscope -- this time examining hairs, fibers and minute shreds of cloth.
Those items, prosecutors believe, not only provide further proof that Mr.
Simpson murdered Nicole Brown Simpson and Ronald L. Goldman but reveal the order and manner in which he murdered them.


Family Pictures
"SOUNDER" (1972), about black sharecroppers in Depression-era Louisiana, has grit and heart.
The characters' plight - and their love - are superbly evoked by Paul Winfield as a father jailed for stealing, Cicely Tyson as his wife, Kevin Hooks (right, in photo with Tyson) and Carmen Mathews.
Martin Ritt's direction and Lonnie Elder III's adaption of the William H. Armstrong novel shape the drama.
Taj Mahal's spare score sets the mood.
The faces do the rest.
WEDNESDAY at 2 P.M. on DISNEY.
Howard Thompson


Braving Blisters and Fatigue in a 756-Mile Race
Driving by car from Chicago to New York would be faster, but 18 paddlers from 5 countries think that traveling by kayak makes more sense.
They are athletes with a mission to traverse seven states by way of four Great Lakes, eight rivers, a lengthy canal and two days of open ocean.


Mother Who Killed: Loss, Betrayal and a Search for a Fairy Tale Life
Her lawyers are expected to argue that Susan Smith has been the victim of destructive relationships and influences since she was born, swept helplessly through life like a cork down a quick-moving creek.
The prosecution is expected to paint her as a scheming monster who lied to her hometown and the entire world for nine days, blaming a phantom carjacker for the disappearance of her sons before confessing that she had drowned the two little boys in a dark lake.


UNTOLD WAR STORIES
James Ivory's supplement to the untold war story of balloon bombs riding the jet stream from Japan to the Pacific Northwest is off by several years (Letters, June 11).
More than 9,000 balloon bombs, the paper casings made by school children from mulberry tree pulp, under military supervision, were launched between November 1944 and April 1945.
A few hundred made it across, some as far east as Ontario and Michigan.
As the Germans were surrendering on May 5, 1945, a picnicking party of a minister, his wife and five children discovered an inert balloon in the quiet Oregon woods near Lakeview.
The Rev.
Archie Mitchell shouted, too late, "Don't touch it!" The explosion killed Mrs.
Mitchell and the children.


Two More Mexicans Are Freed In Assassination of Candidate
A former state police officer and his son were freed from Mexico's maximum-security prison early today after a judge dismissed charges that they helped assassinate the governing party's presidential candidate, Luis Donaldo Colosio.
The exoneration of the two men, Vicente Mayoral Valenzuela and his elder son, Rodolfo Mayoral Esquer, left the authorities holding only one of the five suspects they originally had charged with conspiring to kill Mr.
Colosio as he left a campaign rally in the northern city of Tijuana on March 23, 1994.


A Council Member's Dissent Should Not Cost Her Access
To The Editor:
"The Politics of a No Vote" (June 25) left me with the impression that as one of Ronnie Eldridge's constituents, I should object to her stands because they give my district less clout in the City Council.
On the contrary, I do not think that automatically following the directions of the Council Speaker is what I elected Ms.
Eldridge to do.
I want a Council member who believes that there should be open discussion in the Council Chamber and that Council members should have access to the documents they are being asked to vote on.
In both the state and city legislatures, there is far too little opportunity for the people's elected representatives to debate the merits of the bills before them.


Amy B. Jacobson, Jonathan Goldstein
Amy Beth Jacobson, the daughter of Arlene and Richard Jacobson of Plainview, L.I., is to be married today to Jonathan Howard Goldstein, a son of Michael and Elaine Goldstein of Roslyn Heights, L.I.
Rabbi Aaron Petuchowski is to officiate at the Temple Beth Sholom in Roslyn, L.I.
The bride, 25, and the bridegroom, 26, graduated from Washington University in St.
Louis.
The bride received a master's degree in education from Columbia University.
In the fall, she is to begin teaching the third grade at the Lakeville Elementary School in Great Neck, L.I.
Her father is the director of corporate taxes at Avis Inc. in Garden City, L.I.


Another Prescription Option
To the Editor:
As a former retail pharmacy owner I appreciated the information in your article.
I'd like to point out, however, that under the Federal Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act, pharmacies are required to council patients on the use, dosage, side effects, allergies, and care of medications.


And Finally, a Word From Almost Everyone
The main thing the New Jersey Constitution absolutely requires the Legislature to do is to pass the budget on schedule, and that task has now been accomplished.
Now the members are scattered to their home districts and to their regular jobs for the summer, and the State House has begun to slip into its comfortable summer torpor.
The building crew has gone around turning off lights that once blazed day and night, and standards of dress have decayed so seriously that even some Republican staff workers are wearing chinos to work.
So with hard news on holiday, this might be a good time to confess that there were hundreds, nay, thousands of items of other news that did not get reported during the session, that was ignored or turned into jotting paper or simply swept up by someone tired of finding it underfoot.
We know it is news, becuase it says so, right there at the top of the page: "Assembly Democrats News Release," for example, and "Senate Republican News," and "Office of the Governor News Release," and so on.


Mother and 2 Girls Killed In Fire in a Queens House
A suspicious early morning blaze ripped through what the police described as an illegal boarding house in Queens yesterday, killing a mother and her two children, sending neighbors scrambling to rescue another woman and alarming neighbors who thought their own houses were on fire.
Flames roared through the front of the two-story frame house, at 104-35 134th Street, in Richmond Hill, at 5:23 A.M., engulfing the porch with so much fire that it looked like the sun setting, neighbors said.


There's No Shying From Stocks in Five Retirement Portfolios
TAKING some profits after a spectacular first half in the markets is tempting.
But for long-term holdings, like retirement money, a little fine-tuning is as far as most investment advisers will go.
Only two of the five advisers who created hypothetical retirement portfolios two years ago for The New York Times are taking any profits at midyear.
And even they are plowing money into areas of the stock market that have languished.


Karin Schutjer, Benjamin L. Alpers
Dr.
Karin Lynn Schutjer, a daughter of Patricia M. Schutjer and the Rev.
Clifford D. Schutjer of Mansfield, Ohio, was married last evening to Dr.
Benjamin Leontief Alpers, a son of Dr.
Svetlana L. Alpers and Dr.
Paul J. Alpers, both of Berkeley, Calif.
The bride's father, the senior minister at the First Congregational Church of Mansfield, performed the ceremony at the Holly Hedge Estate, an inn in Solebury, Pa.
Dr.
Schutjer, who is 29 and is keeping her name, graduated summa cum laude from Yale University and received a Ph.D. in Germanic languages and literatures from Princeton University.
In August, she is to become an assistant professor of German at the University of Missouri in Columbia.
Her mother is an assistant professor of English at Ashland (Ohio) University.


ON THE TOWNS
MUSIC ALBERT MUSIC HALL The Pinelands Cultural Society presents "Sounds of the Jersey Pines," a series of Saturday night concerts through the end of the year.
The program features live presentations of bluegrass, country and Pinelands music.
Show time, 8 P.M.
Admission: $4, or $1 for children under 12. 139 Wells Mill Road (Route 532), Waretown. (609) 971-1593.
ALLAN P. KIRBY ARTS CENTER The 1995 Opera Festival of New Jersey continues.
"Turn of the Screw." Today at 3 P.M., Thursday at 8 P.M. and Saturday at 8 P.M.
"Rigoletto." Friday at 8 P.M.
"Elixir of Love." Next Sunday at 3 P.M.
Tickets: $18-$135.
The Lawrenceville School, Route 26 in Lawrenceville. (609) 936-1500.
BRIDGETON'S RIVERFRONT In a series of free Sunday night concerts, Walter Wagner and the Serenaders perform today at 7 P.M.
The Pitman Hobo Band plays next Sunday at 7 P.M.
Routes 49 and 77 in Bridgeton. (609) 451-9208.
DUKE ISLAND PARK, BRIDGEWATER The Somerset County Park Commission continues its free summer concert series with Johnny Youth and the Verdict.
Today at 7 P.M. (908) 722-1200, extension 221.
GARDEN STATE ARTS CENTER James Taylor with the Pittsburgh Symphony Pops and Marvin Hamlisch.
Thursday at 8:30 P.M.
Tickets: $25-$75.
Van Halen.
Saturday and next Sunday at 8 P.M.
Tickets: $26 and $35.
Exit 116 on the Garden State Parkway, Holmdel. (908) 888-5011.
FAIR LAWN SUMMER MUSIC FESTIVAL The Sunday evening concerts continue.
The Symphony Orchestra, conducted by Murray Colosimo, performs today at 8:30 P.M.
Saxophone and clarinet quartets perform music from Mozart to Glenn Miller next Sunday at 8:30 P.M.
Free, but bring your own chairs.
Memorial Park and Berdan Avenue, Fair Lawn. (201) 796-6746.
FLOOD'S HILL, MEADOWLAND PARK Arts in the Park presents John Gorka and Hugh Blumenfeld in the first of a series of four free summer concerts.
Wednesday at 7:30 P.M.
Ridgewood Road and Meadowbrook Lane, South Orange. (201) 378-7754.
KASSCHAU MEMORIAL SHELL The Ridgewood Village Band, conducted by Roger Guccione and Deborah Venezia, continues its free concerts throughout July.
Thursday at 8:30 P.M.
Veterans Field on North Maple Avenue, Ridgewood. (201) 670-3924.
MIDDLESEX COUNTY CONCERTS The Garden State Brass Sextet.
Next Sunday at 3 P.M.
Johnson Park, River Road in Piscataway.
Chris Pedersen and the Garden State Symphonic Band.
Next Sunday at 6 P.M.
Warren Park, Florida Grove Road in Woodbridge.
George Krauss Memorial Concert Band, conducted by Barbara Santoro.
Next Sunday at 7 P.M.
Spring Lake Park, Maple Park and South Plainfield. (908) 745-3936.
NEWARK MUSEUM The "Noontime Jazz in the Garden" series continues with Charged Particles featuring Caleb Hutslar, Mike Rak and Jon Krosnick.
Thursday at 12:30 P.M.
Free.
Through Aug. 10.
Dreyfuss Memorial Garden, 49 Washington Street, Newark. (201) 596-6550.
NEW JERSEY SYMPHONY ORCHESTRA Zdenek Macal, artistic director and conductor, leads the orchestra in "Amadeus Festival," a new summer series.
Friday at 8 P.M. at the Richardson Auditorium at Princeton University.
Saturday at 8 P.M. and next Sundat at 7 P.M. at Temple B'nai Jeshurun in Short Hills.
Tickets: $15-$35. (201) 624-8203.
PAPER MILL PLAYHOUSE In the summer concert series, the Glenn Miller Orchestra, directed by Larry O'Brien, will perform on Tuesday at 8 P.M.
Tickets: $25 and $30.
Brookside Drive, Millburn. (201) 379-3636, extension 2644.
RAMAPO COLLEGE The Minolta Summer Music Fest free Thursday night concerts continues with Jim Furgeson and a night of country music.
Thursday at 8 P.M.
The Bandshell, 505 Ramapo Valley Road.
Off Route 17 and 202 in Mahwah. (201) 529-7612.
CHOIR COLLEGE CONCERTS The Westminster Choir College Summer Concert Series.
Deborah Ford-Bigger, soprano, and Peter Wright, pianist, perform in a recital.
Next Sunday at 4 P.M.
Free.
Westminster Choir College of Rider University, Bristol Chapel, Hamilton Avenue and Walnut Lane, Princeton. (609) 921-2663.
RIVERSIDE GARDENS PARK, RED BANK Comcast Cablevision and the Borough of Red Bank continue their series of free Thursday outdoor jazz concerts with the Al Wright Unit.
Thursday at 7:30 P.M.
West Front Street in downtown Red Bank. (908) 851-8849.
RUTGERS ARTS CENTER The Rutgers Summerfest is in full swing.
The Ted Dunbar Quartet.
Today at 2 P.M.
Tickets: $16.
"Music of the 20th-Century." Tuesday at 8 P.M.
Tickets: $16.
Dance and Film.
Wednesday at 8 P.M.
Tickets: $18.
The World of Henry Purcell.
Thursday at 8 P.M.
Tickets: $16.
Shanghai String Quartet with Arnold Steinhardt on violin.
Friday at 8 P.M.
Tickets: $22.
The Rutgers Festival Orchestra, conducted by Neal Stulberg.
Saturday at 8 P.M.
Tickets: $22.
Ralph Bowen Quartet.
Next Sunday at 2 P.M.
Tickets: $16.
George Street at Route 18, New Brunswick. (908) 932-7511.
SOCLAIR BROOKS FARM In the Soclair Music Festival, the Colorado String Quartet performs the works of Haydn and Brahms.
Today at 4 P.M.
Tickets: $15, or $12 for students and the elderly. 19 Haytown Road, Lebanon. (908) 236-6476.
SOVEREL PARK, EAST ORANGE "Jazz at the Plaza" with Charles Earland and Tilva Donna Comerbach.
Tuesday at 6 P.M.
Free.
Springdale Avenue, East Orange. (201) 266-5147.
STOCKTON PERFORMING ARTS CENTER The Summer Jazz Festival kicks off with Tania Maria, a Latin jazz pianist.
Friday at 8 P.M.
Tickets: $20.
Jim Leeds Road, Pomona. (609) 652-4607.
SUMMERFEST '95 CONCERTS The Morris County Park Commission presents the Partners.
Today at 3 P.M.
Schooleys Mountain Park, West Springtown Road, Washington Township.
Libby Richman.
Wednesday at 6:30 P.M.
Mahlon Dickerson Reservation, Weldon Road, Jefferon Township.
Over the Edge.
Next Sunday at 3 P.M.
Silas Condict Park, Kinnelon Road, Kinnelon. (201) 326-7600.
SUMMER STARS MUSIC FESTIVAL Classical music with the Boehm Quintette, an oboe, flute, clarinet, bassoon and French horn ensemble.
Thursday at 8 P.M.
Tickets: $10.
The Great Auditorium, Pilgram Pathway, Ocean Grove. (908) 775-0035.
TENAFLY PUBLIC LIBRARY The Steamboat Stompers, with Betty Comora, vocalist, presents an outdoor Dixieland jazz concert.
Today at 3:30 P.M.
Free. 401 Tenafly Road, Tenafly. (201) 568-8680.
VILLAGERS THEATER The Garden State Opry, a monthly country music revue, presents the Fox Hill Bluegrass Band; Carol Selick and Robin Foss, country singers; Ed Krizni and Billy Phillips, singers and guitarists; Liz Klosowki, a country folk singer, and the Men's Quartet of the Somerset Community Baptist Church.
Saturday at 8 P.M.
Tickets: $7.50, or Somerset. (908) 274-2748.
WATCHUNG ARTS CENTER A concert with Derek Smith, jazz pianist.
Today at 2 P.M.
Grover Kemble, a guitarist, blends blues, jazz and original works in an "Emerging Artists Concert." Friday at 8 P.M.
Carrie Jackson, blues singer, performs Saturday at 8 P.M.
Tickets: $10. 18 Stirling Road, Watchung. (908) 753-0190.
WATERLOO VILLAGE CONCERTS "Afternoon Folk Music," with Gregg Cagno, Bill Kelly and the House of Cards, Margo Hennebach and the Amazing Incredibles.
Today at 1 P.M.
Druha Trava/Second Grass, a Czech pop and country group.
Saturday at 2 P.M.
Tickets: $8, or $7 for the elderly and $6 for children.
Joanne Shenandoah, a recording artist, presents traditional Iroquois songs and Indian folk ballads.
Next Sunday at 7:30 P.M.
Tickets: $10.
Waterloo Village, Stanhope. (201) 347-0900.
WOOD PARK, LEONIA The Players' Guild of Leonia presents "The Music Man." Thursday through next Sunday at 8:30 P.M.
Tickets: $12, or $11 for students and the elderly.
Wood Park, Leonia. (201) 947-9606.
THEATER BICKFORD THEATER, MORRIS MUSEUM In "Love Letters," a relationship is revealed through a lifetime of correspondence.
Today at 2 P.M.; Friday and Saturday at 8 P.M.; next Sunday at 2 P.M. and July 20-23.
Tickets: $17.50. 6 Normandy Heights Road, Morristown. (201) 538-0454.
BLACK RIVER PLAYHOUSE The Chester Theater Group presents "Nunsense II: The Second Coming," by Dan Goggin.
Starts Saturday.
Through Aug. 5.
Friday and Saturday at 8 P.M.
Tickets: $15.
Grove Street, Chester. (908) 879-7304.
COUNT BASIE THEATER Phoenix Productions presents "Hair." Friday and Saturday at 8 P.M. and July 22 and 23.
Tickets: $14 and $18. 99 Monmouth Street, Red Bank. (908) 747-0014.
COUNTY COLLEGE OF MORRIS "A Funny Thing Happened on the Way to the Forum." Thursday, Friday and Saturday at 8 P.M.
Through July 22.
Tickets: $10.
Dragonetti Auditorium, 214 Center Grove, Randolph. (201) 328-5225.
FOUNDATION THEATER "Nunsense." Today at 2 and 8 P.M.
"Sleuth," by Anthony Shaffer, begins next Wednesday.
Through Aug. 6.
Tickets: $15, or $13 for students and the elderly.
Burlington County College, Route 530, Pemberton. (609) 894-2138.
GUGGENHEIM SUMMER THEATER "I Hate Hamlet." Today at 7:30 P.M.
"Light Up the Sky," by Moss Hart.
Thursday, Friday and Saturday at 8:30 and Sunday at 7:30.
Through July 23.
Tickets: $17 or $15 for students and the elderly.
Monmouth University, West Long Branch. (908) 571-3475.
HUNTERDON COUNTY COURTHOUSE Century Productions presents "Lindbergh and Hauptmann: The Trial of the Century." Friday and Saturday at 8 P.M. and Sunday at 2 P.M.
Through Aug. 13.
Tickets: $17.
Main Street, Flemington. (908) 782-2610.
NEW JERSEY SHAKESPEARE FESTIVAL "Julius Caesar." Wednesday at 2 and 8 P.M., Thursday and Friday at 8 P.M., Saturday at 2 and 8 P.M. and next Sunday at 2 and 7 P.M.
Through July 22.
Tickets: $16 to $30.
Bowne Theater, Drew University, 36 Madison Avenue, Madison. (201) 408-5600.
PAPER MILL PLAYHOUSE "The Secret Garden," a musical by Marsha Norman and Lucy Simon, based on the novel by Frances Hodgson Burnett.
Wednesday and Friday at 8 P.M., Thursday at 2 and 8 P.M. and Saturday and Sunday at 3 and 8 P.M.
Through July 23.
Tickets: $29 to $44.
Brookside Drive, Millburn. (201) 376-4343.
RAMAPO COLLEGE The summer season of Shakespeare in the Garden continues with "Romeo and Juliet." Saturday and next Sunday at 6 P.M. and July 21-23 and 28-30.
Free, but bring your own chairs or blankets. 505 Ramapo Valley Road, Mahwah. (201) 529-7368.
RITZ THEATER "Oliver!," a musical.
Friday and Saturday at 8 P.M and Sunday at 2 P.M.
Through Aug. 5.
Tickets: $12 and $14. 915 White Horse Pike, Oaklyn. (609) 858-5230.
ROOSEVELT PARK AMPHITHEATER The Middlesex County Department of Parks and Recreation presents Plays-in-the-Park 1995.
"The Sound of Music." Starts Wednesday.
Through July 22.
All showtimes at 8:30 P.M.
No performances on Sundays.
Tickets: $3.
Edison. (609) 548-2884.
SOMERSET VALLEY PLAYHOUSE "You Can't Take It With You," by Moss Hart and George S. Kaufman, directed by Richard Dobrowolski.
Friday and Saturday at 8:30 P.M. and Sunday at 7 P.M.
Tickets: $10; $12 on Saturdays.
Through July 30.
Route 514 and Amwell Road, Hillsborough. (908) 369-7469.
THEATERFEST "On Golden Pond." Today at 3 and 8 P.M.
"A Chorus Line." Starts Wednesday.
Through July 30.
Tuesday at 8 P.M., Wednesday at 2 and 8 P.M., Thursday, Friday and Saturday at 8 P.M. and Sunday at 2 and 8 P.M.
Tickets: $23 and $25, or $12.50 for the elderly.
Montclair State University, Valley Road and Normal Avenue, Upper Montclair. (201) 655-5112.
TOWNSQUARE PLAYHOUSE The Townsquare Players present "Snow White Goes West," a musical.
Today at 3 P.M.
Tickets: $12, or $9 for students and the elderly.
Church and Wall Streets, Rockaway. (201) 361-5235.
WASHINGTON CROSSING STATE PARK The Open Air Theater series continues with "Camelot" by the Princeton Opera Association.
Wednesday through Saturday at 8:30 P.M.
Tickets: $6.50 on Wednesday and Thursday; $7.50 on Friday and Saturday.
"Nunsense" begins July 20.
Hopewell Township, Mercer County. (609) 737-1826.
WEISS ARTS CENTER Summerfun Theater presents "I'll Be Back Before Midnight," by Peter Colley.
Tuesday and Wednesday at 8 P.M., Thursday at 2 and 8 P.M. and Friday and Saturday at 8 P.M.
Tickets: $10-$22.
"The Sisters Rosensweig" begins July 18.
Lloyd Road off Bloomfield Avenue, Montclair. (201) 256-0576.
MUSEUMS AND GALLERIES ART CENTER OF NORTHERN NEW JERSEY Salute to Women in the Arts presents "Summerfest V," an annual juried members show.
Starts today with a reception from 2 to 4 P.M.
Through July 30.
Monday through Friday, 10 A.M. to 5:30 P.M., and Saturday, 10 A.M. to 3 P.M.
The Marcella Geltman Gallery. 250 Center Street, New Milford. (201) 599-2992.
ART FORMS Photography by Jeff Martin, Vincent Servbin, Carter Farmer, Joseph Paduano and others.
Through July 29.
Tuesday through Friday, 10 A.M. to 6 P.M., and Saturday, 10 A.M. to 5 P.M. 16 Monmouth Street, Red Bank. (908) 530-4330.
ART MUSEUM, PRINCETON UNIVERSITY "Collaborative Landscape Photographs by Laura McPhee, Class of 1980, and Virginia Beahan," an exhibition of 20 color photographs.
Through Aug. 20.
Free.
Tuesday through Saturday, 10 A.M. to 5 P.M., and Sunday, 1 to 5 P.M.
Princeton. (609) 258-3788.
BERGEN MUSEUM OF ART AND SCIENCE "Edward Walsh Sculpture," nine abstract and traditional sculptures created from stainless steel, granite and bronze.
Through next Monday.
"John Schettino: Drawings and Paintings," through July 30.
"Photographic Drawings" by David Horton.
Through July 30.
Tuesday through Saturday, 9:30 A.M. to 4:30 P.M.; Sunday, 1 to 5 P.M.
Suggested admission: adults, $2.50; children, $1. 327 East Ridgewood Avenue, Paramus. (201) 265-1248.
BERLEX LABORATORIES GALLERY "Moments in Time," original photographs by Janet Engeman and Dwight Hiscano.
Monday and Friday, 9 A.M. to 5 P.M.; Tuesday through Thursday, 9 A.M. to 6 P.M., and Saturday, 9:30 to 5 P.M.
Through Aug. 10. 300 Fairfield Road, Wayne. (201) 540-1195.
BLACKWELL STREET CENTER FOR THE ARTS "Summer Daze," an exhibition of works by all members of the center.
Through Aug. 20.
Thursday through Sunday, noon to 4 P.M. 32-34 West Blackwell Street, Dover. (201) 328-9628.
BRODSKY GALLERY, CHAUNCEY CONFERENCE CENTER Color photographs taken from around the world by Nanci Ori.
Through July 28.
Monday through Friday, 9 A.M. to 9 P.M.
Rosedale Road, Princeton. (609) 921-3600.
CS SCHULTE GALLERIES "Duet: Dan Christensen -- 30 Years of Paintings; Elaine Grove -- Recent Sculpture." Tuesday through Friday, 10 A.M. to 5 P.M. 340 Millburn Avenue, Millburn. (201) 376-6900.
EVERHART GALLERY "Summer Group Show" with architectural renderings by Lauren V. Walling and photographs by Bill Vandever.
Starts Saturday with a reception from 2 to 5 P.M.
Though Aug. 30.
Tuesday through Saturday, 11 A.M. to 6 P.M. 117 South Maple Avenue, Basking Ridge. (908) 221-9007.
GALLERY AT GENERAL PUBLIC UTILITIES Color photographs by H. Lisa Solon and sculptures and paintings by David A. Angelini.
Through July 30.
Free.
Monday through Friday, 8:30 A.M. to 5 P.M. 100 Interpace Parkway, Parsippany. (201) 263-6684.
GUILD OF CREATIVE ART Third Annual Juried Ooen State Show.
Starts today with a reception from 3 to 5 P.M.
Through July 28.
Tuesday through Saturday, noon to 4:30 P.M. 620 Broad Street, Route 35, Shrewsbury. (908) 741-1441.
HUNTERDON ART CENTER "NYC Underground," 17 oil canvas paintings of New York City's subway system and tunnels by Alexandra Dell'amore.
Through Aug. 27.
Tuesday through Sunday, 11 A.M. to 5 P.M. 7 Lower Center Street, Clinton. (908) 735-8415.
JAZZ 88 GALLERY Paintings and collages by Amy Kool and photographs by Cynthia Carris with text by Jose Luis Alonso.
Monday through Friday, 10 A.M. to 4 P.M.
Through July 23. 54 Park Place, Newark. (201) 624-8880.
JERSEY CITY MUSEUM "Albizu Lives," a visual commemoration.
Through Sept. 16.
"The Nation Is Its People: Body and Soul of Lolita Lebron." Through Aug. 18.
"Joan Fine: Wall Reliefs." Through Aug. 18.
Tuesday, Thursday, Friday, 10:30 A.M. to 5 P.M. and Wednesday, 10:30 A.M. to 8 P.M. 472 Jersey Avenue, Jersey City. (201) 547-4514.
LONG BEACH ISLAND FOUNDATION OF ARTS AND SCIENCE "Abstract Watercolors," featuring selected artists from the New Jersey Watercolor Society.
"Mobiles/Stabiles Installation," featuring works by Myron Wasserman.
Through July 19.
Monday through Saturday, 9 A.M. to 5 P.M. and Sunday, noon to 4 P.M.
Free. 120 Long Beach Boulevard, Loveladies. (609) 494-3169.
MEADOWLANDS CENTER FOR THE ARTS "Images, Dreams, Words and Marks," a solo show of paintings and drawings by Lisa Pressman.
Through Aug. 4.
Monday through Friday, 9 A.M. to 6 P.M., and Saturday and Sunday, 10 A.M. to 6 P.M. 1 Williams Plaza, Rutherford. (201) 939-6969.
MONMOUTH COUNTY HISTORICAL ASSOCIATION MUSEUM AND LIBRARY "Optical Delights: Stereographic Views of Monmouth County" presents images of Victorian life.
Through February 1996.
Tuesday through Saturday, 10 A.M. to 4 P.M., and Sunday, 1 to 4 P.M.
Admission: $2 for adults, $1 for children and $1.50 for the elderly. 70 Court Street, Freehold. (908) 462-1466.
MONMOUTH MUSEUM "Artists With Physical Disabilities" includes paintings, photography, printmaking and sculpture.
Through Aug. 17.
Tuesday through Saturday, 10 A.M. to 4:30 P.M., and Sunday, 1 to 5 P.M.
Brookdale Community College campus, Lincroft. (908) 747-2266.
MONTCLAIR ART MUSEUM "Still Life Works From the Collection" offers 13 paintings by American artists ranging in style from 19th-century realism to 20th-century modernism.
Through September.
"Elizabeth Berdann," a self-titled installation featuring portraits of elderly women in a nursing home.
Through Oct. 1.
"Affinities and Influences: Native American Art and American Modernism" begins next Sunday.
Through Oct. 1.
Tuesday, Wednesday, Friday and Saturday, 11 A.M. to 5 P.M.; Sunday and Thursday, 1 P.M. to 5 P.M.
Admission: $4, or $3 for the elderly and students with ID. 3 South Mountain Avenue, Montclair. (201) 746-5555.
MORRIS COUNTY HISTORICAL SOCIETY "A Bouquet of Brides" features more than a dozen wedding gowns dating to 1750 and reflecting a variety of styles and histories.
Opens next Sunday.
Through October.
Admission: $3.
Thursday, 11 A.M. to 3 P.M., and Sunday, 1:30 to 4 P.M. 68 Morris Avenue, Morristown. (201) 267-3465.
NABISCO GALLERY "Crossing Over," an exhibition of 80 mixed-media works by 20 contemporary Russian artists.
Through Sept. 7.
Daily, noon to 4 P.M.
River Road and DeForest Avenue, East Hanover. (201) 503-3238.
NEWARK MUSEUM "New Jersey Arts Annual: Celebrating Diversity in Crafts" takes a look at traditional and modern crafts in New Jersey.
Through Oct. 15.
"American Art Pottery: An Uneasy Evolution, 1880-1930." Through Oct. 22.
"Astronauts: The Star Travelers" features photographs of the Apollo XI flight.
Through Dec. 31.
Wednesday through Sunday, noon to 5 P.M. 49 Washington Street, Newark. (201) 596-6550.
NEW JERSEY HISTORICAL SOCIETY "Moving Through Memory: Caribbean Folk Arts in New Jersey." Through April 1996.
Tuesday through Friday, 10 A.M. to 4 P.M. 230 Broadway, Newark. (201) 483-3939.
NEW JERSEY STATE MUSEUM "Echizen: 800 Years of Japanese Stoneware," an exhibition celebrating the history and art of potters.
Through Aug. 7.
"Baseball in New Jersey: The Game of History." Through Aug. 27.
Tuesday through Saturday, 9 A.M. to 4:45 P.M., and Sunday, noon to 5 P.M. 205 West State Street, Trenton. (609) 292-6308.
NOYES MUSEUM "Looking Due South: Paintings of South Jersey by Glenn Rudderow." Through today.
"Drawing Outside the Lines: Works on Paper by Outsider Artists," presents a selction of drawing in pencil, crayon, and other media with work by Eddie Arning, Minnie Evans, Bill Traylor and Martin Ramirez.
Through Sept. 17.
Wednesday through Sunday, 11 A.M. to 4 P.M.
Admission, $3; the elderly, $1.50; students and children under 18, 50 cents.
Free admission on Fridays.
Lily Lake Road, Oceanville. (609) 652-8848.
PAPER MILL PLAYHOUSE The Renee Foosaner Art Gallery holds its sixth annual Juried Exhibition of Miniature Art.
Through July 30.
Wednesday, Thursday, Saturday and Sunday, 7 to 8 P.M. and Friday, noon to 3 P.M. and 7 to 8 P.M.
Brookside Drive, Millburn. (201) 379-3636, extension 2272.
PASSAIC COUNTY COMMUNITY COLLEGE The Passaic County Cultural and Heritage Council presents paintings and collages by Arnold Brown.
Through July 20.
Monday through Friday, 9 A.M. to 9 P.M.; Saturday, 9 A.M. to 5 P.M.
Broadway and Memorial Drive, Paterson. (201) 684-5448.
PATERSON MUSEUM "Pencilworks: The Drawings of Jerry Winick" displays pencil drawings noted for their details and photo-like realism.
Through today.
Tuesday through Friday, 10 A.M. to 4 P.M.; Saturday and Sunday, 12:30 to 4:30 P.M. 2 Market Street, Paterson. (201) 881-3874.
PETERS VALLEY CRAFT CENTER "Artists in Residence," featuring works with wood, fiber, ceramics, fine metals, blacksmithing and metals, and photography.
Through Dec. 31.
Sunday through Thursday, 10 A.M. to 5 P.M., and Friday and Saturday, 10 A.M. to 9 P.M. 19 Kuhn Road, Route 615, Layton. (201) 948-5200.
PRINTMAKING COUNCIL OF NEW JERSEY "Manny Haller Retrospective," through July 26.
"Three Landscape Printers," through July 22.
Wednesday through Friday, 11 A.M. to 4 P.M., and Saturday, 1 to 4 P.M. 440 River Road, Somerville. (908) 725-2110.
RINGWOOD MANOR STATE PARK "50 Years Retrospective Art Exhibition" features the works of Arthur J. Barbour in the Barn Gallery.
Through today.
Wednesday, Saturday and Sunday, 1 to 4:30 P.M.
Sloatsburg Road, Ringwood. (201) 962-7031.
RIVERRUN GALLERY "Myth in Modern Times," an exhibition of contemporary European, Eastern European and American art inspired by mythology.
Starts Saturday with a reception from 6 to 9 P.M.
Through Aug. 28.
Monday and Wednesday through Saturday, 10 A.M. to 5 P.M.; Sunday, noon to 5 P.M. 287 South Main Street, Lambertville. (609) 397-3349.
RUTGERS ARTS CENTER "Multiple Exposures: Ukrainian Photography Today." In the May Duff Walters Gallery through July 29.
Wednesday through Saturday, 6:30 to 9:30 P.M., and Sunday, 12:30 to 3:30 P.M.
Chapel Drive, New Brunswick. (908) 932-7511.
STEAMROLLER GALLERY "Implied Dissent," paintings and assemblages by Michelle Henkin Bader.
Starts Friday.
Through Aug. 20.
Tuesday, noon to 2 P.M.; Friday and Saturday, noon to 9 P.M. and Sunday, noon to 7 P.M. 52 Bridge Street, Frenchtown. (908) 996-7279.
STONY BROOK-MILLSTONE WATERSHED ASSOCIATION "Naturescape," an exhibition of paintings by Christina Allen, Sarah Antin and Guy Ciarcia.
Through July 22.
Wednesday through Friday, 10 A.M. to 5 P.M.; Saturday, 10 A.M. to 4 P.M.
Titus Mill Road, Hopewell Township. (609) 737-7592.
SWAIN GALLERIES "Recent Works," oils by Brian Townsend.
Through July 20.
Tuesday through Friday, 9:30 A.M. to 5:30 P.M., and Saturday, 9:30 A.M. to 4 P.M. 703 Watchung Avenue, Plainfield. (908) 756-1707.
WATCHUNG ARTS CENTER The New Jersey Photo Forum sponsors a show of photographic prints in the upstairs gallery.
"Vietnam: 20 Years After the Fall" features the silkscreen photography of Richard Gerstner in the downstairs gallery.
Free.
Through July 29.
Monday through Saturday, 1 to 4 P.M. 18 Stirling Road, Watchung. (908) 753-0190.
ZIMMERLI ART MUSEUM The Kusakabe-Griffs Japonisme Gallery showcases Western art from the late 19th and early 20th centuries, documenting the Japanese influence on Western art.
Free.
Tuesday through Friday, 10 A.M. to 4:30 P.M.; Saturday and Sunday, noon to 5 P.M.
Rutgers, corner of George and Hamilton Streets, New Brunswick. (908) 932-7237.
SPOKEN WORD BROOKDALE COMMUNITY COLLEGE Alan Richman, a magazine editor, freelance writer and adjunct at New York University presents a three-session workshop, "Writing for Magazines." Tomorrow, July 24 and Aug. 7.
Fee: $28.
James Connolly, a photographer for The Asbury Park Press, offers a six-session workshop, "Introduction to Lighting: Making the Most of Your Pictures." Mondays through Aug. 14.
Fee: $60. 765 Newman Springs Road, Lincroft. (908) 224-2880.
DELAWARE VALLEY POETS Leslie Bannon, Henry Beechhold and Dennis Lee read selected works.
Tomorrow at 8 P.M.
Free.
The Princeton Market Fair, Route 1 South, Princeton. (908) 874-3480.
OCEAN CITY ARTS CENTER A. R. Ammons, a professor at Cornell University, will read a selection of his poems.
Today at 1 P.M.
Tickets: $3. 17th Street and Simpson Avenue, Ocean City. (609) 525-9300.
SOMERSET MEDICAL CENTER Dorothy L. Zufall, director of community health education, presents "Don't Forget," Tomorrow at 7 P.M. and "Remember This," Thursday at 7 P.M.
Free, but advance registration is required. 110 Rehill Avenue, Somerville. (908) 685-2827.
SOUTHERN OCEAN COUNTY HOSPITAL Jackie Rohan, director of health resources, presents "Don't Forget: Increase Your Memory." Tuesday at 1:30 P.M.
Carol Schoenberger, director of community health education, presents "Get a Grip on Stress!" Thursday at 7:30 P.M.
Free.
The Conference Center, 1140 Route 72 West, Manahawkin. (609) 978-8999.
ST.
BARNABAS MEDICAL CENTER Seton Hall University's Department of Continuing Education and St.
Barnabas Medical Center's Senior Health program co-sponsor two lectures on American art for the elderly.
Professor Robert J. Koenig will speak on "The American Way: Portraits, Landscapes and Still Lifes, 1760 to 1860," and "American Art Comes of Age: Painting and Sculpture, 1860 to 1995." Wednesday and Thursday, noon to 2 P.M.
Fee: $25 for both lectures.
Old Short Hills Road, Livingston. (201) 325-6503.
FOR CHILDREN MEADOW THEATER The Meadow Kids' Summer Clubhouse offers a new show every week with audience participation, songs, games, dancing, improvisations and short plays.
Saturday at 11 A.M.
Through Aug. 26.
Tickets: $5.
Galleria Atrium, Bridge Avenue and West Front, Red Bank. (908) 758-0099.
BERGEN MUSEUM OF ART AND SCIENCE Muriel Ray presents a morning art workshop that includes making finger puppets for a puppet theater.
Saturday at 11 A.M.
Fee: $4.
Reservations are suggested. 327 Ridgewood Avenue, Paramus. (201) 265-1248.
BICKFORD THEATER, MORRIS MUSEUM The Saturn Summer Theater Series for Children, a selection of plays, musicals and variety shows, continues with "Snow White," by the Yates Musical Theater.
Tuesday at 11 A.M. and 1:30 P.M.
Tickets: $6.25. 6 Normandy Heights Road, Morristown. (201) 538-0454.
ENGLEWOOD PUBLIC LIBRARY Bob Messano (Guitar Bob) presents a concert of children's songs.
Monday at nooon.
Free. 31 Engle Street, Englewood. (201) 568-2215.
FORUM THEATER The Yates Musical Theater and the Forum Theater Group present "Snow White." Thursday at 10 A.M.
Tickets: $8. 314 Main Street, Metuchen.(908) 548-4670.
LONG BEACH ISLAND FOUNDATION OF ARTS AND SCIENCE Children's Theater presents "Underneath the Deep Blue Sea," a series of songs of sea creatures and water with an environmental focus.
Tuesday at 7:30 P.M.
Tickets: $5. 120 Long Beach Boulevard, Loveladies. (609) 494-3169.
MONTCLAIR STATE UNIVERSITY Theaterfest for Kids and the Pushcart Players present "Stone Soup and Other Stories," a musical collection of folk tales from around the world.
Thursday at 11 A.M.
Tickets: $7.50.
Valley Road, Upper Montclair. (201) 655-5112.
NEWARK MUSEUM Mr.
Hustler shares the power of knowledge as he teaches about galaxies, stars and nebulae in "The Power." Wednesday through Friday at 2:30 P.M. and Saturday and Sunday at 1 and 3 P.M.
Learn African myths and legends behind the constellations in "African Skies." Wednesday through Friday at 1:30 P.M. and Saturday and Sunday at 2 and 4 P.M.
Adults, $2; children under 12, $1. 49 Washington Street, Newark. (201) 596-6550.
NEW JERSEY CENTER FOR VISUAL ARTS "Pee-Wee Prodigies," for ages 2 and 3, allows children to paint, print and make puppets and masks and offers many other hands-on art activities for preschoolers and their adult companions.
Tuesday and Thursday, 12:45 to 1:45 P.M.
Materials fee: $4. 68 Elm Street, Summit. (908) 273-9121.
NEW JERSEY STATE MUSEUM Join Sandy, a golden retriever, in teaching Pepper, a beagle, about lunar and solar eclipses.
Saturday and Sunday at 1 and 3 P.M.
Travel to mysterious worlds of our solar system and beyond with Patrick Stewart in "To Worlds Beyond." Saturday and Sunday at 2 P.M.
Tickets: $1. 205 West State Street, Trenton. (609) 292-6308.
RARITAN VALLEY COMMUNITY COLLEGE The college's planetarium offers "Mystery! Who Stole the Night," a show that is part legend, fairy tale, science documentary and classic mystery yarn, for the entire family.
Monday and Wednesday at 2 P.M.
Through Aug. 16.
Admission: $4.50.
Route 28 and Lamington Road, North Branch. (908) 231-8805.
RITZ THEATER "Puss N' Boots" meets Ritzy the Wolf.
Wednesday at 10 A.M. and Thursday at 10 A.M. and 1 P.M.
Tickets: $4. 915 White Horse Pike, Oaklyn. (609) 858-5230.
SOVEREL PARK, EAST ORANGE "The Circus Is Coming." Saturday at 11 A.M.
Free.
Springdale Avenue, East Orange. (201) 266-5147.
STOCKTON PERFORMING ARTS CENTER "Marvelous Mostly Midday Matinees" features a different professional children's theater company each Wednesday in July.
The Child's Play Touring Theater presents "Wunzapona Time," a series of fairy tales with music and audience participation that will take children from the Old West to outer space.
Wednesday at 10:30 A.M., 2 P.M. and 6 P.M.
Jim Leeds Road, Pomona. (609) 652-4607.
THEATER IN THE PARK Duet Productions presents "Robin Hood." Wednesday at 7 P.M.
Free.
Next week, Touchstone Productions performs "By the Light of the Silvery Moon." The Donald Rainear Ampitheater, Sunset Lake. (609) 451-9208.
ZIMMERLI ART MUSEUM The Rutgers Collection of Original Illustrations for Children's Literature: "Riders Up! Preparing for a Pony Race," an exhibition of photographs and other materials by Barbara Beirne for her book about a young girl and her pony as they prepare for their first race.
Through July 31.
Tuesday through Friday, 10 A.M. to 4:30 P.M.; Saturday and Sunday, noon to 5 P.M.
Free.
Rutgers, corner of George and Hamilton Streets, New Brunswick. (908) 932-7237.
ETC.
DINNER AND THEATER The $42 ticket price includes a four-course meal and "Deep Space Noir," an interactive and futuristic detective story.
Saturdays, 8 P.M.
Il Giardino Restaurant. 41 Ridgedale Avenue, Cedar Knolls. (201) 301-0562.
FLEA MARKET The Chester Lions Club Flea Market offers craft items, linens, books, children's clothing, housewares, plants and produce, makeup, jewelry, scarves, handbags and other accessories.
Sundays, 9 A.M. to 5 P.M, through Dec. 19.
Beginning today.
Free.
West Blackwell Street, Morris and Sussex Streets in downtown Dover. (201) 442-1494.
LEARN ABOUT SAILING Brookdale Community College is offering landlubbers an easy introduction to sailing and an afternoon aboard a 30-foot sloop on Raritan Bay.
Licensed United States Coast Guard captains will teach basic sailing terminology and provide instructions on how to sail.
Today.
The sloop leaves the Sandy Hook Bay Marina at 1 P.M. and returns at 9 P.M.
Fee: $75, and advance registration is required. (908) 224-2880.
NEW JERSEY FILM FESTIVAL "Before the Rain," Friday, "Ivan and Abraham," Saturday, "Man of Aran," July 21, "The Grapes of Wrath," July 22, and "The Learning Tree," July 28.
Show times, 7 P.M.
Tickets: $4.
Rutgers University in New Brunswick, College Avenue campus, Milledoler Hall, George Street and Seminary Place. (908) 932-8482.
SPIOTTA PARK, SOUTH ORANGE Main Street South Orange sponsors a family night of games, entertainment and a children's scavenger hunt.
Friday from 7 to 11 P.M.
Entertainment includes a professional ice sculpturing contest, a performance by the Next Generation Jazz Quartet and a dance demonstration by the Maria Priadka School.
Downtown South Orange. (201) 763-6899.
STONY BROOK-MILLSTONE WATERSHED ASSOCIATION The public is invited to take a leisurely stroll on the watershed trails and investigate various aspects of summer ecology.
Today at 1 P.M.
Free, but registration is required.
Titus Mill Road, Hopewell Township. (609) 737-7592.
Sounds of Summer Liza Minnelli and Billy Stritch perform tomorrow and Anita Baker appears Wednesday as part of the Summer Sounds '95 concert series.
GARDEN STATE ARTS CENTER Tickets: $22.50-$50.
Showtimes at 8 P.M.
Exit 116 on the Garden State Parkway, Holmdel. (908) 888-5011.
Russian Revival The George Riabov Collection features urban scenes, medieval icons, 19th-century landscapes and 20th-century costume and stage designs.
ZIMMERLI ART MUSEUM Call for times.
Free.
Rutgers, corner of George and Hamilton Streets, New Brunswick. (908) 932-7237.


Lisa M. Patlis, Matthew R. Nicely
Lisa Marie Patlis, a daughter of Patricia L. Fried and stepdaughter of Dr.
Michael L. Fried of Port Washington, L.I., was married yesterday to Matthew Robert Nicely, a son of the Rev. and Mrs.
Paul Nicely of Delaware, Ohio.
The bridegroom's father performed the ceremony at St.
John's Episcopal Church in Cold Spring Harbor, L.I.
Ms.
Patlis, who is 28 and is keeping her name, is a housing specialist for the Department of Housing and Urban Development in Washington.
She graduated from Cornell University and received a master's degree in public affairs from George Washington University.
Her stepfather is the president of Medical Science Publishing Company International in Port Washington.
Her mother is a senior business manager at Bristol-Myers Squibb, the pharmaceutical company in Princeton, N.J.


Joanne Wilde, Robert Freemon
Joanne Wilde, a teacher, and Robert Freemon, a designer of graphics and film titles, are to be married today at Marylou's, a restaurant in Manhattan.
Justice Phylis Skloot Bamberger of the State Supreme Court in the Bronx is to officiate.
The bride, 43, teaches mathematics at the Brooklyn Studio School in Brooklyn.
She graduated from Brooklyn College and received her master's degree in education from Richmond College.
The bride is the daughter of Molly Wilde of Delray Beach, Fla., and the late Robert Wilde.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-14  PULLOUT FROM BOSNIA?
If United Nations peacekeepers in Bosnia cannot prove their effectiveness in the next several weeks, a NATO-backed withdrawal of the troops appears almost certain.  1  CHINA CAMPAIGNER CHARGED  Harry Wu, a Chinese-American human rights campaigner known for his daring travels through China to document prison abuses, was charged with espionage there.  1  KASHMIR DISPUTE RAGES  For India, ruling Kashmir has come down to something much like an occupation.
Only one radio station comes in clearly, and it plays classical music.
From gardens to tennis courts to fountains, some 39 chunks of Riverside Park, which stretches from 72d Street to 158th Street along the Hudson River, have been parceled out to volunteers to groom, clean and partially finance.  25  Fresh Air Fund 29  Obituaries 32  Dr.
Bernard F. Riess, psychologist.


Multiculturalism Is Stressed in 'The Reconstructed Figure'
THE Katonah Museum of Art is cutting loose with "The Reconstructed Figure," a show by 11 contemporaries.
If anyone had thought to use the title 60 years ago, it would probably have aroused associations with Cubism.
But now, at the end of the century, it implies little more than cosmetic surgery.
Not that this association is inappropriate, for in his essay, the curator, John Beardsley, argues in favor of multiculturalism, a philosophy that threatens to succeed where the proponents of anti-art, like Duchamp, failed.
As explained by Mr.
Beardsley, Multiculturalist theory advocates a reversal whereby individuals formerly excluded from the art scene are included, and the victims get to change places with their oppressors.


Panel Urges More Effort On Domestic Violence
THE incidence of domestic violence, including violence against children, is increasing in Westchester, a county task force has reported, and no socioeconomic group is immune.
The panel recommended the creation of a Westchester Domestic Violence Council to coordinate efforts to reverse the trend and urged more training for Family Court judges.
The report was issued late last month by the task force, which was appointed last year by the Chairman of the County Board of Legislators, Stephen P. Tenore.
Following interviews with lawyers, social workers, members of the District Attorney's staff and others, the panel reached some grim conclusions.


Committee in the House Prunes the Budget Tree
As the House Appropriations Committee passes the halfway mark in writing spending bills to fulfill Republican pledges of a leaner Federal budget, the House's ruling right wing is expressing delight at what has been cut.
But it is what survives that ruffles them.
The National Endowment for the Arts, which sponsored Robert Mapplethorpe's contentious photographs of the human anatomy, is bloodied in the legislation being churned out of the appropriations panel, but the endowment is still standing.
So is the Legal Services Corporation, the Federal law firm that conservatives accuse of promoting a liberal agenda in the courts.


SUNDAY, July 9, 1995; QUESTIONS FOR: Mark Morris
Q: Can grace be taught?
A: Yes, absolutely.
I would call it coordination.
It's not just a physical thing; it's a mental thing -- to know what one part is doing while the other part is happening, to have that happen seamlessly and efficiently.
I think efficiency has to do with grace, in employing the most direct action to accomplish a task.
Like picking up a pen, or folding a piece of paper, or talking on the phone, or tying your shoe, or putting groceries in a sack: functional things.


On Top of Parkway Labor Woes Comes a Tangled Racial Dispute
The Parkway Reporter, mailed to the homes of more than 1,200 employees of the New Jersey Highway Authority, which operates the Garden State Parkway, is a typical house organ, with wedding announcements, photos of the company blood drive and profiles of toll takers.
But less typically, the publication for several years contained a column by minority employees that was often used as a sounding board for complaints about the authority's record on affirmative action.
Recently, however, the authority put an end to the column, killing one entry and notifying the author that no future submissions would be published.


Jenifer Fiorentino, J. C. Campagna
Jennifer Fiorentino, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Frank S. Fiorentino of Taos, N.M., was married yesterday to Joseph Christopher Campagna, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph Campagna of Lake Grove, L.I.
The Rev.
Richard Nelson, a Roman Catholic priest, performed the ceremony at the North Guilford Congregational Church in North Guilford, Conn.
The bride, 29, is an administrator for the Breast Resource Program at the Mount Sinai Medical Center in New York.
She graduated from the Fashion Institute of Technology, and she and her husband received M.B.A. degrees from Fordham University.


Changing Times


Q. &amp; A.
Charging A Fee for Moving Q My co-op board is charging me a fee of $100 to move out of my apartment.
Is this legal? . . .
Phyllis Newbeck, Manhattan.
A Gary Rosenberg, a Manhattan lawyer who specializes in real estate, said that a co-op board may charge a fee for costs associated with moving in and moving out of the building, provided the board is authorized to do so.


NO MARTYRS IN WACO
THE EARTHQUAKE, AND I MEAN A REALLY BIG earthquake, hasn't come yet," Sheila Martin explains. "There's going to be darkness over the entire earth.
The moon's going to turn red.
Just watch it.
But the people who know the Lord, they will be the truth and the light.
They will have a glow on them, like Moses when he came down the mountain.
And that is when Wayne and the kids are coming back."
David Koresh will certainly be with them.
"Oh, yes," Martin adds, "we're looking forward to this time where the world is going to see him as he really was to us. This time people are going to hear the message that they did not get to hear in those 51 days."


California's Squabbling Legislature Just Stumbles Along
There was a time, 20 years or so back, when the Legislature here was considered one of the most professional, innovative and productive in the nation, a major force in leading California to its pre-eminence after World War II as the richest and most powerful state in the Union.
Other states looked to the Golden State for legislative example and guidance.
And then there is today's California Legislature, more specifically the lower house, the ideologically sundered, procedurally stumbling, squabbling, wobbling California Assembly.


Woman's Work
FLORENCE KELLEY AND THE NATION'S WORK The Rise of Women's Political Culture, 1830-1900.
By Kathryn Kish Sklar.
Illustrated. 436 pp.
New Haven: Yale University Press. $35.


Strawberry's Help
To the Sports Editor:
Darryl Strawberry's potential for the Yankees must be considered from the perspective of the team's particular need for help against right-handed pitchers.
Yankee fans must avoid being in denial of the reality that Don Mattingly is no longer a threatening hitter, Bernie Williams hits 75 points lower left-handed than right-handed, Wade Boggs is showing his age, and Danny Tartabull, if he plays at all, should only see left-handers.
Strawberry, even at 80 percent of his fabulous prime, is a perfect answer in this situation.


PHOTOGRAPHER'S JOURNAL


Cold Soups That Lift Summer Appetites
SUMMER demands cold soup.
What could be more colorful, flavorful and refreshing for heat-flagged appetites?
And what a boon for the cook.
Cold soups can be made in advance and need only minimal attention before serving.


A Breakdown On the Highway To the Moon
Might Morphin Power Rangers The cast of the television show  Directed by Bryan Spicer PG 95 minutes
The Power Rangers - those teen-age crusaders of television fame - are threatened by the villainous Ivan Ooze, who spreads slime and evil and saps the Rangers of their strength.
They travel to the planet Phaedof to replenish their powers and return to battle Ivan.


A Breakdown On the Highway To the Moon
Judge Dredd Sylvester Stallone, Armand Assante  Directed by Danny Cannon R 91 minutes
In the riotous 2170's, justice is dispensed by a roving tribunal called the judges.
The toughest judge is an armor-plated straight arrow named Joseph Dredd (Mr. Stallone).
When Dredd confronts corruption, warfare erupts between good and evil.


Cutting the Cost Of Calling Home
A REVOLUTION in calling home from overseas is well under way.
A decision by the Federal Communications Commission last month upheld the newest electronic gimmick, where the user dials a special number, lets it ring once, hangs up immediately and then gets a call back from a switching system that provides a dial tone.
Using this opening, the user then dials the real call, and others thereafter, circumventing both the local phone system and any hotel charges for outgoing calls.
Thus a call originating overseas is transformed into a call "placed" from the United States.
This cuts the cost because United States phone rates are cheaper and because the call-back companies buy bulk time on established phone networks.
When call-back companies' prices per call are weighed against the major telephone companies' prices for calls from overseas, the contrast appears astonishing: 76 cents a minute for a call-back call from France to the United States, contrasted with $1.70 for the first minute for a call into the United States system on one phone company's access number that is charged to the company's credit card.


Moishe and the Synagogue in Fort Apache
WHAT do you do when your Bronx neighborhood becomes a battle zone and most of your friends from the last five decades decided long before that a nice condo in Florida or a senior citizen residence isn't such a bad idea after all?
Dig in your heels and stay.


Slow Start Doesn't Stop Yanks This Time
Paul O'Neill was so frustrated and tired Friday night when the Rangers humbled the Yankees by 10 runs, he spoke in a whisper about how it was one of the ugliest games he had ever seen.
One night later, O'Neill made sure the ugliness would not persist and turned a possibly ugly affair into an awesome encounter for the Yankees.
A 3-0 first-inning deficit had been erased by the seventh inning, when O'Neill opposed the left-hander Dennis Cook as a pinch-hitter with the bases full of Yankees and the score tied.


INSIDE
MAKING IT WORK 3 A deejay navigates his way through Brooklyn's reggae dance-hall clubs.
NEW YORKERS &amp; CO. 4 The book-signing culture.
NEIGHBORHOOD REPORT 6-10  Death knell for the East Side security plan?
Roosevelt Island's push to be a player.
The eclipse of the kung fu film in Times Square.
On Jamaica Avenue, theaters become churches.
And a guide to the islands of the Bronx.
PLAYING IN THE NEIGHBORHOOD 12 Dance at Lincoln Center; see New York afresh with the Municipal Art Society.
MOVIE CLOCK 13  What's showing at the local movie houses, today through Thursday.
GOOD EATING 14 An Upper West Side tour.
The reliable Amsterdam's; the alluring Docks.
SOAPBOX 15 A discovery outside Zabar's.
And letters.


Wisdom From the Have-a-Nice-Day School of Personal Finance
MONEY is not as complicated as you thought.
Life is good.
Save more.
Shop around for the best deals.
These perky maxims of financial wisdom will roll off your tongue after a few hours spent between the covers of "The Complete Idiot's Guide to Managing Your Money" and "Personal Finance for Dummies."


More and More Are Living Alone
UNLIKE the bustling family nests of old, new households on Long Island are just as likely to consist of people who live alone.
For the Island, which developed largely around growing families, the implications of the change are far reaching, according to specialists in health, housing and government affairs.


1% Inspiration at the Brewery, New Haven
THE once-white brick structure at 458 Grand Avenue in New Haven is not named the Brewery for nothing.
Not only is beer brewed there, specifically Connecticut's own Elm City brand, but also the huge stainless steel vats are visible through the building's equally huge windows.
But there is also a banqueting hall upstairs and it has just been inaugurated as an art gallery (also called the Brewery) by "One Percent Inspiration." The title comes from Thomas Edison's definition of genius as 1 percent inspiration and 99 percent perspiration.


PHOTOGRAPHER'S JOURNAL


Right On
To the Editor:
The photographic essay "In a French Cave, Art Fit for a Connoisseur"  [ June 18 ]  highlights an interesting aspect of these remarkable 30,000-year-old paintings.
Almost all the animal profiles are drawn facing the observer's left.
The preponderance of left-facing images may be coincidence or it may be one of the oldest human records supporting the dominance of the right cerebral hemisphere in the realm of visual and artistic perception.
The left visual field is favored by the right brain.
This neurobiologic bias provides a more reasonable explanation of the left-right pictorial imbalance than the presumption of Stone Age artistic canons.


Eye-Popping Technology Led a Grand First Half for Funds
MUTUAL fund investors are suffering an embarrassment of riches, and they are praying that the pain never stops.
In a stretch that could have made even the most conservative managers positively giddy, mutual funds turned in a roaring second-quarter performance and have had a stellar year in only six months.
Judging by the early returns to last week's action by the Federal Reserve, which trimmed a key short-term interest rate by a quarter point, even more good times may be ahead.


Watch This Space
WHERE HUMAN ANATOMY meets data processing, there are just two important devices: the brain and the wristwatch.
The brain is nice, but it doesn't tell time very well.
So, creatures of habit that we are, we strap on that extra thing -- a machine worn every day by most adults in the industrialized world to display a single piece of data.
It's starting to look as though this may not be a particularly creative use of valuable anatomical real estate.
Technology is outpacing fashion.
Now you can buy wristwatches that tell time and . . . announce your appointments . . .  monitor your pulse and blood pressure . . . store phone numbers . . . check the air or water temperature . . . compute sums . . . play music.
There are emergency-beacon watches for pilots and at least a prototype of a matchmaking watch: put your essentials into a data base and the watch of a suitable romantic interest will blink when you draw nigh.
Besides locating you in the fourth dimension, some watches can locate you, or at least orient you, in the first three -- with altimeters, depth finders and electronic compasses.


Changing Trains


Raiders' Divorce Made in Heaven
Their fans were about leather and mace.
Their stadium was rubble, their practice facility was a deserted school and their marketing department was on wheels.
The Raiders rented in Los Angeles for 13 years, had an option to buy but, in the end, preferred to move back in with their parents (Oakland).
The legacy they leave behind is a paddy wagon.


MATRONS OF HONOR
Working in the theater district, I am reminded on matinee days of the truth of Naomi Bliven's Style essay "Matrons of Honor" (June 18).
Septuagenarians, hellbent for a good time, step out of tour buses with the same fervor (if not the same targets) as the sailors who charge up from the ships that park periodically at the Hudson River piers.
GEORGE E. GEORGE New York


The Nabe as American Small Town
IN THE NEW MOVIE "SMOKE," SET in the Park Slope section of Brooklyn, Harvey Keitel plays Auggie Wren, the street-savvy manager of the local tobacco shop.
In addition to accommodating customers like Paul Benjamin (William Hurt) with exotic cigars, Auggie pursues an odd project.
He takes snapshots of the corner in front of his store every morning at 8 and mounts them as a chronicle of more than 4,000 days.
When Paul, in bewilderment, flips through these seemingly repetitious photos, Auggie urges him to slow down, to note the differences among people, weather and light.
"It's my corner, after all," Auggie explains.
"It's just one little part of the world. But things happen there, too, just like everywhere else. It's a record of my little spot."


More Water Would Have Helped


Price of Loyalty?
To the Sports Editor:
When the Devils moved to New Jersey and sought to develop a fan base there, the team required all new season subscribers to pay an upfront fee of at least $2,000, refunded at the rate of one-tenth per year, to obtain their season tickets.
Those fans who shelled out their cash for a pig in a poke showed how fan passion and loyalty for a team and its players can sometimes defy common sense.
Now that the Devils have won the Stanley Cup, those supporters may suffer the indignity of their team leaving town before they have the opportunity to revel in their championship.


Another Prescription Option
To the Editor:
"Filling Prescriptions by Mail: Not Always the Best Bargain" (Spending It, June 11) did not address the usually competitive prices available at independent community pharmacies.


For Those With the Itch to Shift
AUTOMATIC transmissions are easy.
Move the gear selector into "drive" and the transmission shifts its own gears -- a fine formula for everyday commuting.
But when a driver wants more control over the car's performance -- when driving fast, for instance, on a winding road -- an automatic makes a less than perfect partner because the driver surrenders control of the shifting to the transmission, which cannot read his or her mind.
Several auto makers are working to change this by adding a new level of driver control to automatic transmissions.
Acura, BMW and Porsche all offer vehicles equipped with such "auto-manual" transmissions, and Eagle will join them this fall.
Although each version has a different name, all function in much the same way.
In each, the transmission can operate as a normal automatic when the shift lever is in drive.
Or the driver, by moving the shifter to a special position, can override the automatic's shifting pattern and select the gears.
These are not simply clutchless manual transmissions -- like Volkswagen's "Automatic Stick Shift" of 1968-75 and various offerings in the 1940's and 50's -- but are sophisticated automatics capable of mimicking the operation of a stick shift.


July 2-8: It's the Economy, Stupid; The President Watches As the Federal Reserve Turns On the Heat, Sort of
The Federal Reserve cut short-term interest rates last week in what was the latest turn in the up-and-down, arms-length relationship of a Democrat and a Republican who find their fates intertwined: Bill Clinton and the Fed's chairman, Alan Greenspan.
Both men, of course, want a healthy economy.
But they also have a strong interest in seeing a healthy economy next spring: Mr.
Greenspan will be up for re-appointment; Mr.
Clinton will be up for re-election.


Hui Zhang, Stephen Apfelroth
Dr.
Hui Zhang, the daughter of Decheng Zhang of Shanghai and the late Huajuan Dai, was married on Tuesday to Dr.
Stephen Apfelroth, the son of Rochelle and Sanford Apfelroth of Jamaica Estates, Queens.
Rabbi Mordechai Efron performed the ceremony at the Crest Hollow Country Club in Woodbury, L.I.
Dr.
Zhang, 30, is keeping her name.
She is a research fellow in human genetics at the Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center in New York.
She graduated from Shanghai Medical University and received a Ph.D. in molecular genetics from the Mount Sinai School of Medicine.
Her father is a professor of medicinal chemistry at Shanghai Medical University, where her mother was the dean of the school of pharmacy and a professor of organic chemistry.


Insurer Adjusts Record
To the Editor:
In "Life Insurance Without Those Sales Charges" (Spending It, June 18), you accurately describe First Transamerica Life Insurance's new low-load universal-life product.
But contrary to what the article reports, we do not plan to export the product beyond New York.
Our decision was predicated on New York's unique regulatory and competitive environment.


The Ulster Minefield
Having survived a political crisis in London and a resurgence of sectarian street violence here in recent days, the peace effort for Northern Ireland now enters another dangerous period.
This is the "marching season," the time when the Protestant majority and the Roman Catholic minority throughout this British Province celebrate their separate and hostile versions of its history.
The traditional marches by tens of thousands of people could set the stage for new clashes that could set back the peace effort, which was accelerated 10 months ago with the cease-fire by the overwhelmingly Catholic Irish Republican Army.


A Breakdown On the Highway To the Moon
Judge Dredd Sylvester Stallone, Armand Assante  Directed by Danny Cannon R 91 minutes
In the riotous 2170's, justice is dispensed by a roving tribunal called the judges.
The toughest judge is an armor-plated straight arrow named Joseph Dredd (Mr. Stallone).
When Dredd confronts corruption, warfare erupts between good and evil.


Paula R. Lupkin, Andrew J. Walker
Paula Rachel Lupkin and Andrew J. Walker, both doctoral candidates in art history at the University of Pennsylvania, are to be married today in Stockbridge, Mass.
Rabbi Robert Gluck is to perform the ceremony at Chesterwood, the historic home and studio of the sculptor Daniel Chester French.
Ms.
Lupkin, 27, is keeping her name.
She graduated cum laude from Bryn Mawr College.
She is the daughter of Rona and Joseph Lupkin of Great Neck, L.I.


Deborah L. Uffer, Bradford Kolodny
Deborah Lynn Uffer, a daughter of Carol and Seymour Uffer of Woodbury, L.I., is to be married there today to Bradford Ira Kolodny, a son of Susanne and Irwin Kolodny of New City, N.Y.
Cantor Barry Black is to perform the ceremony at the Woodbury Jewish Center.
The bride, 24, teaches the sixth grade at Public School 107 in Flushing, Queens.
She graduated from the State University at Stony Brook, L.I., and is a candidate for a master's degree in elementary education at the C. W. Post campus of Long Island University.


Pamela J. Weiner, Harlan J. Wakoff
Pamela Jill Weiner, a daughter of Elaine Ellner of Aventura, Fla., and Seymour Weiner of Morris Township, N.J., was married last evening to Harlan Jeffrey Wakoff, the son of Marcia and Marvin Wakoff of Morganville, N.J.
Rabbi Ezra Finklestein performed the ceremony at the Woodbury Jewish Center in Woodbury, L.I.
Mrs.
Wakoff, 28, is an assistant controller at National Hockey League Enterprises, the licensing arm of the sports league, in New York.
She graduated from Emory University.


New in This Section
This issue of Televison introduces some new features and some improvements on familiar ones.
You'll find channel numbers for New York City cable systems on the left side of each grid, making it easier to find the program you choose.
You may have to test them.
Once you find which number works for your cable company - say, the second from left (16 for A&amp;E and 32 for AMC) - use the number in that spot for each channel.


CHATTER: Should the Devils Stay or Go?; A Reasonable Price to Pay
Why would I want to see a Stanley Cup-winning team leave our state?
Shouldn't New Jersey want to shout its pride, instead of leaving it all for New York City?


Venice Biennale: Startling Songs Of the Body . . .
THE GIARDINI ARE TRANQUIL.
The Palazzo Grassi is mostly empty.
The insiders who gathered last month for the Venice Biennale, Part One: The Media Event, have given way to the plain folk who come wandering in for Part Two: The Event Itself.
Each time around it's the same, with the chattering art masses crowding into the opening to see one another, as much as anything else, and acting like Claude Rains in "Casablanca," shocked, shocked to find bad art at the Biennale.
There is much pontificating over Bellinis at Harry's Bar about what a travesty the event is.
I'm sorry, I've done it myself, but I'm in no mood this year.
Venice is too beautiful.
Maybe if I had had to wait two hours to see Bill Viola's videos at the American pavilion, as some poor souls apparently did at the opening, I'd be testier.
But a few days ago there were two people in the pavilion.
Likewise the next day, and the next.
What these meager audiences say, if anything, about popular enthusiasm for contemporary art, I don't know.
But it was very pleasant.


Union Goal of Equality Fails the Test of Time
By 7 A.M., nearly 30 men have gathered in the hiring hall of the Iron Workers Local 401.
They talk quietly in groups at small gray tables, like diners in a restaurant waiting to be served.
Several who are black sit apart.
All are waiting for a glass window at one end of the hall to slide open and the hiring boss to call out jobs.
Six times this year, the window has opened for Michael Sharpe, one of the black men.
But none of the jobs lasted long, and he has averaged only eight days of work a month, half the number this year of most white members of Local 401.
The others at his table tell similar stories.


The World; Everyone's Too Busy To Be Africa's Leader
IF continents placed want ads, Africa's current listing might read something like this: Needed, economic power center with strong political commitment to the African neighborhood and healthy democratic instincts, to help build continental prosperity.
But there would be a problem: Nobody would be applying for the job, even though the continent is not without candidates whose resumes are available.


Glorious Shade
To the Editor: Like W. D. Wetherell, I am a redhead always looking for shady refuge.
When my husband proposed a trip to Positano, Italy, the town from which his family emigrated, I was terrified -- but, remembering all the cups of tea he sipped willingly with my cousins in Ireland, I loaded up on SPF 54 sunscreen and bought a large purple hat.


Carol L. Rawn, William Mackey
Carol Lee Rawn, a prosecutor in the Massachusetts Attorney General's office in Boston, was married yesterday to William Timothy Mackey, a landscape architect in Cambridge, Mass.
The Rev.
Thomas Cleveland, an Episcopal priest who is the chaplain of the Milton Academy, performed the ceremony at Penzance Point in Woods Hole, Mass.
Ms.
Rawn, who is keeping her name, graduated from Middlebury College and received her law degree from the University of Virginia.
She specializes in environmental law.
She is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Stanley R. Rawn of Cos Cob, Conn.
Her father is the chief executive of the Noel Group, a venture capital concern in New York.


Life on the Loaf
To the Editor:
As the new director of the Bread Loaf Writers' Conference, I read Meghan Daum's essay with keen interest.
Ms.
Daum quotes from last year's Bread Loaf brochure ("not . . . a place where you write, but one where you talk . . . about writing") to describe a tradition that has discouraged participants from writing while attending the conference.
As I look forward to my first session as conference director in August, I invite Ms.
Daum and others to consider a Bread Loaf whose current brochure informs participants that "writing, and the passion for writing, will be the focus of the conference," along with "a new emphasis on workshops and classroom discussion."  MICHAEL COLLIER  Middlebury, Vt.


Nicole Burman, Jeffery S. Sichel
Nicole Burman, the daughter of Margaret and Sheldon V. Burman of New York, is to be married today to Jeffery Stuart Sichel, a son of Joyce L. Sichel of Dallas and Michael Sichel of Somers, N.Y.
Rabbi Shelley Becker is to perform the ceremony at the couple's apartment in New York.
The bride, 29, is to be known as Nicole Burman-Sichel.
She and the bridegroom, 27, are the artistic directors of the Empty Space Theater Company in Manhattan, which the bridegroom founded.
The bride graduated from Barnard College.
Her father is a lawyer and her mother is a novelist, both in New York.


Woman, Bugged by Gnats, Vows Vengeance
IN a house with a sweeping view of rural Hunterdon County, in a tiny subdivision off narrow roads where geese still demand the right of way, Gretchen Baldwin has actually appeared outside in a floppy hat with strips of Bounce fabric-softener sheets taped to the brim.
"The sheets work," she said glumly the other day.
"A lot of people use them. Not breathing outside also helps. But neither solution is very practical."


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
Smooth-Flying Food
ON her first day as a waitress at a new restaurant in Southold, Sandi Tarpey, 17, was learning two important facts -- how much to charge for a hamburger and how to keep from crashing into the customers.
Miss Tarpey had just become a roller-skating waitress, a carhop at Hubba Hubba, a drive-in in Southold.
"I find I go so fast," she said, "that I realized I had to learn to steer or I'd just keep heading into the cars or out into the road."
After a few hours of juggling her steers Miss Tarpey had it down to a science.
She was able to carry her tray filled with hamburgers, fries and sodas and perform skating tricks at the same time.
"You still have to watch the pebbles, though," she said.
"You hit one, and you jerk and its, 'Whoa with the soda!' "


SUNDAY, July 9, 1995; FINE ARTS: Road Runner in the Park
Dinosaurs are having another one of their endless heydays at the Museum of Natural History; the Museum of Modern Art is showing paintings by 70 women, and Edward Hopper is at the Whitney.
But what to do on a hot day in Manhattan if you absolutely have to see some carved wildfowl?
Luckily, Phillips Petroleum has its collection of carved birds on display at the Central Park Conservancy's Charles A. Dana Discovery Center at 110th Street just off Fifth Avenue.
The exhibit includes the road runner at left, by Richard Finch, screech owls, scissor-tailed flycatchers and other birds.


LOOKING FOR A DONOR TO CALL DAD
The first time I read Orenstein's article, I was "on table," resting in a clinic after having been inseminated with my brother-in-law's sperm.
I came to New York to have this procedure because, in France, donor insemination with a "directed or known donor" is illegal.


Amy Salesin and Adam Gershwin
Amy Elizabeth Salesin, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Michael Salesin of West Bloomfield, Mich., was married last evening to Adam David Gershwin, a son of Andrea Gershwin and Marc Gershwin, both of New York.
Rabbi Dannel Schwartz performed the ceremony at the Ritz-Carlton Hotel in Dearborn, Mich.
Mrs.
Gershwin, 24, is a candidate for a master's degree in film at Columbia University.
She graduated magna cum laude from the University of California at Los Angeles, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa.
Her father is an obstetrician-gynecologist at the Detroit Medical Center.
Her mother, Susan Salesin, is a speech pathologist in West Bloomfield.


North Carolina Celebrates Its Heritage
For two days later this month, North Carolina will showcase its cultural resources with "Museum Magic," a festival of exhibitions and demonstrations in Raleigh.
Three museums -- the North Carolina Museum of Art, the Museum of History and the Museum of Natural Sciences -- have collaborated in organizing the event.
The Museum of Natural Sciences will present a lecture about wetland animals and courses in waterfowl calling, creating ponds, and fly fishing.
"Freshwater Wetlands," the museum's permanent exhibition, depicts wetlands plants and animals in naturalistic habitats, and includes a walk-through diorama of the Roanoke River bottom lands in the spring.


PRESENT SHOCK
How can Heidi Toffler expect to be taken seriously when she uses astrology to explain the personality differences between her husband and herself?
She ought to refrain from such remarks as: "Al is a Libra, he's more balanced and less of a social animal. I'm a Leo, an individual." MADALYN MARGOLES New York


In the Region/Westchester;
ON a 56-acre campus at this city's highest point, a full-scale retirement community is being built to attract affluent elderly people, especially those now living in their own homes in surrounding areas.
The glossy brochure for the project, Sterling Park at the Osborn, shows well-turned-out silver-haired couples strolling through opulent interiors, dining al fresco or swimming in the pool.


Castilla Hits Two Homers For Second Night in a Row
Rockies 8, Expos 3
Vinny Castilla hit two home runs for the second straight game, driving in four runs last night in the Colorado Rockies' 8-3 victory over the Montreal Expos at Coors Field.
Eric Young added a two-run homer for the Rockies, who won their fourth straight.
They have scored 66 runs in winning six of seven.


. . . It's Dance, Dance, Dance, Dance
Another plaza night, with mambo and merengue bands, June 30.


A Breakdown On the Highway To the Moon
Might Morphin Power Rangers The cast of the television show  Directed by Bryan Spicer PG 95 minutes
The Power Rangers - those teen-age crusaders of television fame - are threatened by the villainous Ivan Ooze, who spreads slime and evil and saps the Rangers of their strength.
They travel to the planet Phaedof to replenish their powers and return to battle Ivan.


Q and A
Grand Canyon of Spain Q.  In 1978 my wife and I went to Spain and visited El Chorro de Gargantua, or the Grand Canyon of Spain, north of Malaga, and found it to be an extraordinary experience.
But no one we speak to has ever heard of it.
Were we in the Twilight Zone? -- Harold Alan Pincus, M.D., Chevy Chase, Md.
A.
Your memory has got it almost right.


A Yard of Cloth, A Mile of Versatility
A piece of clothing that is key to this summer's sportswear mix is the sleeve-less blue jean jacket.
The jacket, in a new abbreviated look that's a cross be-tween a bolero and a vest, uses little more than a yard of cloth and still has all the traditional construction.
The denim jackets, costing under $50, are worn with every style of trousers and all dress lengths.


4,700 and Coping With High Anxiety
THE stock market has zoomed skyward this year, with the major stock indexes all up more than 20 percent since the end of 1994.
The Dow Jones industrial average topped 4,600 for the first time ever on Wednesday, and then exceeded 4,700 just two days later.
And this move is just continuing a bull market that erupted 13 years ago.
If you've owned stocks for much of that period, you've probably done better than you ever dreamed possible.
You may also be getting a bit nervous.
Can such good things last forever?
Should you take some of your chips off the table?
And if so, how?


Now About Those Weeds, Before It's Too Late
SOMEONE once defined a weed as a "plant out of place." Often enough, quite right.
Many respected wild flowers are thought of as weeds.
Beauty seems to be in the eye of the beholder.
The temptation is to consider these plants as botanical intruders.
But one thought should be in the weeds' favor.
Many of them have had vital roles in the establishment of civilizations over the centuries.
In a certain sort of way, weeds deserve some respect.


Saving a Wilderness for Tourists,and More Endangered Species
It is hard to imagine a landscape of more jarring contrasts.
A river thick with organic debris zigzags slowly across a lush, marshy plain teeming with life.
Less than 1,000 feet away, behind a stand of pines, sits a vast, blasted-out desert, humps of exposed sand surrounding a crystal-clear dredging pond that glows an unearthly bluish-green in the sun.
This is the Manumuskin Preserve, 3,257 acres of primeval river, pine-oak forest and abandoned sand mines near the state's southwestern edge.
A month ago, after a long and tangled land-use struggle, it was acquired by the Nature Conservancy, the environmental group that buys land all over the country to preserve it forever.


Cavers Uncover Faith in Heart of Darkness
We arrived in bright sunshine.
The previous night's thunderstorms had left this area of upstate New York particularly lush.
We were five city slickers looking for a way to celebrate summer.
What better way than to crawl into the darkness of Mother Nature's belly?
We were going caving in one of the 200 caves said to be in the county.
After hiking into the woods, past the honeysuckle and pines, we spotted a ladder sticking out of the earth.
Standing nearby were four cavers covered from helmet to hiking boots in mud.
Some of the life that is attracted to the water at the mouths of caves was attacking their foreheads.
As we swatted the savage mosquitoes, we asked for any advice the cavers had to offer.


Melanie Shulman, Marc A. Feigen
Dr.
Melanie Shulman, the Javits Fellow in behavioral neurology at Boston University, was married last evening to Marc Alan Feigen, a management consultant at McKinsey &amp; Company in New York.
Rabbi Richard S. Chapin performed the ceremony at Temple Emanu-El in New York.
The bride, 31, graduated magna cum laude from Harvard University and received a master's degree in the history of medicine from St.
John's College in Cambridge, Mass.
She received her M.D. degree from the University of Pennsylvania.
She is a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Abraham Shulman of Hollis Hills, Queens.
Her father, a professor emeritus of otolaryngology at the State University Health Sciences Center in Brooklyn, is the founder and director of the Martha Entenmann Tinnitus Center in Brooklyn.
The bride's mother, Arlene Shulman, is the leadership chairwoman for the Queens region of Hadassah.


Taxables Heat Up; Munis Crawl Under a Wet Blanket
Talk about a turnaround.
Bond fund investors who were burned last year -- and that includes just about everyone who owned a bond fund -- might be astounded to learn that no taxable bond funds lost money in this year's second quarter.
And near the top of the list of stars are some Latin American specialists that were whacked only a few quarters ago.
The best performers over the first six months, meanwhile, have been the Benham Target funds that bet on zero-coupon Treasury bonds with the longest possible maturities.
Those bonds are among the most volatile available, but, as this year's numbers demonstrate, they do extraordinarily well during bond market rallies.


Indurain Stuns Tour, Blasting Into Second
In a virtuoso display of strength and bravado, Miguel Indurain unexpectedly sped away today in the Tour de France, moving up to second place over all and gaining more than a minute on his main rivals.
He may also have turned tomorrow's first major test, a long individual ride against the clock, on its head.
The only thing Indurain failed to do after his breakaway was win the long, hard and hot seventh stage, 203 kilometers (126 miles) in Belgium from Charleroi to Liege.


The Games of Morning (Grunt. Thwack.)
LIVE sports action invades Sunday morning television this month.
Championship tennis with thwacks and grunts.
Grainy golf transmissions from Scotland.
Put off the morning walk and set up the tray tables, breakfast is served in the den.
What is all this?
Sunmday mornings are for leisurely brunches or family trips to church.
Live sports, sports that matter, not the usual round-the-clock cable fare of taped auto races and beach volleyball, might seem like a jarring intrusion on a wekend morning routine, like anything that seems to be in the wrong place at the wrong time.


It's Alive


In Williamsburg, A Mighty Life For a Captive
This is the day of the big lift, when both the boat and giglio are hoisted, and anyone who doesn't knwo what that means is not familiar enough with the combined feast of our Lady of Mount Carmel and St.
Paulinus in the Williamsburg section of Brooklyn.
The feast, now under way at Our Lady of Mount Carmel Roman Catholic Church at North Eighth and Havemeyer Streets in Williamsburg and running until July 16, commemorates the release in the fifth century of St.
Paulinus, the Bishop of Nola, Italy, from captivity among the Vandals.
St.
Paulinus had volunteered to be a captive in place of a child so that the child's mother, a widow, could have her only son back.


At Concordia Finale, Old Plus the New
FOR the last two weeks in Bronxville, Concordia College's first Keyboard Clinic has brought students and the public an almost daily bonanza of master classes, open rehearsals, panel discussions and concert performances.
This afternoon at 3, a premiere and two piano concertos highlight the grand finale in the Sommer Center.
Joan Forsyth, director of the clinic (as well as of the college's Music Preparatory Department) will be the soloist in one of the concertos -- the Beethoven Third -- while Mozart is the composer in a showcase performance by the winner of the clinic's student competition.


Now About Those Weeds, Before It's Too Late
SOMEONE once defined a weed as a "plant out of place." Often enough, quite right.
Many respected wild flowers are thought of as weeds.
Beauty seems to be in the eye of the beholder.
The temptation is to consider these plants as botanical intruders.
But one thought should be in the weeds' favor.
Many of them have had vital roles in the establishment of civilizations over the centuries.
In a certain sort of way, weeds deserve some respect.


BEST SELLERS: July 9, 1995
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
2
152
THE BRIDGES OF MADISON COUNTY, by Robert James Waller. (Warner, $17.95.) A photographer and a farmer's lonely wife in Iowa.
2
3
2
ROSE MADDER, by Stephen King. (Viking, $25.95.) Fleeing an abusive husband, a woman seeks happiness in a strange city by creating her own myth.
3
1
11
THE RAINMAKER, by John Grisham. (Doubleday, $25.95.) A young man barely out of law school tries to expose a corporation's multibillion-dollar scam.
4
4
6
THE APOCALYPSE WATCH, by Robert Ludlum. (Bantam, $24.95.) Tracking a neo-Nazi movement with designs on American and European officials.
5
5
71
THE CELESTINE PROPHECY, by James Redfield. (Warner, $17.95.) An ancient manuscript, found in Peru, provides insights into achieving a fulfilling life.
6
6
9
LET ME CALL YOU SWEETHEART, by Mary Higgins Clark. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $24.) An unusual murder case haunts a prosecutor's career and her private life.
7
14
2
THE WITNESS, by Sandra Brown. (Warner, $21.95.) A seemingly happy public defender and wife is plunged into a morass of bigotry and hate.
8
7
55
POLITICALLY CORRECT BEDTIME STORIES, by James Finn Garner. (Macmillan, $8.95.) Classic tales respun to avoid offending current sensibilities.
9
9
8
ONCE UPON A MORE ENLIGHTENED TIME, by James Finn Garner. (Macmillan, $9.95.) Eight more "politically correct bedtime stories."
10
11
11
LADDER OF YEARS, by Anne Tyler. (Knopf, $24.) At 40, a woman leaves her physician husband and children to start a new life in a strange town.
11
8
146
OH, THE PLACES YOU'LL GO! by Dr.
Seuss. (Random House, $15.) The problems of finding your way through life; in verse and pictures.
12
12
2
REDEMPTION, by Leon Uris. (HarperCollins, $25.) In a sequel to "Trinity," the Larkin family continues to fight for Irish independence.
13
10
5
STRANGE HIGHWAYS, by Dean Koontz. (Tartikoff/Warner, $23.95.) A collection of suspense tales, including novels, novellas and short stories.
14
13
MOO, by Jane Smiley. (Knopf, $24.) Intrigues and machinations on the campus of a Midwestern state university.
15
13
7
MIND PREY, by John Sandford. (Putnam, $23.95.) Lucas Davenport pursues the kidnapper of a psychiatrist and her two daughters.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Nonfiction
1
3
39
THE HOT ZONE, by Richard Preston. (Random House, $23.) The discovery of the deadly Ebola virus in Virginia and the efforts to keep it from spreading.
2*
5
70
MIDNIGHT IN THE GARDEN OF GOOD AND EVIL, by John Berendt. (Random House, $23.) The mysterious death of a young man in Savannah, Ga.
3
10
3
NEW PASSAGES, by Gail Sheehy. (Random House, $25.) How changing social conditions and longer life expectancies are affecting our lives.
4
2
6
DAVE BARRY'S COMPLETE GUIDE TO GUYS, by Dave Barry. (Random House, $21.) A humorist describes the strange ways of a species of males called "guys."
5
4
6
SPONTANEOUS HEALING, by Andrew Weil. (Knopf, $23.) A physician explains the ways in which the body heals itself.
6
1
3
A GOOD WALK SPOILED, by John Feinstein. (Little, Brown, $23.95.) A sportswriter reports on the P.G.A.
Tour in 1993 and 1994.
7
6
28
SISTERS, by Carol Saline.
Photographs by Sharon J. Wohlmuth. (Running Press, $27.50.) The relationships of 36 sets of sisters, reported in words and pictures.
8
8
21
THE DEATH OF COMMON SENSE, by Philip K. Howard. (Random House, $18.) How governmental rules and regulations are fettering the lives of all Americans.
9
12
5
KATO KAELIN, by Marc Eliot. (Harper Paperbacks, $20.) A friend of O.J.
Simpson's on events surrounding the murders of Nicole Simpson and Ron Goldman.
10
4
SLEEPING AT THE STARLITE MOTEL, by Bailey White. (Addison-Wesley, $20.) A Georgia schoolteacher tells about her adventures while traveling and at home.
11
7
11
IN RETROSPECT, by Robert S. McNamara with Brian VanDeMark. (Times Books/Random House, $27.50.) The author recalls his role in the Vietnam War.
12
9
81
THE BOOK OF VIRTUES, by William J. Bennett. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $30.) Moral stories adapted from the Greeks, the Bible, folklore and elsewhere.
13
13
12
FROM BEGINNING TO END, by Robert Fulghum. (Villard, $20.) The rituals we practice and the spiritual journeys we take, from childhood to old age.
14
15
THE DISCIPLINE OF MARKET LEADERS, by Michael Treacy and Fred Wiersema. (Addison-Wesley, $25.) A discussion of competitive business strategies.
15
7
PAULA, by Isabel Allende. (HarperCollins, $24.) The novelist tells stories of her family's life as she tends her fatally ill daughter.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous
1
1
111
MEN ARE FROM MARS, WOMEN ARE FROM VENUS, by John Gray. (HarperCollins, $23.) Communicating.
2
2
16
THE SEVEN SPIRITUAL LAWS OF SUCCESS, by Deepak Chopra. (Amber-Allen/New World Library, $12.95.) How to "generate wealth in all its forms."
3
3
8
HOW TO ARGUE AND WIN EVERY TIME, by Gerry Spence. (St. Martin's, $22.95.) A lawyer describes ways to win arguments at home and at work.
4
56
IN THE KITCHEN WITH ROSIE, by Rosie Daley. (Knopf, $14.95.) Recipes by Oprah Winfrey's cook.
Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending June 24, at 3,050 bookstores plus wholesalers serving 28,000 other retailers (gift shops, department stores, newsstands, supermarkets), statistically weighted to represent sales in all such outlets nationwide.
An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
And Bear in Mind (Editor's Choices of other recent books of particular interest) AND WHEN DID YOU LAST SEE YOUR FATHER? by Blake Morrison. (Picador USA, $21.) An English poet's perfectly convincing memoir of his father, a man both overbearing and engagingly quirky, whose death comes to the reader as a surprise.
BETRAYAL: The Story of Aldrich Ames, an American Spy, by Tim Weiner, David Johnston and Neil A. Lewis. (Random House, $25.) How a turncoat C.I.A. officer sold his agency to the Soviets and got away with it for nine years without even being careful; lucid narration by three correspondents of The New York Times.
THE CITY OF FLORENCE: Historical Vistas and Personal Sightings, by R.W.B.
Lewis. (Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux, $27.50.) An autobiographical, anecdotal, historical memoir, filled with love and learning, about a distinguished scholar's affair with a miraculous city.
COLD SNAP: Stories, by Thom Jones. (Little, Brown, $19.95.) A collection that turns a merciless, ironic gaze on the organic trap called life, in which spiritual beings -- humans -- are forever in jeopardy of mere chemical accidents or biological insults.
THE LOVE LETTER, by Cathleen Schine. (Houghton Mifflin, $19.95.) Helen is 42, capable and loves Edith Wharton.
Johnny is 20, acne-spotted and -- like, excellent! -- a big Tom Robbins fan.
In this comic novel they fall in love.
A MAN'S WORLD: How Real Is Male Privilege -- And How High Is Its Price? by Ellis Cose. (HarperCollins, $22.) A skilled analyst of gripes finds that most men (including so-called angry whites) are more confused than angry and more subdued than privileged; to his argument he brings persuasive numbers and moderate tones.
MOVING VIOLATIONS: War Zones, Wheelchairs, and Declarations of Independence, by John Hockenberry. (Hyperion, $24.95.) Swaggering in a wheelchair isn't easy, but this candidly aggressive National Public Radio correspondent is up to the job (or any other).
THE NEXT AMERICAN NATION: The New Nationalism and the Fourth American Revolution, by Michael Lind. (Free Press, $25.) An intelligent, industrious, not very cheerful look at possible futures.
Balkanization through identity politics?
Stratification, Brazilian style?
NIGHTMOVER: How Aldrich Ames Sold the CIA to the KGB for $4.6 Million, by David Wise. (HarperCollins, $25.) Same Ames, same story, somewhat gentler on the agency; enhanced by the authority of a veteran espionage writer.
THE PRICE OF A CHILD, by Lorene Cary. (Knopf, $23.) A sensual, funny first novel that transposes to pre-Civil War Philadelphia the theme of the author's 1991 memoir, "Black Ice": the duty of an escapee toward the oppressed she leaves behind.
VENICE REDISCOVERED, by John Pemble. (Oxford University, $25.) A historian's fresh, fascinating account of the potent symbolic resurrection of Venice in the European imagination after its political death in 1815.


The Nation; New Hampshire, First Again
FOR as long as there have been Presidential primaries, New Hampshire has insisted on having the first.
And for as as long as New Hampshire has been first, other states have sought to challenge its primacy, moving up their own primary dates.


PLAYING IN THE NEIGHBORHOOD
MIDTOWN  Freeze-Frame: The Kaleidoscopic City On a sunny day in 1946, 15-year-old Harold Feinstein took his first photograph.
It was of a group of children lolling on the beach at Coney Island, and it was the beginning of five decades of photographic embraces of New York City.


Drape Central Park?
To the Editor:
Steven R. Weisman (Editorial Notebook, July 3) would like to see Central Park decorated with 11,000 gates and apricot-colored fabric along 25 miles of walkways, but I doubt he has thought through what this would entail.


Lorette I. Simon, Keith M. Gross
Lorette Ivy Simon, a daughter of Irene and Stanley Simon of Riverdale, the Bronx, was married on Monday to Dr.
Keith Mark Gross, the son of Arlene Special of La Jolla, Calif., and the late Bernard Gross.
Rabbi Jacob Sodder performed the ceremony at the Plaza in New York.
Mrs.
Gross, 27, is a senior account executive in the Los Angeles office of D'Arcy Masius Benton &amp; Bowles, the advertising agency.
She graduated from Cornell University, from which she also received an M.B.A.
Her father, who was the Bronx Borough President from 1979 to 1987, is a Bronx-based consultant to companies that operate coin telephones.
Her mother is an associate broker at Douglas Elliman, the real estate firm in Manhattan.


Out to Lunch
To the Sports Editor:
The article on Manny Ramirez ("A Spot in the Order, a Home in the Burbs," The Times, June 18) made me wonder where were George Steinbrenner's Yankee scouts when Ramirez was tearing up the New York City scholastic league while playing for George Washington High School in Washington Heights.
And where were the Yankee scouts when Mo Vaughn and John Valentin were tearing up the college leagues while playing for Seton Hall?


SUNDAY, July 9, 1995; AMERICAN HISTORY: The Thing With Feathers
When Bruce Babbitt, Secretary of the Interior (bottom right), signed an agreement this spring to buy more than 100,000 acres on Kodiak Island in Alaska from two native corporations, he donned native headgear.
He wore an Alutiiq whaler's hat given to him two years ago, which he had saved for the occasion.
Babbitt is only the latest in a long tradition of happy warriors, as the photographs show.
Presidents, Governors, Senators -- even Mayor Fiorello La Guardia have worn ceremonial American Indian gear.
John F. Kennedy, who hated hats, didn't put the headdress on but only posed with it held over his head.
As for President Clinton, the White House press office says it has no photographs of the President wearing feathers.
Furthermore, a spokesman said, if such a photo did exist, the office would not release it.


Beyond Category
VICE VERSA  Bisexuality and the Eroticism of Everyday Life.
By Marjorie Garber.
Illustrated. 606 pp.
New York: Simon &amp; Schuster.


Squeaky Wheels: Group Gets Results
When transit officials devised subway and bus cuts this year, the Upper East Side was among the first and best organized neighborhoods springing into action, fighting to preserve local service.
That was no accident.
Leading the charge was the Upper East Side's not-so-secret weapon, the East 79th Street Neighborhood Association.
Founded in 1984 to campaign for a Sunday bus on York Avenue, the group has since grown into a major influence on a wide array of local issues.


BEIJING ARRESTS RIGHTS DEFENDER
Harry Wu, a Chinese-American human rights campaigner known for his daring and secretive travels through China to document prison labor abuses, was charged with espionage today.
Mr.
Wu has been detained since June 19, when Chinese border authorities discovered his identity at a remote checkpoint in western China as he entered the country from Kazakhstan with an associate.


A Breakdown On the Highway To the Moon
Species Ben Kingsley, Natasha Henstridge, Michael Madsen Directed by Roger Donaldson R 111 minutes
When scientists fabricate a segment of D.N.A. from instructions sent from outer space and combine that with a human egg, they create Sil, the half-female, half-alien creature they keep ina secret lab.
Sil (in human form, Ms. Henstridge) escapes and specialists give chase.
The problem is that in weeks Sil matures from a young girl to a grown woman, eager to reproduce.
And she has a nasty temper when crossed.


Expect the Unexpected: Spread the Risk
WHAT if the optimists are wrong?
What if the economy crash lands?
Or what if it booms -- and the Federal Reserve jacks up interest rates again, instead of easing them as it did Thursday?
And, to raise a specter that is haunting millions of Americans, what if another stock-market meltdown interrupts the Dow Jones Industrial Average's seemingly unstoppable march to 5,000?


Pepsico Starts a Health Clinic in Russia
WHY is Pepsico in the health care business in Moscow?
Not far from the Kremlin is an American outpatient clinic run by U.S.
Global Health, the offspring of a joint venture among Pepsi World Trading, Presbyterian Health Services and the Fund for Large Enterprises in Russia.
"There are several strong reasons why we got involved in health care in Russia," said James D. Gerwin, senior trader at the World Trade Company, a Pepsico subsidiary in Somers.
"Why? Because we are always looking at unusual projects that will guarantee us a flow of foreign exchange in tough territories, but more importantly because we recognized a need for a quality health care facility in Moscow."


A Cresting Wave of Change, Powered by Condominiums
Two years ago, Bob Sales moved into his bi-level unit at the St.
Charles Condominiums, a new city-subsidized development for lower- middle-class families.
He has been keeping track of his new neighborhood since.
To him, the changes around thefour complexes on Frederick Douglass Boulevard between 136th and 138th Streets have been gradual: a jazz restaurant two blocks down, Londel's, is eight months old, there's an ATM on 135th Street near Fifth Avenue now, and storefronts are being built on 135th.
And more changes are coming: within a year, 53 families will be buying into the new Bradhurst Apartments, a block away.


Aid Packages For Retailers In Poor Areas
Hoping to replicate New York City's success over the last decade in rebuilding abandoned housing, the Giuliani administration for the first time will offer packages of vacant land and financing to develop retail stores along some of the city's most blighted commercial strips.
The administration wants to spur the opening of dozens of neighborhood businesses -- groceries, pharmacies, video stores, laundries and restaurants -- that officials and housing experts say are essential to the revival of poor neighborhoods where the city has built thousands of affordable homes for working families.


Miss Hill, Mr. Sardera-Schneider
Susannah Wyatt Hill, a daughter of Nancy and Dr.
Lucius Hill of Exeter, N.H., was married there yesterday to Esteban Sardera-Schneider, a son of Esteban and Regine Sardera of New York.
Dr.
Robert Shaw, a Unitarian minister, performed the ceremony at the bride's parents' house.
The bride, 30, is a consultant at Renaissance Solutions Inc., a management consulting company in Lincoln, Mass.
She graduated from Brown University and received an M.B.A. from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
Her father is a general surgeon who practices in Exeter.
Her mother is a psychologist for the public schools in Portsmouth, N.H.


Sports of The Times; Nelson Isn't Enough for 30-Something Knicks
IN his inaugural address, Don Nelson proclaimed that the Knicks as currently constituted "can still win a championship," that the team is stocked with "both good older players and good younger players," that the "middle-aged players are still productive." And when he was reminded that Knick loyalists were used to a winning team, he smiled.
"I'm glad they're used to it," the new coach said, "because they're going to get more of it."


DIARY
THE ECONOMY Rates: Can't They Get It Right?
You'd think that with today's computers, which can land a space ship on the head of a T-bill, economists could simply figure out where interest rates should be -- and leave them alone, for heaven's sake.
But no: it's up and down, up and down, with incessant speculation beforehand and the actual changes heralded by 1,427 trumpets (adjusted for inflation).
So it was that on Thursday the Fed, having decided that all those rate increases over the past year and a half may have tipped the economy toward recession, sent one key rate down a notch.
It took its time, though: the free market had started sending things like bond yields and mortgage rates down some time ago.


Backlash
To the Editor:
As a professor of women's studies at the City University of New York, I would like to reply to Wendy Kaminer's essay "Feminism's Third Wave: What Do Young Women Want?" (June 4).


Life on the Loaf
To the Editor:
I was greatly impressed and amused by Meghan Daum's essay on the Bread Loaf Writers' Conference ("Life on the Loaf: Two Weeks at the Bread Loaf Writers' Conference," June 11).
Ms.
Daum clearly has the literary gift and, in particular, the sensitivity to the definitive social detail needed to become the successful writer she aspires to be.
However, she is mistaken in her claim that the practice of awarding full scholarships to promising young writers in exchange for their service as waiters began in 1956.


The World; Remember the British Voter?
TO David Ayres, a real estate agent in this town 30 miles east of London, the debate within the governing Conservative Party last week had an air of unreality about it, as if he were watching a parallel political universe.
Not that Mr.
Ayres was entirely uninterested. (The Tories were bickering over whether to dump John Major as Prime Minister; as it turned out, they didn't.) But above all, Mr.
Ayres has come to believe that the Tories, after nearly 16 years in power, have simply lost touch with the electorate.


Lyme Tick Study's Funds Run Out
THE only laboratory in Westchester County doing field ecology research on the ticks that carry Lyme disease has run out of money, despite a promise of $180,000 from the state last fall to continue the researchers' work at Purchase College.
The cutoff in state funds at Fordham University's Calder Ecology Center in Armonk comes at a time when a new tick-borne illness with potentially more deadly consequences than Lyme disease has found a foothold in the county.


Commercial Property/Sheepshead Bay; Should There Be a Fishing Village or a Loehmann's?
IT seemed like a great idea, way back when.
Take Sheepshead Bay, with its active deep-sea fishing fleet, broad promenade and protected bay; add a few more seafood restaurants and nautical shops; keep mundane stores out, and voila: A nautically themed magnet for fishing buffs and tourists, right on Brooklyn's southern shore.
At least, that's what city planners envisioned in 1973, when they created the Special Sheepshead Bay District, a 20-block tract from Sheepshead Bay Road to Knapp Street.
Emmons Avenue, running along the water and home of Lundy's seafood restaurant, was to be the district's cultural heart.


A Summer At Camp: Arriving; Short Sheets, and a Long Way From Home
Soon after popping off the bus for the first day at sleep-away camp, Sarah J. Silverberg, 10, of Great Neck, L.I., realized that her blue bag with her stuffed rabbit puppet Peter was missing, and she began to cry, pushing her blonde hair out of her eyes.
"But it had all my stuff in it!" Sarah sobbed.


Lending New Force to the Term Eclectic
STAMFORD'S restaurant row has spilled over from Summer Street into Park Place, where the newest addition is a modern, gallery-like space with a pared-back look: wood floors, colorful abstract art on sponge-painted oyster-white walls.
"Eclectic cuisine" states the Park Place menu, and it is, featuring dishes and ingredients from Japan, Mexico, Peru, Italy and France, among others.
For example, a generously packed shrimp quesadilla came with smoked Gouda cheese, a twist that gave the Mexican appetizer a new kick.
Adorned with sour cream and a chunky, sharply flavored guacamole and salad greens, this was a delicious starter.


CHATTER: Should the Devils Stay or Go?; The Door Is Open
I would welcome the New Jersey Devils.


Berlin to Paris, With an All-Important Stopover in Brooklyn
WILLIAM HURT IS IN Brooklyn again, but he's not playing the cigar aficionado he portrayed in "Smoke." On a warm evening at the end of May on St.
James Place, in Fort Greene, a crew member is hosing down the sidewalk for another take of a scene from Chantal Akerman's forthcoming film, "A Couch in New York."
The romantic comedy, written by the Belgian Ms.
Akerman and the French screenwriter Jean-Louis Benoit, stars Mr.
Hurt as a psychoanalyst who trades his Manhattan high-tech apartment for a bohemian abode in Paris.
The apartment belongs to a young French dancer played by Juliette Binoche.
After 8 weeks of shooting interiors in Berlin, the production moved to New York for 15 days (three of them in Brooklyn) and from there will go to Paris.


Cold Soups That Lift Summer Appetites
SUMMER demands cold soup.
What could be more colorful, flavorful and refreshing for heat-flagged appetites?
And what a boon for the cook.
Cold soups can be made in advance and need only minimal attention before serving.


A Host of New Insights From 'The Homecoming'
To the Editor:
Alvin Klein's review of "The Homecoming," by Harold Pinter (June 25), carried me back 30 years, when I first saw the play in London.


A Sliver of Scotland For Lairds and Cows
IT'S disconcerting to discover that the most southerly of the Inner Hebrides lies south of Glasgow, Scotland, and as the crow flies, is only 56 miles away.
For the rest of us it's a slow 110 miles, even in late September, up Loch Lomond, down Loch Fyne and south down the long proboscis of Kintyre, until, 20 miles short of Campbeltown, you reach Tayinloan where the car ferry sails to Gigha (GEE-uh, with a hard G), three miles distant.
The new car ferry is surprisingly large.
Too large, some think, for Gigha's one road, where cars oblige bicyclists to dismount.
A sign encourages visitors to leave cars on the mainland and rent a bike on the island.
My husband and I felt rather guilty in our rented Vauxhall.


Victoria LaMarca, Paul Saunders Jr.
Victoria Marie LaMarca, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Charles A. LaMarca of Glen Cove, L.I., was married yesterday to Paul Christopher Saunders Jr., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Saunders of New York.
The Rev.
Leo J. O'Donovan, the president of Georgetown University, performed the Roman Catholic Ceremony at the Church of St.
Thomas More in New York.
Mrs.
Saunders, 23, and her husband, 24, graduated from Georgetown, she cum laude and he magna cum laude.
She is a registered nurse.
Her father is an otolaryngologist in Middle Village, Queens.


Residential Resales
In the following reports, the "listed at" price is the asking price when negotiations began that ended in the sale.
Time on market is from most recent listing to contract.
MANHATTAN
CLINTON  $230,000
344-348 West 38th Street  2-bedroom, 1-bath, 1,700-sq.-ft. co-op in a loft building; elevator, dining area, 12 1/2-ft. ceilings, Hudson River view; maintenance $1,050, 50% tax-deductible, listed at $249,000, 24 weeks on market (Brokers: Bascom &amp; Sears; Peter K. Browne)  UNION SQUARE  $420,000
1 Irving Place  (Zeckendorf Towers)  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,063-sq.-ft. condo in a 10-year-old building; 24-hr. doormen, concierge, dining area, health club and pool; common charge $662; taxes $3,258, listed at $430,000, 1 week on market (Broker: J.R.)  UPPER EAST SIDE  $720,000
200 East 69th Street  (Trump Palace)  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,402-sq.-ft. condo in a 5-year-old building; 24-hr. doormen, concierge, dining area, health club; common charge $1,017; taxes $7,200, listed at $890,000, 22 weeks on market (Broker: Corcoran Group)  UPPER WEST SIDE  $290,000
2166 Broadway (76th St.)  (Opera Building)  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,300-sq.-ft. prewar co-op; 24-hr. doormen, entry hall, dining area, high ceilings, hardwood floors, 3 exposures; maintenance $963, 51% tax-deductible, listed at $335,000, 3 years on market (Broker: Bellmarc)  BRONX
KINGSBRIDGE  $195,000
3234 Tibbett Avenue  3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 45-year-old brick tudor; dining room, eat-in kitchen, fireplace, finished basement, 1-car garage; taxes $1,980, listed at $215,000, 12 weeks on market (Broker: Charles G. Brophy)  RIVERDALE  $280,000
6115 Delafield Avenue  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 6-year-old stucco-sided house; dining room, eat-in kitchen, fireplace, enclosed deck, sunroom, 1-car garage; taxes $1,900, listed at $375,000, 8 weeks on market (Broker: Sopher)  BROOKLYN
CANARSIE  $194,500
1273 East 83d Street  2-family, 34-year-old brick house; 2 bedrooms, 1 bath, dinette, eat-in kitchen in each unit; 2 bedroom, 1 bath hospitality suite in basement; taxes $1,300, listed at $209,000, 12 weeks on market (Broker: Sure Home Sales)  PARK SLOPE  $105,000
140 Eighth Avenue  2-bedroom, 1-bath, 1,100-sq.-ft. co-op in a prewar Art Deco building; 24-hr. doormen, dining area, eat-in kitchen, parquet floors, 2 exposures; maintenance $746, 53% tax-deductible, listed at $119,000, 6 weeks on market (Broker: Aguayo &amp; Associates)  WINDSOR TERRACE  $210,000
230 Seeley Street  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 2-story attached brick house; dining room, front porch, semi-finished basement, 1-car garage, 17- by 150-ft. lot; taxes $1,300, listed at $249,000, 26 weeks on market (Broker: F.J. Kazeroid)  QUEENS
FOREST HILLS  $202,500
71-42 Manse Street  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 60-year-old colonial; dining room, eat-in kitchen, finished basement, 1-car garage; taxes $1,300, listed at $212,000, 1 week on market (Broker: Kingdom)  FOREST HILLS GARDENS  $300,000
115-27 Union Turnpike  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 75-year-old 3-story tudor; dining room, eat-in kitchen, semi-finished basement, 1-car garage, 40- by 122-ft. lot; taxes $2,600, listed at $359,000, 20 weeks on market (Broker: Terrace)  STATEN ISLAND
STAPLETON  $85,000
163 Wright Street  4-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath detached colonial; eat-in kitchen, semi-finished basement, 26- by 85-ft. lot; taxes $785, listed at $94,900, 1 3/4 years on market (Broker: Salmon)  WESTCHESTER
HARTSDALE  $250,000
25 Lytton Avenue  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 39-year-old split level; bay window, modern eat-in kitchen, dining room, brick patio, den; 1/4 acre; taxes $5,400, listed at $265,000, 13 weeks on market (Broker: Century 21 Wolff)  PURDYS  $1.775 million
397 Mills Road  5-bedroom, 4 1/2-bath, 66-year-old colonial; entry hall, fireplace, dining room, den; 3/4 acre; taxes $31,083, listed at $1.95 million, 50 weeks on market (Brokers: Vincent &amp; Whittemore; Houlihan/Lawrence)  TARRYTOWN  $278,000
52 Highland Avenue  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 75-year-old cape cod; breakfast nook, screened porch, skylights, den; taxes $6,194, listed at $289,900, 47 weeks on market (Brokers: The Prudential Rita Cohen; Coldwell Banker Schlott)  WACCABUC  $487,500
18 Hunt Farm  4-bedroom, 4 1/2-bath, 7-year-old colonial; French doors, terrace, deck, 2-car garage; 1/2 acre; taxes $11,193, listed at $512,000, 24 weeks on market (Broker: Houlihan/Lawrence)  LONG ISLAND
AMITYVILLE  $176,000
29 Cooper Court  3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 37-year-old split level; dining room, eat-in kitchen, basement, den, 1-car attached garage; taxes $6,000, listed at $185,000, 17 weeks on market (Brokers: Bernice Giordano; Harbor Light)  BRIGHTWATERS  $480,000
47 South Windsor Avenue  7-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, 65-year-old brick and stucco colonial; dining room, eat-in kitchen, loft, inground pool; taxes $11,200, listed at $489,900, 48 weeks on market (Brokers: Coldwell Banker; Craben Associates)  ISLIP  $449,000
5-bedroom, 3-bath, 30-year-old expanded ranch; dining room, family room, 2-car garage, 0.5-acre, waterfront; taxes $11,575, listed at $449,000, 20 weeks on market (Broker: Eric G. Ramsay Jr. Associates)
WOODBURY  $348,000
12 Jan Lane  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 28-year-old colonial; dining room, eat-in kitchen, finished basement, family room, fireplace, 2-car garage; taxes $8,400, listed at $399,000, 16 weeks on market (Broker: ERA Gatewood)  CONNECTICUT
BRANFORD  $207,000
48 Flat Rock Road  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 9-year-old contemporary; family room, c/a, floor-to-ceiling fireplace, 2-car garage, 1 acre lot; taxes $2,909, listed at $218,900, 1 week on market (Brokers: Beazley Co.; Pepi)  DARIEN  $2.425 million
19 Contentment Island  4-bedroom, 4-bath, 89-year-old brick and clapboard carriage house; private waterfront and beach, deep-water mooring, rotunda living room, 3 fireplaces, gourmet kitchen, sunroom, slate roof, 2-car garage, 1,145-acre lot; taxes $18,622, listed at $2.6 million, 10 weeks on market (Broker: Coldwell Banker/Schlott)  GREENWICH  $1.48 million
2 Crown Lane  4-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, 30-year-old brick and shingle French provincial; new master bath, dining room, heated pool, tennis court; 4 1/2-acre lot; taxes $10,872, listed at $1.5 million, 31 weeks on market (Brokers: Preferred Properties; Coldwell Banker/ Schlott)  STAMFORD  $332,500
37 Hemlock Drive  4-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, 45-year-old cape cod; remodeled eat-in kitchen, c/a, fireplace, h/w floors, rear deck, 2-car garage, 0.33-acre lot; taxes $4,750, listed at $359,900, 5 weeks on market (Brokers: William Pitt; Juner Properties)  NEW JERSEY
EWING  $205,000
88 Lochatong Road  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 35-year-old ranch; 2-car garage, full finished basement, c/a, brick fireplace; taxes $4,818; listed at $219,800, 5 months on market (Broker: Richard A. Weidel)  FAIR LAWN  $213,000
33-07 Ryan Road  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 42-year-old Cape Cod; finished basement with bar, c/ a, rear covered porch, 1-car garage, taxes $4,538; listed at $219,900, 1 week on market (Brokers: T.P. Mabey; Century 21, Betty Lewis)  FRANKFORD  $75,000
92 Wantage Avenue  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 25-year-old ranch; 0.5-acre lot, h/w floors, 2-car garage, taxes $2,275; listed at $79,900, 18 weeks on the market (Broker: Weichert)  OCEAN CITY  $90,000
100 Somerset Lane  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 25-year-old ranch; 1-car oversized garage, new roof, corner lot, eat-in-kitchen, taxes $1,520; listed at $119,000, 7 months on market (Broker: The Richards Agency)


Swimmingly, Thanks; At 67, John Sarkos, Lifeguard, Has Rescued Nearly Everyone
JOHN SARKOS has the kind of squint in his eye that suggests that if he hasn't seen everything, he's certainly seen enough.
"I've seen planes crash and wash up," he said.
"I've seen plenty of whales come close to the beach. Dolphin. Elephants, too. Clyde Beatty once had his circus on Million Dollar Pier and he had to give the elephants a bath somewhere, so they took them right down at Arkansas Avenue."
After a pause, he added, "The environmental concerns were a little different back then."


'Kid Twist' Took the Fall, But He Left His Bag Behind
To The Editor:
To follow your report, "Ill-Fated Stool Pigeon's Roost Finally Following Him Down" (May 28): When the Half Moon Hotel in Coney Island is demolished, New York will still retain a memento of the late if unlamented Abe (Kid Twist) Reles.
At the City Archives on Chambers Street, an institution filled with millions of pieces of paper recording the city's history breath by breath, I was shown a small, drab suitcase left behind by Reles in the moment of his death.
No one on the otherwise knowledgeable staff could tell me how the archives came to possess this treasure, but they told me it has been there longer than any of them.
ARTHUR M. ZIPSER  Manhattan


July 2-8: Armed in the U.S.A.; Virginia Is Latest to Allow Concealed Weapons
County police departments in Virginia began fingerprinting and photographing thousands of state residents last week.
No lawbreakers, these average citizens were arming themselves.
Virginia became the sixth state this year and the 25th overall to relax regulations for those seeking a permit to carry a concealed handgun.
Under new procedures, any resident without a felony conviction or mental disability is virtually assured of getting the permit.


Sarah Klagsbrun, Eric S. Weinstein
Sarah Devora Klagsbrun, the daughter of Francine and Dr.
Samuel Klagsbrun of New York, is to be married this evening to Eric Scott Weinstein, a son of Anita and Barry Weinstein, also of New York.
Rabbi Harlan J. Wechsler is to officiate at the Rainbow Room in New York.
Ms.
Klagsbrun, 25, is keeping her name.
She will be a second-year medical student at the Albert Einstein Medical College in the fall.
She graduated magna cum laude from Princeton University.


SUNDAY, July 9, 1995; TRAVEL: Band on the Roll
The band is called Bicycle and it plays a combination of heavy metal, folk and rap music, with a wink.
It's striking out on its first cross-country tour -- by bicycle.
The guitarist's mom, driving ahead, will haul the instruments in a pop-up camper.
The band members (in their 20's) are oddly well behaved.
They don't smoke, and, says the drummer, "It's kind of embarrassing, but none of us has a drug problem."


Liberties; Clinton Shopping Network
Attention, D-Mart shoppers!
The Democratic National Committee has put out a catalogue with its exciting new fall collection from the White House. (Political-machine washable and made in the U.S.A.)


July 2-8; City Hall's Going Retail in Wholesale Fashion
FOR America's cities, times are certainly tough.
The cost of municipal government is rising.
The Federal Government and state capitals are slashing aid.
The mere mention of a tax hike sends politicians scurrying for political cover.
What are cash-strapped cities to do?
The answer for some time now has been for cities to get into business for themselves, but now the notion of municipal entrepreneurship has taken hold with such force that it's getting hard to keep track of its many variants.


Eva Z. Zion, Michael A. Salzhauer
Eva Zafira Zion, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Israel Zion of Brooklyn, is to be married today in Lawrence, L.I., to Michael Alexander Salzhauer, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Jehoshua H. Salzhauer of Orangeburg, N.Y.
Rabbi Chananya Elbaz is to perform the ceremony at Temple Israel of Lawrence.


For Women, Better V.A. Care
When Colleen Sambucci-Mussolino joined the Army as a cook in 1965, she was prepared for the rigors of military life.
But nothing could have prepared her for the ordeal she endured on an Army base in Alabama and the subsequent years of emotional pain.
Ms.
Sambucci-Mussolino said she was raped by four soldiers at Fort McClellan that year.
And the medical care for her physical and emotional wounds was woefully inadequate, she said.
An ectopic pregnancy went undiagnosed until it became gangrenous and was about to rupture.
She underwent emergency surgery in July 1966.


A Breakdown On the Highway To the Moon
The Little Princess, The Little Colonel At the Walter Reade Theater, 165 West 65th Street, Lincoln Center, "The Little Princess," today at 2 P.M.; "The Little Colonel," July 15 and 16 at 2 P.M.
Shirley Temple
"The Little Princess" is the 1939 version of Frances Hodgson Burnett's tale, with boarding school when her father goes to war.
Also part of this series is "The Little Colonel," with Miss Temple as the stubborn Miss Lloyd Sherman, who lives with her irascible grandfather (Lionel Barrymore) in Kentucky in the 1870's.


Pulsipher Tames Pirates, But Mets Are Even Meeker
Maybe Bobby Bonilla should say the Mets need more hitting every night.
Bill Pulsipher wouldn't mind.
The 21-year-old rookie left-hander pitched another strong game tonight, but again had nothing to show for it.
He was shaky early, almost escaped a no-out, bases-loaded situation in the third, and then retired 11 Pirates in a row at one point.
But Pittsburgh rode a two-out, two-run single from Don Slaught in the third, plus a run in the seventh inning, to a 3-2 victory at Three Rivers Stadium.


Teen-Agers Enlisted In War on Graffiti
The newest recruits in Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani's war against graffiti are fresh-faced teen-agers -- kids themselves easily pictured holding cans of spray paint.
And that is the point.
Standing with five junior high school students in an East Harlem hardware store yesterday, the Mayor and the Consumer Affairs Commissioner, Alfred Cerullo 3d, announced an anti-graffiti initiative aimed at businesses flouting the ban on spray paint sales to minors.


Seles Plans to Return In Time for U.S. Open
Two years and two months after being stabbed in the back during a tournament, Monica Seles said today that her mental anxiety was finally under control and at age 21 she was about to return to tennis.
At one point in a news conference, the former No. 1 player said she "planned" to play in the United States Open, which begins on Aug. 28 in Flushing Meadows.
At another, she said she "hoped" to play in the Open.


Glorious Shade
To the Editor: Thank you for having the courage to tackle a subject of great importance to those of us who, after a summer in the sun, can at best boast of achieving a deep rich pink.
W.
D.
Wetherell's description of the travails and pleasures of us whose skin tone is best described as pigment-challenged was right on point.
All our lives we are put down for not joining the fun in the sun.
Somehow we don't see the joy or beauty of being blistered, feeling sun-stroked and squinting constantly while we walk around slathered with so much emollient we resemble a greased-up uncooked turkey with sunglasses ready for the oven.


Jill M. Connors, Joseph E. Cooper
Jill Mary Connors, the deputy editor of American Homestyle and Gardening magazine in New York, was married on Monday to Joseph Edward Cooper, the founder and director of Sail for Kids, a nonprofit educational and sailing organization, also in New York.
Judge Edward M. Keller of Michigan District Court in Standish performed the ceremony at the bride's family's cottage in Tawas City, Mich.
Mrs.
Cooper, 38, graduated from Pennsylvania State University.
She is a daughter of Dr.
Donald R. Connors of Bethel Park, Pa., and the late Helen R. Connors.
The bride's father, a nuclear physicist, is the manager of environmental affairs at Bettis Atomic Power Laboratory in West Mifflin, Pa.
Her mother owned Bethel Book Barter, a bookstore in Bethel Park.


An Expanded Television Section
The television section has been redesigned to provide more information in an easier-to-use format.
Its new features include:  Listings for six additional cable channels: Comedy Central, the Cartoon Netwark, E!
Entertainment, the Learning Channel, the Sci-Fi Channel and VH1.


CHATTER: Should the Devils Stay or Go?; Improved Image
New Jersey should definitely keep the Devils here.
I lived in Minnesota when the North Stars packed up and left for Dallas.
The state was stunned.
When you talk about Minnesota, the home of the American Hockey Hall of Fame, but without a professional hockey team, you're talking about a major black eye.


Two Ways to Travel From Screen to Stage
WE COMPLAIN ABOUT THE uneasy relations between the sexes and between the races, between parent and child and between lover and lover: what about the knotty, uneasy relations between stage and screen?
Life was simpler when they both knew their place.
The stage was the august and venerable ruler of the performing arts; film was the upstart and parvenu, raiding plays for material, actors and prestige.
The play was the message; the movie was the medium and handmaiden.
But that was in another time.
Film has long since become a self-sufficient art and has long since eclipsed theater as mass entertainment.
Plays are now busy bootlegging film techniques and effects.
They are even bootlegging film scripts; witness the short-lived "On the Waterfront" and the still-running (how long, O Lord, how long?) "Sunset Boulevard." We do live in the age of the makeover and the adaptation.
Call it homage, call it pastiche, call it ironic commentary, but painters, photographers, composers and directors are all obsessed with reworking old masters and old chestnuts.
When this works, and why, is worth thinking about.


Over the Sea To Skye, On a Toll Bridge
IN terms of pure romance, probably no place exerts such a hold on the imagination of voyager and highlander alike as the Isle of Skye, the largest of the Inner Hebrides.
The mystical island is forever linked to the lure of escape across the water and refuge, epitomized by the flight of Bonnie Prince Charlie in 1746 and the haunting Scottish ballad "Over the Sea to Skye."
Ever since the days of the Viking hegemony in A.D. 800 -- and before, for that matter -- the only way to get here has been by boat.
Never mind that the strait between Kyle of Lochalsh on the mainland and Kyleakin is disappointingly narrow, enough almost to yell across were it not for the howling wind.
Tourists delight in pouring aboard the small ferry for the 10-minute ride, sometimes even singing: "Speed bonnie boat, like a bird on the wing."


Urbanites Get Back to the Land (Dirty Fingernails Optional)
When Jean-Paul Courtens sent the first crops from his upstate farm into Manhattan, he knew consumers would go crazy for his tomatoes, strawberries, turnips and peas.
But when he started talking about turning New Yorkers into farmers, people told him he was nuts.
"The city? Those people could never have a relationship with the land," other farmers told Mr.
Courtens, who has been growing fruits and vegetables in Columbia County since 1987.


Losing One's Bearings, Gaining One's Self-Esteem
BROOKLYN -- Like Californians who were in the middle of earthquakes or New Yorkers remembering the night John Lennon was killed, every Lubavitch Hasid has a story about where he was last year when he first heard that Rabbi Menachem Schneerson, affectionately known as the Rebbe, had died.
Chaim Marcus, 23, got the news by cellular telephone in a car on the F.D.R.
Drive.
He hung up, pulled over and ripped his blazer, following a traditional form of mourning.
He later found out that the custom was to rip one's coat at the funeral.


Graf Wins Wimbledon, Again


Tiny Fetus at the Edge of Survival: Save It or Not?
Perhaps no area of medicine has made such astonishing advances as neonatology, the study and care of the newborn.
Every day, doctors resuscitate the tiniest infants, using oxygen masks and chest compressions, and rush them to the intensive care unit, where the latest technology can turn 24-week-old, 1-pound-4-ounce fetuses into "miracle babies," destined to live for 80 years.
But occasionally an infant is saved in the delivery room only to face months of painful and costly care, which may simply prolong its dying or -- perhaps worse -- usher it into a life of devastating handicaps: blindness, chronic lung disease, mental retardation, cerebral palsy.
Moreover, the technology is so new that doctors can no longer predict which borderline babies will thrive and which will not.
Staring at a 24-week infant, physicians cannot say whether the baby will grow up relatively unscathed or whether he will grow up unable to eat, walk or talk while his family provides lifelong care.


Nobody's Child
MOTHER OF PEARL By Mary Morrissy. 281 pp. New York: Scribner.


Anastasia McLaughlin, Michael Slattery
Anastasia Bradley McLaughlin, a daughter of Dolores and H. J. McLaughlin of Cherry Hill, N.J., was married yesterday to Michael Slattery, a son of Mary and Denis Slattery of Ballinree, Ireland.
The Rev.
William A. Scafidi performed the ceremony at St.
Patrick's Cathedral in New York.
Mrs.
Slattery, 36, is a vice president and an assistant general counsel at the United States Trust Company in New York.
She graduated from Rosemont College and received her law degree from New York Law School.
Her father retired as the president of the City and Suburban Gas Company, an energy conservation concern in Cherry Hill.


On the Road: 11 Trouble Spots to Avoid
A look at trouble spots you may encounter in the next week -- or month, or months -- courtesy of Transcom, an interstate transportation agency.


V. E. Sternberg, David C. Gottlieb
Victoria Elizabeth Sternberg, the daughter of Alexandra Langner of Ossining, N.Y., is to be married there today to David Carl Gottlieb, the son of Jerome Gottlieb of Hauppauge, L.I., and the late Bette Gottlieb.
Rabbi Jeffrey Wert is to perform the ceremony at the home of the bride's mother and stepfather, Jay B. Langner.
The bride, 29, was until recently the operations manager of Robert A. Becker Inc., an advertising agency in New York.
She graduated from the University of Michigan.
Her mother retired as an executive recruiter at Battalia Winston &amp; Associates, an executive search firm in New York.
The bride's stepfather is the president of the Hudson General Corporation, an aviation services company in Great Neck, L.I., and the chairman of the board of trustees of Montefiore Medical Center in the Bronx.


Welcoming Summertime Guests for Four Generations
Seventy-two years ago, Peter and Edna Chatell started a tradition that has endured through four generations of their family.
As their granddaughter, Georgia Brothers, remembers, "I can't ever recall not having Fresh Air kids around in the summer."
Since 1966, Georgia and her husband, Hubert, have played host to at least two Fresh Air Fund children each summer at their home in DeKalb Junction, N.Y., in St.
Lawrence County.
But her family's relationship with the fund has deeper roots, going back not only to the Chatells, her maternal grandparents, who took their first Fresh Air child in 1923, but also to her paternal grandparents, Earl and Elva Moulton, who started being hosts around 1930.


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: July 9, 1995
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
2
DEBT OF HONOR, by Tom Clancy. (Berkley, $7.50.) Jack Ryan and the C.I.A. vs. a Japanese plot to strike America's territory and economy.
2
3
THE ALIENIST, by Caleb Carr. (Bantam, $6.99.) A journalist and a psychologist track down a murderer in turn-of-the-century Manhattan.
3
37
CONGO, by Michael Crichton. (Ballantine, $6.99.) An American team seeks to discover why a group of archeologists died among ruins.
4
15
THE CHAMBER, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $7.50.) A lawyer represents a racist who is on death row for his part in a 1967 bombing.
5
9
THE STONE DIARIES, by Carol Shields. (Penguin, $10.95.) The journey of a woman from childhood to motherhood through old age.
6
9
REMEMBER ME, by Mary Higgins Clark. (Pocket, $6.99.) After an estranged couple reunite, they are haunted by a mysterious force.
7
4
CHARADE, by Sandra Brown. (Warner Vision, $6.99.) Following a heart transplant, a television host finds her life enriched -- and threatened.
8
5
UNDUE INFLUENCE, by Steve Martini. (Jove, $6.99.) A defense attorney is caught in a web of murder and deceit within his own family.
9
2
ONLY LOVE, by Elizabeth Lowell. (Avon, $5.99.) A woman living in the post-Civil War Rockies fends off dangers and finds romance.
10
1
FIRST OFFENSE, by Nancy Taylor Rosenberg. (Signet, $6.99.) A probation officer whose husband is missing finds her life threatened.
11
26
CIRCLE OF FRIENDS, by Maeve Binchy. (Dell, $6.50.) The coming of age of women in an Irish village and in Dublin's academia.
12
3
ASSAULT AT SELONIA, by Roger MacBride Allen. (Spectra/Bantam, $5.99.) The second volume of the "Star Wars" Corellian Trilogy.
13
8
ALL THAT GLITTERS, by V.C.
Andrews. (Pocket, $6.99.) From plantation house to shanty: Ruby's marital ordeals continue.
14
2
HOLLYWOOD KIDS, by Jackie Collins. (Pocket, $6.99.) The tribulations of the privileged adult children of movie stars.
15
6
TUNNEL VISION, by Sara Paretsky. (Dell, $6.99.) V.I.
Warshawski probes a murder and a scandal in an agency for the homeless.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
NonFiction
1
2
APOLLO 13, by Jim Lovell and Jeffrey Kluger. (Pocket, $6.50.) The 1970 moon mission during which an oxygen tank exploded and the crew escaped in a tiny lunar module.
2
42
EMBRACED BY THE LIGHT, by Betty J. Eadie with Curtis Taylor. (Bantam, $5.99.) A woman's near-death experience.
3
78
CARE OF THE SOUL, by Thomas Moore. (Harper Perennial, $12.) A psychotherapist discusses spirituality and everyday life.
4
15
REVIVING OPHELIA, by Mary Pipher. (Ballantine, $12.50.) The dangers that beset teen-age girls.
5
9
MOTHERLESS DAUGHTERS, by Hope Edelman. (Delta, $12.95.) The experiences of women after the deaths of their mothers.
6*
121
I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS, by Maya Angelou. (Bantam, $4.99.) The poet's depiction of her childhood and adolescence.
7
609
THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott
Peck. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $10.95.) Inspiration.
8
41
HAVING OUR SAY, by Sarah L. Delany and A. Elizabeth Delany with Amy Hill Hearth. (Dell, $5.99.) Two black sisters reflect on their lives.
9*
30
SOUL MATES, by Thomas Moore. (Harper Perennial, $13.) Love and relationships.
10
43
MAMA MAKES UP HER MIND, by Bailey White. (Vintage, $10.) Life in a Georgia town.
11*
20
MAKES ME WANNA HOLLER, by Nathan McCall. (Vintage, $12.) The life of a young black man in America.
12*
4
THE KENNEDY WOMEN, by Laurence Leamer. (Ivy, $7.99.) Five generations of a family.
13
7
DOLLY, by Dolly Parton. (Harper Paperbacks, $5.99.) The autobiography of the country singer.
14
9
CREATING A NEW CIVILIZATION, by Alvin Toffler and Heidi Toffler. (Turner Publishing, $7.95.) A proposal for reshaping society.
15*
11
MAYBE (MAYBE NOT), by Robert Fulghum. (Ivy, $6.99.) Inspirational essays.
16*
2
LIFE OF THE PARTY, by Christopher Ogden. (Warner, $6.50.) A biography of Pamela Harriman, the United States Ambassador to France.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Advice, How-To and Miscellaneous
1
41
CHICKEN SOUP FOR THE SOUL, compiled by Jack Canfield and Mark Victor Hansen. (Health Communications, $12.95.) Uplifting stories.
2
10
A 2ND HELPING OF CHICKEN SOUP FOR THE SOUL, compiled by Jack Canfield and Mark Victor Hansen. (Health Communications, $12.95.) One hundred more stories.
3
219
THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE, by Stephen R. Covey. (Fireside/S&amp;S, $12.) Principles for success.
4
7
O.J.'S LEGAL PAD, by Henry Beard, John Boswell and Ron Barrett. (Villard, $8.95.) Notes and doodles supposedly made by O.J.
Simpson during his trial; a spoof.
Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending June 24, at 3,050 bookstores plus wholesalers serving 38,000 other retailers, statistically weighted to represent sales in all such outlets nationwide.
An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.


A Breakdown On the Highway To the Moon
Apollo 13 Tom Hanks, Kevin Bacon, Bill Paxton, Gary Sinise, Ed Harris, Kathleen Quinlan Directed by Ron Howard PG 135 minutes
Three astronauts (Mr. Hanks, Mr. Bacon and Mr. Paxton) are headed for the Moon when alarms go off in the spacecraft and just about every system on board seems to be broken.
The three try to be brave while the fellows at Mission Control (including Mr. Harris and Mr. Sinise) figure out how to get the astronauts home alive.
VIOLENCE -- None, but there are a number of scary moments when systems start failing.
SEX -- Fleeting banter that is over the head of most children.
PROFANITY -- A moderate amount, increasing as the tension does.
For Which Children?
AGES 3-7 -- They could be bored by all the talk.
AGES 8 and up -- Youngsters with any interest in space travel should appreciate this story.
ANITA GATES


Emily Yudell, Ronald Freudenberger
Emily Jane Yudell, a daughter of Anne and Dr.
Robert Yudell of Charlotte, N.C., is to be married today to Dr.
Ronald Steve Freudenberger, the son of Shirley and Joachim Freudenberger of Forest Hills, Queens.
Rabbi Stanley Relkin is to officiate at the Water Club in New York.
The bride, 30, graduated cum laude from Virginia Commonwealth University and is studying for a master's degree in social work at New York University.


Laura M. Dember, Peter A. Merkel
Dr.
Laura Marsha Dember, a daughter of Drs.
William and Cynthia Dember of Cincinnati, is to be married today to Dr.
Peter Alexander Merkel, a son of Eva Merkel of Scarsdale, N.Y., and the late Edgar Merkel.
Rabbi Frank Waldorf is to perform the ceremony at the Four Seasons Hotel in Boston.
Dr.
Dember, who will keep her name, graduated magna cum laude from Yale University, from which she and the bridegroom received medical degrees.
She is a fellow in the renal division at Brigham and Women's Hospital in Boston.


FUNDS WATCH
Vanguard Raises A Red Flag
A SUDDEN surge in cash flow can be a problem.
Just ask John C. Bogle, chairman of the Vanguard Group of mutual funds in Valley Forge, Pa.


He's Flustered


Correction
An article on June 25 about the rerelease of Luis Bunuel's 1967 movie "Belle de Jour" misidentified the director of the 1963 film "Les Carabiniers." He was Jean-Luc Godard, not Roberto Rossellini.
Rossellini was a co-writer for the film, with Mr.
Godard.


Underneath Cul-de-Sacs, Sludge Pits
Frank Pennimpede was not told the full story behind DeLuca Farms when he bought a $285,000 house in the rambling subdivision here four years ago.
He might have never found out either.
But then neighbors recently began to talk of men in "space suits" digging up soil samples, of drinking wells becoming contaminated and of a child coming down with a mysterious illness.


Ordeal of the Fire Island Parking Permits
AFTER years of trying to find ways to get on and off Fire Island in the winter Margaret Tannen, a single mother living year-round in Fair Harbor, has obtained one of the 145 off-season driving permits for the Fire Island National Seashore.
Life was "a nightmare" for the three years that she spent on the waiting list, she said.
Ms.
Tannen could not go to her doctor in Manhattan, lost her job as a security guard, was unable to take courses to be certified as a health-care worker and had problems entering her son in an enrichment program at C. W. Post College in Brentwood.


Just Two Summers Later, It's Winter for the Chinese
In the summer of 1993, athletes from China known as Ma's Army overthrew the sport of women's distance running with performances that were equally stunning and suspicious.
Two years later, the fall of the Chinese runners has been as extraordinary as their rise.
Coached by the stern, flamboyant Ma Junren, the Chinese women obliterated world records at 1,500 meters, 3,000 meters and 10,000 meters at the National Games in Beijing, attributing their phenomenal success to high-altitude and high-volume training, along with herbal diets of worm fungus and turtle soup.


Tale of Two Highways
A key issue at the heart of last week's labor trouble on the New Jersey Turnpike is the Turnpike Authority's desire to bring overtime in line with what is paid to collectors on the Garden State Parkway.
Turnpike workers walked off the job for eight hours on Monday, while parkway workers, who are seeking higher wages and resisting efforts to make them pay more for health care, staged a sickout the following day.
Turnpike workers resumed negotiations yesterday; negotiations have yet to resume on the parkway.


Jennifer Fenton, Christopher Jones
Jennifer Allison Fenton, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Dean Edgar Fenton of Greenwich, Conn., was married yesterday to Christopher Walton Jones, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard Walton Jones of Harrington Park, N.J.
The Rev.
Jeffrey Walker performed the ceremony at Christ Episcopal Church in Greenwich.
Mrs.
Fenton Jones teaches special education at the Haynes School in Sudbury, Mass.
She graduated from Boston College and received a master's degree in elementary and special education from Manhattanville College.
Her father owns Prime Capital, a venture capital firm in Stamford, Conn.
Her mother, Barbara Fenton, is the business manager of Greenwich Magazine in Greenwich.


F.Y.I.
Fickle Fees?
Q.
Last week, a friend and I went to the Department of Motor Vehicles to get our learner's permits.
They charged me $37, and my friend $34.50.
They said it had to do with when our birthdays were.
This doesn't seem fair; it doesn't even seem to make sense.
What gives?
A.
Fair it isn't; reasonable it is, at least by bureaucratic standards.
Here's why, as explained by George Filieau, a D.M.V. spokesman.
Until December 1993, prospective drivers had to buy one-year learner's permits.
After passing the road test, a person then had to return to the D.M.V. to buy a license and have an I.D. picture taken.
Two trips, two payments, two adventures in paperwork.
In December 1993, the D.M.V. started a simpler system using computers that could store masses of photos and personal information.
A prospective driver has an I.D. photo taken and pays the license fee when the permit is issued.
Once the road test is passed, a license is automatically issued through the mail.
To spread its workload throughout the year, the D.M.V. generally sets a license's expiration dates based on a driver's birthday at least four years after the application for the learner's permit was filed.
Thus, people who apply this year will get licenses that expire on their birthdays in 1999 or later. (An exception is when a driver's birthday is earlier in the same calendar month than the application date; then, the license expires just shy of four years, on the driver's birthday.)
Because licenses are issued for four years, drivers are assessed $2.50 for each six-month period, or part of a period, beyond that standard duration.
Thus, someone whose birthday is April 10 and who applies on July 10 will have a license that expires in four years and nine months.
But it will cost $5 more than the standard $32 -- $2.50 for each six-month period, or part thereof, beyond four years.
Someone whose birthday is July 10, but who applies on April 10, will have a license good for four years and three months, and will pay $2.50 above the $32 for the extra duration.
If you want to avoid both additional fees and mathematical headaches, apply on your birthday.
O Fleeting Fame Q.  There's an apartment house at 235 Second Avenue, between 14th and 15th Streets, that bears the inscription "U.S. Senate." Was this ever home to the Senate?
A.
No, it was not.
So why are the words there?
To answer a question with a question, did you notice the building next door?
The inscription at 231 Second Avenue says, "W. M. Evarts."
That clears it all up, doesn't it?
Both inscriptions, made in 1903, honor William Maxwell Evarts, a prominent New York lawyer, diplomat and Senator, who died in 1901.
Evarts, according to the Encyclopedia Americana, was involved in several of the more celebrated events of the mid- and late 1800's.
In 1868, he helped President Andrew Johnson survive his impeachment trial in the United States Senate.
In 1871, Evarts got Great Britain to cough up $15.5 million for having helped the Confederate Navy.
The Fate of All Cash Q.  At the north end of the Hudson River Park in Battery Park City there's a bizarre sculpture/chess garden with all these little bronze figures pushing pennies, among other things, into a tower shape in the fountain.
There are some little dead figures buried in the piles of coins, and a bodiless head.
What is it?
A.
It's called "The Real World" and it's definitely not the MTV show.
It's the work of the sculptor Tom Otterness, whose fondness for the little doughboy figures is a trademark.
There are plaques, Mr.
Otterness said, at the northern and southern entrances to the work.
"But nobody ever sees them," he said.
"They just step over them."
The piece was unveiled in 1992 and combines cartoonish whimsy with a comment on the fickleness of the financial businesses that literally shadow the Park.
Mr.
Otterness says he likes to drop by to watch families explore the work.
"I go with my 3-year-old daughter, Kelly," he said.
"It's great to watch. The kids come up and say, 'Look, dead people!' and the parents go 'Eeeeechhhh.' And little kids go up and yell into the ear of the head that's lying down. It seems endless."
Mr.
Otterness's next big public work: designs for the 14th Street subway station on Eighth Avenue, slated for completion in 1999.
JESSE McKINLEY Questions (and answers) may be sent to F.Y.I., The City, The New York Times, 229 West 43d Street, New York, N.Y. 10036.


Japan Arrests More Suspects In Gas Attack
The police today arrested three members of the Aum Shinrikyo religious sect who had been on a nationwide wanted list in connection with the March poison gas attack on the Tokyo subway system.
The authorities have stepped up their search for fugitive sect members after four incidents in the last week in Tokyo involving poison gas.
There is no indication that the fugitives are responsible, and the sect has denied responsibility, but the episodes reminded the public of Tokyo's vulnerability to terrorist attacks.


Problem Is Rain, Not Reservoirs
New Jersey could use some rain.
Precipitation has been below normal levels every month since last September, making this one of the driest periods in memory, The Associated Press reported.
Despite the drought, the state's reservoirs are only 5 percent below normal -- a circumstance meteorologists attribute to improved management of water supplies and the fact that a wet year preceded the dry spell, with ground water, rivers and reservoirs above normal levels at that time.


Vibrations on Old Pipes Can Shake Out Surprises
When the water pipe that burst yesterday was first built, horses were still common on Manhattan's roads, and the first subway line had not even been completed.
But in the nine decades since, untold subway cars and heavy trucks have rolled by, their vibrations testing the durability of the rigid cast-iron pipe.
And while inspectors frequently test the city's 6,000 miles of water mains to see which are most vulnerable, the age of the pipes leaves the system open to surprises.


Cyberspace-Rights Group Heads West
The Internet backlash is in full swing.
The Senate has passed a bill that restricts free speech on computer networks.
The White House and several foreign governments are restricting the use of private data encryption software.
The Federal Bureau of Investigation wants increased capabilities to conduct telephone and computer network wiretaps.
And in the midst of this, the Electronic Frontier Foundation, one of the first civil liberties groups created to influence public policy on issues related to cyberspace, is closing its Washington office and moving to San Francisco.


From 14th to 42d Streets, Mud and Nothing but Mud
For Transit Authority officials trying to get the flooded Seventh Avenue subway line back in service yesterday, the biggest problem was mud.
The day began with what initially seemed like a bizarre underground rainstorm.
Torrents of water gushing through a jagged crack in a pipe under 40th Street poured onto the tracks in the Times Square subway station and set off in furious streams for Greenwich Village.
When it was over, there was mud and debris everywhere.


2 Dominican Team Members May Be Applying for Asylum
Two members of the Special Olympics team from the Dominican Republic have slipped away from their escorts and may be planning to apply for political asylum to remain in the United States permanently.
David Phelps, a Special Olympics spokesman, said that Juan Carlos Bal Buena, a 20-year-old basketball player from Santo Domingo, was believed to be with relatives in New York today, after apparently receiving help from friends or family to leave the games about 1 P.M.
Friday.
Mr.
Bal Buena, who is described as moderately mentally retarded, was not reported missing until Saturday by members of his delegation.


Accounts
*
Seiko Communications, Richardson, Tex., an alliance between Fossil Inc. and Seiko Worldwide, to GSD&amp;M, Austin, Tex., to introduce the Message Watch, a timepiece that also offers options like a pager and radio.
The Message Watch is currently being tested in Seattle and Portland, Ore.


Devils and Sports Authority Near Better Lease for Team
The Devils and the New Jersey Sports and Exposition Authority, so recently swapping charges of bad faith and deceit, are within days of agreeing to a renegotiated lease that will increase revenues to the team.
"We're very close, it could be announced before Tuesday," Joel Kobert, general counsel to the authority, said yesterday.
"Both sides have exchanged documents. We should know today or tomorrow."


Pilobolus Is at It Again, In a Duel With Gravity
The Pilobolus Dance Theater will be 25 next year.
In dance-company terms, that is the equivalent of about a century.
But the program presented by Pilobolus on Friday night at the Joyce Theater suggested that these canny cutups of modern dance go right on doing what they do best.
The Pils, as it is familiarly known, can be depended on for stunning physical feats and visual surprises, a peek or two into the crannies of the heart, and lots of humor, both awful and sublime.
"The Doubling Cube," the premiere on this first of three programs, epitomizes the company's physical style.
Choreographed by Robby Barnett, Alison Chase, Michael Tracy, Jonathan Wolken and the performers to a score by Jane Ira Bloom, the new group work takes six bodies, clustered close for the most part, and sends them racing, sprawling and rolling through arcs of movement.


Ex-Rival Accuses Buchanan of 'Flirting' With Fascism
William J. Bennett, former Education Secretary and pugnacious advocate of family values in the Republican Party, has accused Patrick J. Buchanan, the conservative columnist and Republican Presidential candidate, of "flirting" with fascism in his vision of America's future.
In a wide-ranging interview in The New Yorker this week, Mr.
Bennett was asked whether he stood by his remark of several years earlier that Mr.
Buchanan had flirted with fascism.


Of Time Travelers And Props
Sali Ann Kriegsman, the new executive director of the Jacob's Pillow Dance Festival, has been sprinkling her welcoming speech before each performance with warnings about an uninvited guest: a black bear that has been frequenting the grounds (the local police are on alert).
"Wonderland," a new work by Paula Josa-Jones, a choreographer based in Cambridge, Mass., was nonetheless performed without incident on Saturday afternoon at the Studio Theater.
It is doubtful that even an ursine visitor would have looked out of place in the stream of images that make up the phantasmagoria of "Wonderland."


Quest for Sharper TV Likely To Bring More TV Instead
High-definition television, which became the rallying cry for the revival of the American electronics industry in the 1980's, now seems to be a wonder whose time may never come.
Just as the vision of HDTV, with its promise of dazzlingly sharp pictures, is on the verge of becoming reality, broadcasters and regulators increasingly agree that what the American public will want is more television, not better television.


Hospital Urged To Bar Patients Posing a Threat
A Brooklyn grand jury has recommended that criminally insane patients be barred from a state mental hospital in East Flatbush, where a patient escaped and returned with a knife that the police said he used to kill another patient.
The report, released yesterday by the Brooklyn District Attorney, Charles J. Hynes, said the hospital, Kingsboro Psychiatric Center, was never designed to hold the criminally insane.
It said housing dangerous patients at the center, in a residential neighborhood a few blocks away from a high school, posed a serious threat to public safety.


Sydney Journal; Battling Over a National Symbol: It's on the Menu
To many in the loftiest epicurean circles of Sydney, Jean-Paul Bruneteau is a culinary icon, the chef whose popular restaurant, Riberries, has championed the use of overlooked foods from the Australian bush.
But to animal rights groups, Mr.
Bruneteau is the enemy, the man who has tried to turn the Australian national symbol -- the beloved kangaroo -- into food.
And they will do almost anything, they say, to force him to pull it from the menu.


36 Are Injured in Stampede At Concert in Coney Island
About 36 people suffered minor injuries at a reggae concert on Coney Island last night when the sound of gunshots sent audience members fleeing in panic from a fenced park, the police said.
Gunfire erupted in Steeplechase Park around 7:30 P.M. as about 20,000 concertgoers were listening to the daylong festival's final act, Capleton, the police and witnesses said.
There were reports of as many as 40 shots, coming from four different locations in the park.


Haiti: Lessons for the Next Election
Haiti is wise to postpone its next round of elections.
The first round, on June 25, was marred by massive disorganization.
Thousands of eligible voters were unable to cast ballots.
Some were left off lists and some polling places never even opened.
Ballots were handled sloppily and the announcement of results has been postponed.
On July 22 those who missed out in the first round will be able to vote.
The runoffs will now take place in August on a date to be announced.
The postponement should give officials time to learn from their mistakes.
Some of those lessons are startlingly simple.
Ballot boxes need to be sealed, and voters need some education about the process.
In the last round, a largely illiterate electorate was presented with confusing, complicated ballots and given no idea how to handle them.
Many did not even realize that it was not a presidential election.
Giving voters a chance to see a ballot before the voting would help, as well as trying to simplify the ballots themselves.


Christopher Cadbury, 86, a Conservationist
Christopher Cadbury, an Englishman who helped set up and develop nature preserves in Britain and elsewhere, died on June 25 in Worcestershire, the British newspaper The Daily Telegraph reported Thursday.
He was 86.
Mr.
Cadbury worked in his family's chocolate-manufacturing company, Cadbury Brothers, and was president of the Royal Society for Nature Conservation from 1962 to 1988.


A Long Day's Journey Into the Off Season
Here in the National Hockey League's northernmost outpost, the summer sky disorients a visitor's body clock.
The sun doesn't set until after 10 P.M., the dusk lingers long after that and the dawn breaks a few hours later.
This surreal setting was appropriate for the symbolic conclusion of the winter game's longest season.
This was the site of the Entry Draft, Trade Fair and Gossip Flea Market on Saturday at Northlands Coliseum.


Health Care Report Cards
Health care reform received a potential boost earlier this month at a meeting in Wyoming of large private and public employers.
They created a foundation to spur health plans to provide consumers with information that can help determine which plans provide the best treatment.
Participants in the Wyoming meeting vowed to use their collective influence -- together, they employ 80 million workers -- to force health plans to report data that would show which programs provide the most effective care.
Based on the information, the foundation would produce periodic report cards on quality of care, matters like the recovery rates from colon cancer treatment or heart attacks.


Man's Museum of Memories Relives the Terror for Blacks
A survivor of history and horror, James Cameron is the founder and tour guide of "America's Black Holocaust Museum" here.
He is also its star exhibit.


Bridge
The finale of the European Team Championships in Vilamoura, Portugal, nine days ago was one of the most dramatic in the 64-year history of that prestigious event.
There was no doubt that Italy would win, with a young and relatively inexperienced team, and that France would finish second, with a nucleus of stars who took the World Olympiad Team title in Salsomaggiore, Italy, three years ago.
The excitement concerned third and fourth place, which would earn qualification for the world championships scheduled for Beijing in October.
With eight deals remaining, Poland, Sweden and the Netherlands were virtually tied for third.
Poland was playing Sweden and needed simply to play steadily.
But the Poles indulged in a series of slight overbids and lost the match heavily.
As a result, their players, who have had great success in international competition, will not be in Beijing, but the Swedes and the Dutch will.


U.N. Warns Serbs Of Bombing if They Attack Dutch Unit
United Nations officials said tonight that NATO air strikes had been authorized if Bosnian Serbs attacked a United Nations position in eastern Bosnia.
The threat of bombing and the detention of 30 peacekeepers by the Serbs raised the prospect of a new cycle of violence and reprisal that could further damage the already fragile United Nations mission.


Investigation Of Company Stirs Curiosity
The last time the Archer-Daniels-Midland Company tangled with antitrust enforcers, there was no mystery about what landed the grain trading and processing giant in the Federal Government's gunsights.
A.D.M. wanted to acquire a competitor's capacity to make corn sweetener, and the Government said the deal would reduce competition.
That battle began in 1982 and ended with an A.D.M. victory in court in 1991.
The outcome has only added to the intrigue surrounding A.D.M.'s announcement on June 28 that it was the subject of a new investigation of price-fixing in the global markets for sweeteners and other food and feed additives.


Mets End the First Half on a Familiar Note: Falling Flat
The Mets ended the first half of the season exactly as they started it: with a two-game losing streak.
And that does not say anything about all those defeats in between.
Somebody named Esteban Loaiza tossed a five-hitter against the hapless New Yorkers at Three Rivers Stadium this afternoon to give the Pittsburgh staff its first back-to-back complete games in nearly three years.
The Mets, meanwhile, fumbled their way to 3 more errors to give them 10 in their last 4 games.
Bret Saberhagen, trade rumors swirling all about him, departed once again with arm fatigue.
And, after the Mets scored two quick runs in the second inning, their bats once again fell silent en route to a 6-3 loss -- their league-worst 44th of the year.


New Look for Train Station
The Central Railroad of New Jersey station in Elizabeth will undergo a facelift as one of about 100 transportation projects that are to receive a total of $20.5 million in Federal and state funds, Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman's office has announced.
About $7.6 million will go to municipalities for roadwork.
The remainder has been earmarked for bikeways, roadway walking paths and rest areas.


In America; Health &amp; Safety Wars
On one side you have extremely powerful politicians, like the Senate majority leader, Bob Dole, and Representative David McIntosh, a champion of industry who once headed Dan Quayle's Council on Competitiveness.
On the other you have ordinary citizens like Laura Day, a student at the University of Alabama, and Roni Rudolph, a homemaker from Carlsbad, Calif.


Equity Offerings Expected This Week
The following equity and convertible debt offerings are expected this week:  BNC Corp., Bismarck, N.D., an initial public offering of one million shares.
Dain Bosworth.
Colonial Data Technologies Corp., New Milford, Conn., 2.2 million shares.
First Albany Corp.
LSI Logic Corp., Milpitas, Calif., five million shares. Lehman Brothers.
Martin Industries Inc., Florence, Ala., an initial public offering of two million shares.
Bradford (J. C.) &amp; Co.
MEMC Electronic Materials Inc., St.
Peters, Mo., an initial public offering of 17 million shares, including 13.6 million in the U.S.
J.
P.
Morgan.
Mountain Parks Financial Corp., Minneapolis, 700,000 shares and $10 million of exchangeable subordinated notes due in 2005.
Piper Jaffray.
Novadigm Inc., Mahwah, N.J., an initial public offering of 2.85 million shares.
Alex Brown.
Ontrak Systems Inc., Milpitas, Calif., an initial public offering of 2.4 million shares.
Montgomery Securities.
Penncorp Financial Group Inc., New York, 1.5 million shares $50 convertible preferred.
Smith Barney.
Pixtech Inc., Rousset, France, an initial public offering of 2.5 million shares.
Hambrecht &amp; Quist.
Project Software and Development Inc., Cambridge, Mass., 1.8 million shares.
Robertson Stephens &amp; Co.
Sola International Inc., Meno Park, Calif., 4.5 million shares, including 3.6 million in the U.S.
Morgan Stanley.
Tarrant Apparel Group, Los Angeles, an initial public offering of 2.55 million shares.
Prudential Securities.
Tele-Communicatons Inc., Englewood, Colo., an initial public offering of 20 million class A shares, including 14 million in the U.S. and Canada.
Merrill Lynch.
United Waste Systems Inc., Greenwich, Conn., 1.3 million shares. Goldman, Sachs.
Source: MCM CorporateWatch.


Abroad at Home; Bare Ruined Choirs
The radical Republicans in Congress like to say that they are cutting and changing for the sake of our children.
"Our goals are simple," Newt Gingrich said.
"We don't want our children to drown in debt. . . ."
What kind of America will our children in fact inherit if the Republican Congress meets its declared goals?
If the legislation now in process is finally enacted?


Infant Mortality Rate Drops But Racial Disparity Grows
Infant mortality in the United States declined to a record low last year, but the gap between rates for blacks and whites is growing and is not expected to narrow in the next 15 years, the Government said today.
Preliminary data, disclosed by the National Center for Health Statistics, show that there were 7.9 infant deaths for every 1,000 live births in the United States in 1994, while the figure for 1993 was 8.3 and 8.5 for 1992.
The rate first fell below 12 per 1,000 in 1981.


Free Market of Ideas
To the Editor:
"A Breach in the Church-State Wall" (editorial, July 5) benightedly urges a modern-day version of a permanent Babylonian exile of religious speech from public discourse.


Saved in a Motel Pool
A Newark woman and her three children none of whom were able to swim -- were rescued when a Lodi man pulled all four out of a motel swimming pool, including a boy who was lying at the bottom.
The man, Kenny Xheraj, was sitting near the pool at the Fountains Motel last Friday when he saw Crystal Willis and her two daughters, Celeste and Christine, struggling in the water.


Outrage Keeps Shifting In Republican Primaries
AS Patrick J. Buchanan sees it, New York is the most reactionary state in the union.
And he has a point.
The conservative commentator came to town the other day to complain about New York's infamously restrictive election laws.
He stood there at a news conference in the Doral Inn and said the Presidential primary race "comes very close to being a political fix." He called the system a match for Eastern Europe, "circa 1955." He said that fair is fair and New York isn't.
And who could argue with him?


Senate Goes to Battle On U.S. Regulations
The Senate today begins debate on an ambitious effort to change the way Federal regulations are written.


White House Offers Documents to New Whitewater Hearings
On the eve of new Congressional hearings into the Whitewater affair, the White House today made available some documents from the office of Vincent W. Foster Jr., the former deputy White House counsel who committed suicide in 1993, in an effort to buttress its case that there was no link between his death and the controversy over the failed Arkansas land deal.
Breaking months of silence imposed by the special Whitewater prosecutor, Kenneth W. Starr, White House lawyers summoned reporters to review pager records, security logs and Secret Service reports on the handling of access to Mr.
Foster's office and papers in the hours and days after his death on July 20, 1993.


The Champions on Film
The film career of Marge and Gower Champion will be the subject of "Capturing Choreography: Masters of Dance and Film," on Wednesday and Thursday at 8 P.M. at the Walter Reade Theater, 165 West 65th Street.
The program, narrated by Ms.
Champion, is to feature dances choreographed for films that include "Jupiter's Darling," "Three for the Show" and "Show Boat." Tickets are $12.
Information: (212) 875-5625.


INSIDE
New Officials Seen at MCA
Two top entertainment figures are said to be joining MCA, as Edgar Bronfman Jr. puts his imprint on the film and music company.
Page D1.
Korean Is Pulled From Rubble
A 21-year-old student was pulled from a collapsed department store in South Korea after surviving for more than nine days.
Page A6.
American Bolts to Freedom
A Connecticut man kidnapped by rebels in India tricked his captors by feigning illness and then escaping into the Himalaya foothills.
Page A5.
Base Closings List Readied
After giving assurances on jobs in California, the President is set to approve base closings.
Page B9


Rupture of Pipe Floods Subway in Manhattan
A huge turn-of-the-century water main ruptured just south of Times Square shortly before dawn yesterday.
A geyser of floodwaters that surged unchecked for six hours turned Seventh Avenue into a small lake and two subway lines into rivers that ran chest-deep and fast to Greenwich Village, two miles away.
No one was injured, and damage was limited to the broken main, a cratered street and flooded basements around the site at 40th Street and Seventh Avenue.
But the spectacular break halted all Seventh and Eighth Avenue subway service, created huge traffic snarls in midtown Manhattan and left the city with an enormous cleanup job in mud-caked, debris-strewn subway stations and tunnels.


The French Discover One of Their Own, Sculptor and Feminist
Louise Bourgeois was over 70 when a one-woman show at the Museum of Modern Art in New York in 1982 first earned the artist broad recognition in her adopted land.
Now, at the age of 83, the feisty and voluble feminist is finally being discovered by her native France through a major retrospective at the Museum of Modern Art of the City of Paris.
In a sense, the wait was worthwhile; many admirers of her work believe the last decade has been her most creative period.
The Paris show, which is to run until Oct. 8, has therefore been organized in reverse chronological order to emphasize her recent work, with half of the 50 sculptures and installations on display here dated after 1982.


Sports of The Times; Becker Won't Take Glory From Sampras
BORIS BECKER wasn't fooled.
He knew the crowd had granted him an extraordinary romp around Center Court because he is an old guy, 27, who had just been sizzled by Pete Sampras, all of four years younger.
The crowd has loved Becker since the first day he stuck out his burly chest and took over Center Court a whole decade ago.
And after Sampras had paraded around the court in the proper, ceremonial display of the winner's trophy, the crowd called for Becker.
Sampras urged him to take the lap, and Becker jogged around the court with what little spring was left in his legs.


A Troubled Church Misses 4 of Its Pillars
The burnished wood sanctuary of St.
Augustine Presbyterian Church ached yesterday with their absence.
Evelyn Dotson, 80, who brought meat pies to the 97-year-old woman she visited two or three times a week.
Henrietta E. Lathan, 73, who telephoned another congregation member almost every day after five heart operations forced the woman to move in with her son.


Treasury Auctions Limited to Bills This Week
The Treasury's schedule of financings this week is confined to today's regular weekly auction of three- and six-month bills.
By the close of the New York cash market on Friday, traders said, the rate on the outstanding three-month bill was 5.37 percent and a six-month bill was 5.26 percent.


TV News Crossing Old Lines On Jobs
It was Friday night, the start of the Fourth of July holiday weekend, when Jerry Nachman, vice president of news at WCBS-TV (Channel 2) in New York, got a phone call at home telling him three things: that Elizabeth Holtzman, the former New York City Comptroller, had been mugged at an automatic teller machine in Manhattan, that two city firefighters had helped to catch the culprit and that Channel 2 had no reporter available to cover the story.
Mr.
Nachman, a newsman for 25 years, dashed downstairs to a news van at his front door, got to the scene, interviewed Ms.
Holzman and the firefighters, and reported it all live on the 11 o'clock Channel 2 news.


They Let Their Fingers Do the Talking
Little more than a year ago, Michael Bolanos, an independent concert producer, decided to get into the computer on-line business in a modest way.
On Compuserve, a major on-line service whose subscribers can dial in for access to everything from out-of-town newspapers to stock quotations to conversation, he started an entertainment forum.
It would be a little alcove in cyberspace, where, he figured, people could meet to discuss movies and television shows.
Mr.
Bolanos began his venture with a friend, one personal computer, scant hope of riches and no intention of abandoning his work as a producer.


Saving Farmland By Saving Farmers
It's just a field: 57 acres of bottom land along the Shepaug River, below Mine Hill, where for as long as many people remember, dairy farmers have grown corn for their cows.
But fields are more than just fields in the soft hills and valleys of Litchfield County.
Carved out of wilderness by farmers, they both define the pastoral landscape that attracts artists, writers and, increasingly, summer people, and hold it open for view.


Among the House's Big Spenders
Representatives Bob Franks of New Providence and Jim Saxton of Mount Holly, both Republians, spent more than anyone else in New Jersey's 13-member House delegation on salaries and office expenses for the first three months of the new Congress, the A.P. reported.
Mr.
Franks spent $209,919 and Mr.
Saxton $206,257, placing them in the top 100 overall from Jan. 1 through March 31, the Clerk of the House's quarterly report said.


METRO DIGEST
WATER MAIN RUPTURE FLOODS 7TH AVENUE A huge turn-of-the-century water main ruptured just south of Times Square.
A geyser of floodwaters that surged unchecked for six hours turned Seventh Avenue into a small lake and two subway lines into rivers that ran chest-deep and fast to Greenwich Village, two miles away.
No one was injured, and damage was limited to the broken main, a cratered street and flooded basements around the site at 40th Street and Seventh Avenue.  [ Page A1. ] For Transit Authority officials trying to get the flooded Seventh Avenue subway line back in service, the biggest problem was mud.  [ B6. ]


Flood-Control Plan Takes Shape
Federal and local officials have unveiled a $42.3 million plan to control flooding in South River and Sayreville.
A flood wall and two levees would be built along parts of the South River and the adjoining Washington Canal.
Six major floods have hit South River and Sayreville since 1962, including one that forced the evacuation of 200 people.
The plan also calls for studying flooding in Old Bridge and restoring 250 acres of wetlands damaged by dredging in the Washington Canal.


The Senate Must Remove Bob Packwood
To the Editor:
I am one of 29 women who has chosen to speak out about Senator Bob Packwood's improper sexual advances.
I was shocked by William Safire's June 29 column commenting on the charges that Mr.
Packwood abused his office by improperly soliciting lobbyists to employ his wife, tampering with his public journals (transcribed with campaign funds) and sexually assaulting 29 women.


Economic Calendar
Listed below are the scheduled release dates for major economic indicators this week.
Monday Consumer Borrowing May Tuesday None Wednesday None Thursday Producer Prices June Weekly Jobless Claims Friday Consumer Prices June Retail Sales June Industrial Production June Capacity Utilization June


The Perks of a Music Man (Annotated)
It wasn't close to the estimated $360 million that Michael Ovitz was seeking to become the head of MCA.
But Doug Morris was on his way to a pretty good year before Time Warner dismissed him last month as chief of its Warner Music domestic record labels.
The ensuing contract dispute provides a rare public glimpse into the fine print of perquisites for a music mogul.
When Time Warner dismissed Mr.
Morris, he lost more than a job, salary and stock options; he's out a car and driver, use of the corporate jet and a family room full of consumer electronics.


Health Law May Go Nationwide
First, Trenton passed a bill insuring minimum hospital stays for newborns and their mothers.
Then, United States Senator Bill Bradley, Democrat of New Jersey, introduced a similar bill to make New Jersey's law applicable throughout the country.
Now, two New Jerseyans in the House of Representatives are getting into the act.


The Bedside Profession
Everybody, it seems, wants to be a doctor.
Medical school applications have risen to their highest level ever, with 46,000 people trying for 16,000 places last year.
At Harvard, the admissions office received more than 4,000 applications for a class of 165.
This is happening at a time when, many doctors say, the field is more unwelcoming than ever.
They sputter about pressures to join health maintenance organizations, about Government red tape and the cost of malpractice insurance, about daily negotiations with insurance administrators who refuse to authorize tests on patients they will never meet.


Sampras Defends Wimbledon Title


Media; TELEVISION: Smelling blood, Fox is taking quick aim at NBC's beleaguered 'Saturday Night Live.'
NBC's "Saturday Night Live" has been written off as dead numerous times in its 20-year run, but only this year has the speculation been taken seriously enough for its competitors to consider trying to rub out the show permanently.
While ABC and CBS have both been developing late-night shows for Saturdays, Fox has already announced its plans: starting in October the network will offer its own Saturday night sketch-comedy show, "Mad TV."


The Game Needs a Save, So Nomo Must Get a Start
Major league baseball has dedicated a half a season's worth of effort to fans who are no longer there, the missing in action who have chosen to show their displeasure with the game and its endless wrangles over money and power by tuning out.
But tomorrow night, baseball will be shifting its attention to those who want to tune in.
It will do so by giving the public what potentially is the best show to hit baseball in a long time: Hideo Nomo versus the American League at the annual All-Star Game, which this year will be held in Arlington, Tex.


Bridge
The finale of the European Team Championships in Vilamoura, Portugal, nine days ago was one of the most dramatic in the 64-year history of that prestigious event.
There was no doubt that Italy would win, with a young and relatively inexperienced team, and that France would finish second, with a nucleus of stars who took the World Olympiad Team title in Salsomaggiore, Italy, three years ago.
The excitement concerned third and fourth place, which would earn qualification for the world championships scheduled for Beijing in October.
With eight deals remaining, Poland, Sweden and the Netherlands were virtually tied for third.
Poland was playing Sweden and needed simply to play steadily.
But the Poles indulged in a series of slight overbids and lost the match heavily.
As a result, their players, who have had great success in international competition, will not be in Beijing, but the Swedes and the Dutch will.


Ex-Tenant Questioned in Fire
Detectives yesterday questioned a former tenant of an illegal boarding house in Queens about a suspicious fire there Saturday that killed a mother and two small children, the police said.
The name of the tenant, a woman, was not released, though the police said there had been tension between her and the woman killed in the fire.


On Stage 8, the Yellow Jersey Is Reclaimed by Its Owner
Big Mig won, of course, but this time it wasn't easy.
Storming to the finish line, standing in the saddle, the sweat dripping from his face and the veins in his arms bulging as he pushed down on his bicycle's handlebars, Miguel Indurain barely triumphed in the Tour de France's first big test today.
For the fifth successive year, Indurain, a Spaniard who rides for the Banesto team, won the Tour's first long individual time trial.
He also donned the overall leader's yellow jersey.


The Pentagon Jackpot
Pentagon officials can hardly believe their good fortune.
While furiously cutting domestic programs to balance the Federal budget, Congress is showering the Defense Department with billions the generals did not request.
It is a disheartening exhibition of political self-interest, devoid of any plausible national-security justification.
The sole purpose is to dispense defense dollars and jobs to as many Congressional districts as possible.
There should be no place for lavish military spending when threats to the United States are diminishing and disadvantaged Americans are facing drastic cuts in Government programs that help them sustain the barest standard of living.
Led by Republicans who suggest that American defenses are inadequate, the House and Senate seem to be engaged in a race to see which can throw more money at the Pentagon.
The Senate Armed Services Committee recently approved a $264.7 billion military budget for 1996, about $7 billion more than the Pentagon requested.
The House has approved a $267.3 billion plan.
Either way, Congress is prematurely braking the decline in the defense budget that appropriately began with the end of the cold war and disintegration of the Soviet Union.
The Congressional budget numbers go even higher in the years ahead.


An Aspiring Sailor Learns the Ropes


Judge Johnson's Medal
When President Clinton gives a Presidential Medal of Freedom to Judge Frank Johnson later this year, he will be reminding the nation how this quiet man improved American justice and the life of his native Alabama.
In 40 years on the Federal bench, Judge Johnson has seen his assignment as upholding the Constitution, fairly interpreting the law and doing equal justice to poor and rich.
For doing that, violence-prone segregationists threatened his safety and that of his family.
For desegregating Alabama's schools and colleges, he won the denunciation of Gov.
George Wallace.
For demanding decent conditions in state prisons, he won criticism for judicial activism.
His brave rulings cleared the way for the Selma march and sent killers to jail on Federal civil rights charges when the state courts failed to act forcefully to end racial violence.
It was truly said that while Mr.
Wallace ranted and railed, Judge Johnson ran the state.
Indeed, his governance was as orderly and principled as Mr.
Wallace's was fitful and biased.


U.N. Report Accuses Croatian Troops of Killing Refugees
A United Nations report quoting testimony by witnesses asserts that Croatian Army troops machine-gunned refugees and committed other "serious" human rights violations in their attack two months ago on part of Croatia held by Serbian rebels.
The report, which is expected to be made public this week, challenges the Croatian Government's contention that from 20 to 54 civilians died in the fighting.
It says information gathered from "various international sources credibly indicate a number of civilian dead in excess of the Government's figures." The report says there should be further investigation.


Police Managed the News in Second Siege of Squatter Street
To the Editor:
I was among the astonished observers of the police preparations for the confrontation with the squatters who had returned to the building on East 13th Street the night of July 4 (news article, July 5).
While the magnitude of the response seemed both ludicrous and ominous, I was equally disturbed by the lack of press presence at the moment of actual confrontation, as this seemed to me the best hope for a minimum of police violence.
The potential for excess seemed enormous.
The press did arrive (I identified Channel 7 Eyewitness News and WINS radio).
But the reporters were not allowed within the police cordon.
I was amazed to see how readily they accepted being restricted.
Am I old-fashioned?
I grew up in a time when reporters routinely made their way to the front lines in war zones.
Now I saw them meekly standing on the sidelines in peacetime in their own city, accepting whatever scraps of information were available from the police and the rest of the people who were barricaded out.
Isn't this kind of censorship newsworthy?
Although WNYC's local newscaster mentioned next morning that reporters were kept a block and a half away from the besieged building, this was far from universally reported.
JOANNE COLLIER  New York, July 6, 1995


Missing in Cyprus
To the Editor:
What is missing in "War's Dark Secret, Kept Alive by Women in Black" (news article, July 4) on the question of missing persons in Cyprus is any mention that the Turkish Cypriot side has accepted the criteria proposed by the United Nations Secretary General for the effective functioning of the Committee on Missing Persons in Cyprus.


RESULTS PLUS
AUTO RACING Jeff Gordon Gets Fifth Victory of Season
Jeff Gordon used pit-stop strategy to join the leaders, then drove a smooth line to the top of the Winston Cup standing with an easy victory yesterday in the Slick 50 300 at New Hampshire International Speedway in Loudon.
Giving the new Chevrolet Monte Carlos their 13th victory in 16 Winston Cup events this year, Gordon collected $160,300 from a $1.3 million purse.
Included in his earnings was a $50,000 bonus for taking the lead in the series points race.
Gordon passed the seven-time champion Dale Earnhardt on the 170th of 300 laps on the 1.058-mile oval, then surrendered the lead only during caution periods.
The victory was his series-leading fifth this season. (AP) VILLENEUVE WINS: Jacques Villeneuve went virtually unchallenged en route to his second straight Texaco-Havoline 200 victory at Road America in Elkhart Lake, Wis. (AP) GOLF Mayfair Takes the Western Open
In Lemont, Ill., Billy Mayfair broke a five-player logjam by making a birdie on the 18th hole yesterday to win the Western Open by one stroke.
Mayfair's second career victory in six seasons earned him the $360,000 top prize in the $2 million event, one of the richest on the PGA Tour.
The check more than doubled his season winnings to $630,985.
With a five-under-par 67 for the day and a nine-under 279 for the tournament, the 28-year-old from Phoenix finished just ahead of Jeff Maggert, Jay Haas, Scott Simpson and Justin Leonard. (AP)  MARSHALL GETS FIRST VICTORY: Kathryn Marshall became the sixth first-time winner on the L.P.G.A.
Tour this season, shooting a four-under-par 67 to capture the Jamie Farr Toledo Classic in Sylvania, Ohio.
Marshall, a Scotswoman in her third year on the tour, finished with a three-round total of eight-under 205. (AP) HILL IS DOMINANT: Mike Hill shot a five-under-par 66 to complete a front-running victory in the Kroger Senior Classic in Mason, Ohio.
Hill led after every round and finished with a tournament-record total of 17-under 196.
It was the lowest score this year for a 54-hole tournament.
Isao Aoki finished one stroke behind Hill, and Graham Marsh was another stroke back.
Both shot 65's. (AP) BOXING Patterson Takes Junior Lightweight Title
Tracy Harris Patterson stopped Eddie Hopson in the second round and won the International Boxing Federation junior lightweight title in Reno today.
In the first round, Patterson had Hopson backpedaling as he got off the quicker and more accurate punches.
He had Hopson on the canvas or on the ropes four times in the second round before Referee Mills Lane stopped the fight at 1 minute 37 seconds. (AP)


Free Health Plan and Anger Divide Whitman and Unions
Talks for a new contract with state workers begin a week's recess on Monday with Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman's administration and its biggest union separated as much by anger as by differences on wages and benefits.
The administration settled last week with two small unions, but negotiations with the Communications Workers of America, which represents 38,000 of 65,000 workers in state government service, have foundered on the Governor's demands that workers in traditional health plans begin to contribute part of the cost.


Essay; Honoring Repression
At a convocation this fall, Williams College in Massachusetts will confer full academic honors on its alumnus Goh Chok Tong, Prime Minister of Singapore.
In that dictatorship (where chewing gum gets you a $1,000 fine and sharing a marijuana cigarette invites the death penalty) students are prohibited from waving political banners.


Polygram Has Eyes for Hollywood
If it were a Hollywood script proposal, the scenario might sound promising, though rather vague:
A European-controlled music company that is seemingly over the hill -- call it Polygram -- goes from flat on its back to the second-largest recording enterprise in the United States.
In just a few years it becomes a fount of cash, with artists as diverse as Luciano Pavarotti and Sheryl Crow.


Dividend Meetings


Corrections
A chart yesterday comparing figures of reported felonies for New York City with figures for the 44th Precinct in the Bronx reversed the two sets of statistics.
The first two columns referred to crimes reported in the first six months of 1995, not 1994; the third and fourth columns referred to crimes reported in the first six months of 1994, not 1995.


Bad Foot, Bad Post, Lost Shoe, Big Victory
She began the race from the most difficult starting position, was already smarting from a bruised right foot and went the last three-quarters of the mile wearing just three shoes.
Nevertheless, CR Kay Suzie finished Saturday night's Yonkers Trot in grand style, blazing to a 7 1/2-length victory in a stakes-record time of 1 minute 56 seconds, and became the first filly in 39 years to capture the first leg of trotting's triple crown.


Space Program Still Makes Hearts Beat Faster; Spaceport USA Movies
To the Editor:
The notion, put forth by Frank Rich in "The Lost Frontier" (column, July 5), that Spaceport USA "must tart itself up with IMAX movies to draw customers" is wrongheaded in two directions.


In Regulatory Overhaul Debate, Every Word Counts
For the next several days, senators will be arguing over the minutiae of an ambitious attempt to change how regulations affecting areas as diverse as toxic waste dumps and job safety are written.
Almost everybody in the Senate agrees on the need for legislation to give businesses relief from costly Federal regulations on health, safety and the environment.


Left Dangling, Cellular Style, On the New Jersey Turnpike
In the old days, if a flood of phone calls overwhelmed the system and calls did not go through, frustrated customers could only sit at home or in the office and fume.
But this is the age of cellular technology, and they have a more advanced option: They can sit in their cars and fume.
The number of cellular receiver sites is growing fast, nearly 50 percent last year, but in some areas the number of phones is growing even faster than the structure that enables the calls to go through.
Like the charming little restaurant that has been discovered, rendering it neither charming nor little, the system is losing its ability to cope.


The Third Time Is Charming: Sampras Wins at Wimbledon Again
He was unusually animated: soon after losing the first set of this Wimbledon final to the initially marauding Boris Becker, Pete Sampras incited the Center Court crowd to riot right along with him as he attempted to break Becker's serve in the third game of the second set.
He was unusually motivated: Sampras dearly wanted to use this championship as a get-well gift for his ailing coach, Tim Gullikson, who is back home in Chicago undergoing chemotherapy in an attempt to battle brain cancer.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-8  ARAFAT CRACKS DOWN IN GAZA  Yasir Arafat's security apparatus has gone on the offensive against Muslim militants in the Gaza Strip, arresting scores of radicals as it consolidates its authority.
A1  NEW PROBLEM FOR CHINA AND U.S.
Suddenly, the most crucial problem between the United States and China is not Beijing's suspicious arms deals or its unfair trade practices or bad treatment of its own citizens, but the fate of one man: Harry Wu.
A1


BUSINESS DIGEST
Senate Split on Party Lines In Environmental Debate  The Senate resumes work this week on what promises to be the biggest environmental debate of the year.
It concerns plans to relieve businesses from costly Federal rules on health, safety and the environment.
But the Senate is split along party lines, and there is little sign of compromise.


Space Program Still Makes Hearts Beat Faster
To the Editor:
"The Lost Frontier," Frank Rich's July 5 column, mistakenly equates the lack of news media interest in the Atlantis-Mir mission with an overall lack of interest among most Americans for the achievements we are making in space research and exploration.


Support for Affirmative Action


Union Journal; In a Trial As Theater, Sideshow Tires Town
The stone monument in front of the Union County Courthouse proudly informs passers-by that this is the birthplace of John Pratt, "inventor of the first practical typewriter." The townspeople forgave him the fact that he elected to die in Chattanooga.
For more than a century, the biggest headlines in this verdant corner of the South came from layoffs at textile mills.
Then came the Susan Smith spectacle, and the 10,000 or so people of Union were dragged into a dizzying dance with celebrity.


China's Prisons Forged Zeal of U.S. Crusader
Suddenly, the most crucial problem in the deteriorating relationship between the United States and China is not Beijing's suspicious arms deals or its unfair trade practices or its treatment of its own citizens, but the fate of one man: Harry Wu.
To China, Wu Hongda, as he was named at birth in Shanghai 58 years ago, is nothing but a convicted criminal and spy, an unrepentant counterrevolutionary who spent 19 years in labor camps and has taken revenge by secretly entering China under false names to steal state secrets.


After Assurances on California Jobs, Clinton Is Expected to Approve Base-Closing List
After agonizing for more than a week, President Clinton is expected to approve the recommendations of an independent commission on military bases, now that the Pentagon has been assured that it has the authority to keep thousands of jobs at a California Air Force base, Administration officials said today.
Mr.
Clinton had been considering rejecting the commission's recommendation to close McClellan Air Force Base near Sacramento because the loss of the installation's 11,000 military and civilian jobs would hurt the economy of a large state crucial to his 1996 campaign hopes.


New Owner of MCA Is Said Close to Hiring Two Key Executives
Two top entertainment figures are to join MCA Inc., as Edgar Bronfman Jr. begins to make his mark on the big studio and music company, industry executives said tonight.
In a major surprise, Ron Meyer, the president of Hollywood's top talent agency, Creative Artists Agency, is to oversee MCA's film and television business, the executives said.
Mr.
Meyer is a longtime ally of Michael Ovitz, the chairman of Creative Artists, who himself was nearly lured to MCA several weeks ago.
And Doug Morris, who ran Warner Music's record labels until he was dismissed by Time Warner management last month, will go to MCA to start his own record label, according to people familiar with those talks.


The Spy Who Knew It All and Gave It All Away
NIGHTMOVER How Aldrich Ames Sold the C.I.A. to the K.G.B. for $4.6 Million  By David Wise  Illustrated. 356 pages.
HarperCollins. $25.
KILLER SPY The Inside Story of the F.B.I.'s Pursuit and Capture of Aldrich Ames, America's Deadliest Spy  By Peter Maas  Illustrated. 243 pages.
Warner Books. $21.95.
SELLOUT Aldrich Ames and the Corruption of the C.I.A.
By James Adams  Illustrated. 322 pages.
Viking. $23.95.
There's no question that Aldrich Ames, whose spying for the Soviet Union cost the lives of some 10 American agents and thereby obliterated the C.I.A.'s human penetration of the Russian system, was very bad for the United States.
But Mr.
Ames was, as reporters often put it, a good story.
He was a real-life John le Carre character involved in a cold-war tale of espionage, treason and bureaucratic failure.
This no doubt explains why Mr.
Ames's eight-year career as a highly placed mole and his capture by the Federal Bureau of Investigation has produced a large crop of books.
The three under review here all tell the story briskly and well.
Indeed, there is not a great deal of reason to choose one over the others.
Peter Maas adheres most closely to the standard formula in the telling of such stories, squeezing drama from the material, ending chapters on page-turning notes of portent ("Ames's squinty eyes, angular face, and pointy nose made him look just like a mole"), dwelling on the details and the excitement involved in the F.B.I.'s actual capture of the spy.
The accounts by David Wise and James Adam are richer in background information -- Mr.
Wise is especially sophisticated as he discusses the inner workings of the spy trade -- and they provide fuller pictures of the agents working for our side whose lives were destroyed by Mr.
Ames's perfidy.
Mr.
Adams is the only one who attempts to draw some deeper meaning from the Ames affair, arguing that "his cumulative acts of treachery have so undermined the American intelligence community that it will be changed forever by his acts," but he does not delve deeply into this theme.
Instead, Mr.
Adams, like the other chroniclers, sticks mostly to the story of espionage and betrayal.
Mr.
Ames was 44 when he began his career as a traitor.
In his 23-year career at the C.I.A. he had been posted in Mexico City and Rome and, in 1985, was at the agency's headquarters in Virginia as chief of the Soviet counterintelligence branch.
"He knew it all," Mr.
Wise reports.
And he told it all, starting with the day he walked into the Soviet Embassy in Washington and handed over a letter addressed to the K.G.B. station chief offering to sell classified information for $50,000.
The Soviets knew a good thing when they saw it.
They readily accepted Mr.
Ames's offer and made clear to him that if he kept the information coming, there would be a lot more than $50,000 for him.
There were millions more before Mr.
Ames was finally unmasked in 1993.
Given that the West did win the cold war, it is clear that his information was not decisive in the larger struggle.
But very early on in his relationship with the K.G.B., Mr.
Ames loaded up a plastic bag with secret documents that gave away the identities of several Russians who were agents for the United States, including two who were working right there in the Soviet Embassy in Washington.
They and a number of others were tortured and executed as a result of the information Mr.
Ames provided.
Among them was Gen.
Dimitri Fedorovich Polyakov, considered by many the most valuable spy in the C.I.A.'s history until, as Mr.
Wise writes, "Aldrich Ames turned him in."
All three writers try to deal with the biggest question left behind by the Ames scandal: How did he get away with it for so long?
In retrospect, at least, it is clear that Mr.
Ames should never have been trusted with high responsibility in the first place.
He was a drunk.
His lie-detector tests were inconclusive at best.
While he fed the Soviets information right out of the C.I.A.'s computers, he and his wife lived conspicuously beyond their means.
The C.I.A. knew that its Soviet agents were being given away, yet Mr.
Ames remained in place for eight years.
These books explain the problem in part with references to the "culture" of the C.I.A., which discourages the idea that there can be traitors in its midst.
There was also the heritage of James Angleton, the former counterintelligence chief whose fanatical search for moles in the 1960's left the agency so demoralized that it overreacted by never wanting to search for moles again.
And there is what might be called the fog of espionage, or, as Mr.
Angleton himself put it, "the wilderness of mirrors." There are too many actors involved to easily locate suspects, and it is difficult to know if a particular compromise was caused by a mole or by some technical feat of the other side.
Why did Mr.
Ames do it?
Mr.
Maas stresses the money and Mr.
Ames's need to indulge his greedy and demanding wife, Rosario, who became a co-conspirator in the last couple of years.
Mr.
Maas's citations from wiretapped conversations make for the most unflattering portrait of Mrs.
Ames.
Mr.
Adams, by contrast, the only one of the three authors to have interviewed her, seems at times to be taken in by her self-serving versions of events.
In any case, surely there were other C.I.A. employees who needed money and did not become traitors.
To try to explain why Mr.
Ames did, the authors mention other ingredients: his low self-esteem, his evolving politics, which put him in many ways closer to the Russians than to the Americans, the thrill of outsmarting the system that employed him.
In the end, the answer remains elusive.
Unlike Mrs.
Ames, who is serving a six-year prison sentence in a state of denial and depression, Mr.
Ames, according to these writers, seems content despite his life sentence.
He was besieged with interview requests.
Connie Chung actually embraced him.
He was interviewed on CNN and quoted in newspapers around the globe.
He has become famous, a legend.
Meanwhile, as all of the writers note, he has never expressed a word of regret for the men he destroyed.


Exaggeration's the Thing, via Wodehouse
"The Play's the Thing," P. G. Wodehouse's 1926 English adaptation of Ferenc Molnar's Hungarian comedy "The Play at the Castle," retains the potential to enchant.
Yet it's not until late in the evening that any hint of enchantment surfaces in the Roundabout Theater's commonplace revival, which opened last night at the Criterion Center.
This "Play's the Thing" is not a disaster to equal the misguided Roundabout staging of "Hedda Gabler" just a year ago.
It looks handsome.
It has a cast of good actors, all of whom have performed with merit in other works.
What's missing is any sense of the securely sophisticated style that defines high comedy.
Most of the time the production is like something put on by college students, not all of whom appear to be the right age for the roles they're playing, even when they are.
It was only my imagination working overtime with boredom, but I thought I could detect the scent of talcum powder in the air.


A Tracker Of the Stars Has Stoops To Conquer
Larry Wolfe Horwitz sidled up to the liveried doorman at the Kenilworth apartment house, one of the towering prewar fortresses that line Central Park West.
Word was out that the movie star Michael Douglas was about to get a divorce, and Mr.
Horwitz was in pursuit.
"How you doing?" he asked the doorman.


Glennon Awarded Popeye's Account
The Popeye's Chicken and Biscuits division of America's Favorite Chicken Company in Atlanta named the Glennon Companies in St.
Louis to handle its national account, with billings estimated at $7 million.
The account had been at Fitzgerald &amp; Company in Atlanta for two years until the company and that agency parted ways in April.
Glennon was awarded the account last week after a three-month review narrowed the field to four finalists: Glennon; Garfield, Linn &amp; Company in Chicago, which had handled the account before Fitzgerald; Gray Kirk/VanSant in Baltimore, and Henderson Advertising in Greenville, S.C.


Broderbund Strong In Software Sales
The latest listings of best-selling software show that when it's no longer tax time, titles that allow businesses to create page designs for everything from brochures to news releases remain the chief rival to personal-finance software.
For both Macintosh computers and P.C.'s Broderbund's Print Shop Deluxe CD Ensemble is one of the top three best sellers.


Two public service campaigns rely on 'the wow factor.'
THE public service announcement ranks among the most treacherous art forms in advertising.
It invites failure: the advertisement needs to be earnest enough for television stations to donate broadcast time, but astringent enough for viewers to remember.
Two public service organizations, the American Red Cross and the United Nations, have developed different campaigns that rely on a similar approach, what a United Nations official calls "the wow factor."


His Master's Choice


Dr. Bernard F. Riess, 87, Who Lost Teaching Post in McCarthy Era
Dr.
Bernard F. Riess, a prominent psychologist whose dismissal from the Hunter College faculty in 1952 for refusal to answer Senate questions in the heyday of McCarthyism was redressed by New York City 30 years later, died July 3 at his home in New Preston, Conn.
He was 87.
In a career that spanned more than 60 years, Dr.
Riess was a university teacher, a therapist with private and community-clinic practices, the director of mental health centers, an industrial consultant, the author and editor of scores of articles and books, and a lifelong advocate of progressive causes.


Haiti to Delay Announcement Of Results of National Voting
Haiti announced today that it would delay until Tuesday releasing the results of the first national elections since President Jean-Bertrand Aristide was restored to power, and tensions grew over how the losers might respond to the announcement.
The nine-member Provisional Electoral Council initially had said it would release on Saturday the results from the June 25 elections for parliamentary and local offices.


Stolen Cars Find a World Of Welcome
The glittering green Toyota 4-Runner sat in a lot at a port terminal here, surrounded by a sea of cars waiting to be shipped overseas.
But something looked wrong.
The trunk lock was sealed crudely with a jagged piece of metal and four screws, suggesting a break-in.
Jose Valentin, a Newark police detective, and his partner, Douglass Farrell, a United States Customs Service agent, sniffed around the car for more clues, prying open its hood, crouching to look up at its belly, pointing to spots where identification stickers had been peeled off.


Coastal Property
It is probably not an exaggeration to say that the thought of a powerful hurricane hitting the region keeps insurance industry executives up nights.
A major hurricane hitting land on Long Island or in New York City could cause estimated insured losses in excess of $40 billion, according to a study of coastal property and populations by the Insurance Research Council, and industry group.
The value of insured property in the area's coastal counties has soared recently, almost doubling in New York from 1988 to 1993, and increasing by more than 70 percent in New Jersey and Connecticut, Long Island (inclucding Brooklyn and Queens) alone accounts for almost 20 percent of the value of Atlantic and Gulf coastal property.


County Fairs in Full Swing
Corn dogs and cotton candy, Ferris wheels and 4-H exhibits, horse shows and horticulture exhibits -- those are the hallmarks of agricultural fairs, and this is the month that the fair season swings into high gear.


Space Program Still Makes Hearts Beat Faster; We Can't Afford It
To the Editor:
As to Frank Rich's July 5 column, "The Lost Frontier," on the lunacy of America's interest in the movie "Apollo 13" and society's indifference to the joint Russian-American space linkup: Why would he believe it would be anything different?


American Tricks Captors in Kashmir and Bolts to Freedom
An American kidnapped by rebels in India made a daring escape this weekend, tricking his captors by feigning illness and then bolting to freedom in the isolated foothills of the Himalayas.
Faking stomach cramps and diarrhea pains, the American, John Childs, of Simsbury, Conn., played on sympathy to escape Saturday from Muslim guerrillas who have kidnapped at least five Westerners in their fight to end Indian control of Kashmir.
The others are still being held, officials said.


Patents; Really Saying It With Flowers
Thomas Edison first recorded the human voice in 1877.
But two new patents have been issued for inventions that commit our voices to posterity in ways he might never have imagined.
Geoffrey Stern, a marketing specialist in Manhattan, has developed a way to send a voice message along with a bouquet of flowers.
The sender calls a toll-free telephone number to leave a recorded message, which is then downloaded by the florist into a card containing a voice chip and delivered with the flowers.


Wife Urging Tough Response to Dissident's Arrest
Ching Lee Wu, the wife of Harry Wu, says she has hardly slept during the last three weeks as she has tried to mobilize support and publicity for her husband in the press and at various levels of government.
Today at their home here, 40 miles south of San Francisco, the telephone rang continually with calls from supporters, and on Monday she is heading to Washington to lobby on her husband's behalf.


One More Title for Navratilova
Martina Navratilova, even in semi- retirement, added another Grand Slam title to her collection today at Wimbledon when she and partner Jonathan Stark, seeded third, defeated fourth-seeded Gigi Fernandez and Cyril Suk in the mixed-doubles final.
Her 19th Wimbledon title -- including a record nine singles crowns -- brought her overall Grand Slam total to 56: 18 singles, 31 doubles and 7 mixed doubles.


World Games Close With a Flourish
The Special Olympics World Games ended today, and almost everyone concerned was happy with the achievements -- athletic and otherwise -- over the last nine days.
For the 7,200 athletes from 140 nations, all mentally retarded and some physically disabled, there was almost endless competition in 19 sports.
They made new friends from far-off nations.
And they proved to themselves and to the public that mental retardation is not the end of a productive life, but just one more obstacle to be dealt with.


Jewish Law Rejects Assisted Suicide
To the Editor:
It is with profound compassion that I read of the plight of Myrna Lebov, a New York City patient with multiple sclerosis, whose husband, George Delury, admitted to assisting in her suicide at her request (front page, July 6).
However wrenching this story is, I must take exception to the impression, accurately or inaccurately formed, that the couple took away after talking with their rabbi about suicide for the terminally ill: "If it happens, it would be as natural a death as any other."


Oklahoma Witness Sees a 'Witch Hunt'
James Rosencrans says he has always been suspicious of Federal agents.
Now, he says, he is downright fearful of them.
The latest witness to appear before the grand jury in the Oklahoma bombing investigation, Mr.
Rosencrans has returned to his home here with nothing but complaints about the experience.
He says the agents he went to Oklahoma to help are on "a witch hunt" and are bent on crucifying him.


ARAFAT'S FORCES PUSH CRACKDOWN ON GAZA RADICALS
Yasir Arafat's security apparatus has gone on the offensive against Muslim militants in the Gaza Strip, arresting scores of radicals and consolidating its authority in this crowded coastal region.
The size of the Palestinian security force has increased steadily in the year since Mr.
Arafat returned from decades in exile.
It now numbers about 20,000, including policemen and soldiers.


Patents; New sunglasses stop jet-lag sufferers from resetting their body clocks too many times.
DESPITE promising new lines of treatment, globe-trotters still have no easy and sure-fire relief from jet lag.
Now Murray N. Waldman, an inventor in Winnipeg, Manitoba, has received a United States patent for something that he says could fight the disorientation that arises after crossing multiple time zones.


Hiroshima Exhibit Opens Quietly at a University
The exhibition hall was not in one of the cavernous museums that dot this city's landscape.
Rather, the artifacts were displayed in a small room on the sixth-floor of a student center.
It is a small but powerful collection, energized by faces and personal belongings.
It is an exhibit on the destruction caused by the atomic bombs dropped on Hiroshima and Nagasaki and it opened on Saturday at American University, not very far from the Smithsonian Institution, where an exhibition on the same subject had been scaled back under pressure from veterans' groups.


Mattingly First Half Already Forgotten
Don Mattingly wants to purge the first 66 games of this strange season from his memory.
Erase the statistics and start fresh.
Obviously, Mattingly cannot officially do that, but he will do it in his mind.
The first half is history.
He struggled, the Yankees struggled and Mattingly wants to forget.
Everything.
There is much for him to forget.
Mattingly has managed one home run.
His golden glove has made five errors, as many miscues as he had in the last two years.
He was plagued by a viral infection in his right eye that blurred his vision for five weeks, stunted his batting average and made him much more susceptible to the harsh criticism he has skirted for 12 seasons in New York.


Don K. Price, 85, Educator And Science Promoter, Dies
Don K. Price Jr., an educator who devoted much of his career to promoting the role of science in the American Government, died today in the Newton-Wellesley Alzheimer Center in Wellesley, Mass.
He was 85 years old and had suffered from Alzheimer's disease for several years.
He was a longtime resident of Cambridge, Mass.
The cause of death was Alzheimer's disease, according to his wife, Harriet.


Tools of Brain Surgery
To the Editor:
We were pleased to read the article explaining the value of stereotactic radiosurgery for treatment of a variety of tumors and other abnormalities in the brain (Health page, July 5).
However, the article gives the impression that radiosurgery, which uses highly focused radiation beams, can only be performed using the Leksell Gamma Knife.


Yanks Botch Chances And Give Game Away
The Yankees walked off the field muttering about their ragged play.
They removed their grimy uniforms and disappeared to different parts of the country for a brief and necessary break.
They did not want to play baseball or even see a baseball.
Not after today's fiasco.
They were embarrassed.
Steve Howe continued muttering after the depressing loss.
On an oppressively hot afternoon when the Rangers made six errors and tried to give the Yankees a neat going-away present, they responded by giving it right back in succumbing, 5-4, in 12 long innings.
Mickey Tettleton lashed a one-out single to left field off Howe that scored Mark McLemore from second base and gave the Yankees much to ponder as the unofficial first half of the season ended in a symbolically sloppy manner.


Martin Bucksbaum, 74, Pioneer In Shopping Center Development
Martin Bucksbaum, a pioneer in the development of shopping centers and real estate investment trusts, died on Friday at his home in Des Moines.
He was 74 years old.
The cause was a heart attack, his family said.


Matching Funds Hold Key to Welfare Reform
To the Editor:
Re "Drive for Block Grants Pitting State Against State" (front page, June 28): Under the Senate welfare bill, grants are paid to states without regard for what a state pays.
States are fighting over the formula because it is free money, with no obligation.


CHRONICLE
Rarely do print journalists see their names emblazoned on anything but a newspaper, a magazine, perhaps a book.
WINSOR BROWN FRENCH 2D, a bon vivant and society columnist in Cleveland from 1931 to 1968, mostly for The Cleveland Press, would no doubt be pleased to see where his name is imprinted: on a restaurant.
Winsor's, the restaurant named for Mr.
French, who died in 1982, is in the new $27.6 million Wyndham Cleveland Play House Square Hotel on Euclid Avenue, which opened Saturday with considerable fanfare.


CHRONICLE
People in the audience wore T-shirts with his picture on them.
Women screamed when he ascended to the stage.
Men shouted to him.
Rock star?
Actor?
Athlete?
No, orchestra conductor.
KEITH LOCKHART'S debut conducting the Boston Pops's famous Fourth of July concert last week was a measure of his pop celebrity.
He is one of a number of young, personable, media-savvy conductors drawing lots of attention to themselves and enthusiastic new audiences to their orchestras across the nation.


An Ode to the Typewriter
If the business world is a jungle, then the rise and fall of the typewriter is one of its more cherishable demonstrations of evolution, of the little creature that could, for a while at least.
As the Smith Corona Corporation filed for bankruptcy protection last week, one of the final signals in the triumph of personal computers and software over the typewriter was at hand.
So, too, was a sheaf of lessons in human adaptability.
Pursued by eccentrics and visionaries for more than a century before the first practical model was patented in 1868, the typewriter revolutionized world industry.
It became the critical element in opening the doors of Western industry to women.
Even now at the Katherine Gibbs secretarial schools across the nation, digital stamina requires that speed-typing classes begin on a typewriter -- an electric -- before proceeding to the latest keyboard innovations of glyphic mice and men.


Kodak Sees a Future Where Film Is Optional
When the flags in Oklahoma City were raised on July 4 to their full height for the first time since the bombing of the Federal building in April, David Longstreet, a photographer for The Associated Press, was there to record the event.
Like the images he took of the building soon after the bombing, these pictures were not captured on film but on a silicon chip and, minutes after they were taken, they were sent over telephone lines to AP subscribers around the world.
Filmless electronic cameras offer photographers like Mr.
Longstreet unprecedented convenience and speed.
Instead of having to leave the scene of action to get their film to a darkroom, they can call up their images on a computer screen and straightaway transmit them for publication.
The AP has bought 50 or so of these cameras for its photographers.


Technology; DIGITAL COMMERCE: Virtual-world users put themselves in a sort of electronic puppet show.
FOR more than a decade, those involved in the world of high-powered computers have helped build tools for creating computer-generated three-dimensional environments, which have become known over the years as virtual reality.
And because more of that computer power is finding its way into today's personal computers, interest in bringing this 3D technology into the home is giving rise to a new genre of consumer software called "virtual worlds."
A virtual world is not the same as what is known as virtual reality because it employs only a personal computer and a mouse to display and navigate 3D scenes.
It does not require data gloves and head-mounted displays for viewing, thus avoiding both the cost (and the vertigo) that such equipment often produces.


Taking In the Sites; Play Ball! Find Out Fast Who's on First
Attendance at most ball parks may be lagging, but baseball is still enjoying a golden age on the World Wide Web.
The latest baseball Web site is a throwback to the days when Western Union relayed play-by-play descriptions over the telegraph and fans gathered around ticker-tape machines during the World Series.
This week, Instant Sports Inc. of Austin, Tex., begins play-by-play coverage of every major league game -- every play of every game, updated every minute.
For Mets fans, it can be like watching the Lusitania sink, one porthole at a time.


Being of Two Cultures and Belonging to Neither; After an Acclaimed Novel, a Korean-American Writer Searches for His Roots
In kindergarten, Chang-rae Lee did not say a word.
Day after day he sat in class in New Rochelle, sponging up the English spoken by his teacher and classmates and wringing it out in Korean in his mind.


Cutting Down on Amenities To Achieve No-Frills Jails
The national anticrime mood that has led to mandatory sentences and wider use of the death penalty has also brought a crackdown on the amenities and free services criminals receive in prison.
The movement is driven partly by a need to control corrections budgets that exploded with the growing use of fixed sentences, and partly by a public sense that life in prison has become so comfortable that prisoners live better behind bars than they did on the street.


Tanglewood Opens With Celebrations And a Bawdy Theme
There is always plenty to celebrate at Tanglewood, it seems, and this season the excellent Tanglewood Festival Chorus, observing its 25th anniversary, is the main order of business.
Led this afternoon by its founding director, John Oliver, the group contributed two sacred works to a program of Mozart's music, ending the festival's opening weekend on a note far different from that on which it began.
For on Friday, Seiji Ozawa led the presiding Boston Symphony Orchestra and the chorus in a program devoted largely to unabashed lust, probably not the sort of thing recent high-minded advocates of thematic programming had in mind.
The evening began with the Overture and Bacchanale from Wagner's "Tannhauser" and ended with Orff's brash "Carmina Burana." In between came two gentler evocations of unrequited love by Enrique Granados, "Quejas, o la Maja y el Ruisenor" ("Laments, or the Lady and the Nightingale"), from "Goyescas," and "Elegia Eterna," sung by Kathleen Battle.


In Mounting Defense, O. J. Simpson's Lawyers Plan to Focus on 3 Themes
Defense lawyers will begin their campaign Monday to prove that O. J. Simpson is not a murderer.
But unless the defendant himself takes the stand, the defense case is unlikely to include anything as dramatic as Mr.
Simpson's struggle, feigned or genuine, to fit into a pair of bloody leather gloves.
Mr.
Simpson's lawyers say their presentation will focus on three major themes.
One is that Mr.
Simpson did not have enough time to kill Nicole Brown Simpson and Ronald L. Goldman.
Another is that he never behaved like a killer, either before or after the slayings.
The third is that anything appearing to incriminate him is the product of police bungling or nefariousness.


No Headline
"There is a power called Hamas. It has a political dimension, which we cannot ignore, as long as it does it through dialogue. Otherwise, Hamas knows, it has to know, that there is a Palestinian authority that it must respect." COL.
JABRIL RAJOUB an officer in the Palestinian security force.  [ A8:2. ]


A Reading, With the Boss as Soloist
A reading, in musicians' parlance, is something between a rehearsal and a performance.
Rehearsals involve painstaking work.
Performances can be exciting or intimidating, usually a little of both.
But all musicians love to read through chamber music, just for fun, with few stops to correct mistakes unless there's a complete train wreck.
Concertgoers seldom get to experience readings.
So it was a potentially interesting idea for Bargemusic, which presents chamber music concerts on an air-conditioned barge near the Brooklyn Bridge, to offer readings on Friday evening of two familiar string quartets.


What Goes On?; Don't Speak Unix? Oh? Try http:www.fooledyou
Whew!
What a tangled tongue we weave when first we practice to navigate the Internet's World Wide Web.
As if the name World Wide Web itself were not Elmer Fuddish enough, the computer addresses needed to find individual sites on the global computer network's fastest-growing service typically come with a standard cacophonous prefix -- http://www -- that is pronounced "aich tee tee pee colon forward slash slash double you double you double you."


Brooklyn Man Killed During a Christening
A Brooklyn man was killed last night when three masked men brandishing guns interrupted a christening ceremony in his apartment and announced a robbery, the police said.
Pierre Saint-Sturin, 54, was holding the ceremony for his grandson inside his apartment at 110 Lenox Road in Flatbush when the intruders made his 15 guests lie on the kitchen floor and stole their jewelry, said Sgt.
Michael Enright of the 67th Precinct.


Rajan Pillai, 47, Fugitive Tycoon
Rajan Pillai, one of Asia's most flamboyant businessmen, died on Friday.
He was 47 years old.
The cause of death was complications from cirrhosis of the liver, said a doctor who had been treating him for the last two years.


Closing a Tax Loophole and Opening Another
Nothing, it seems, gets done easily in Washington, particularly when the issue involves people with a lot of money.
Take the so-called expatriates' tax, a proposal intended to close a loophole with which a relatively few very wealthy Americans have avoided millions of dollars in income and estate taxes by renouncing their citizenship and moving abroad to countries with lower tax rates or more porous laws.


Under Construction: A Music Leader
For years MCA Inc.'s music business, while profitable, has lagged far behind the industry leaders.
But the plan to start a new record label under Doug Morris underscores MCA's intention to gain market share -- in part by benefiting from the turmoil at the market leader, the Warner Music Group, a unit of Time Warner Inc.


Mitchell May Be Returning to Japan
The Fukuoka Daiei Hawks have sent officials from Tokyo to meet KEVIN MITCHELL in Los Angeles and find out whether he has recovered from a knee injury and can return.
Mitchell left the team in May after a dispute over the severity of his injury, and the Hawks suspended him.
The team sent the officials after Mitchell's agent said in a letter to the club that he has recovered and wants to play in Japan again.
The Hawks want to know whether Mitchell can play in all 45 of the Hawks' games after Japan's All-Star Game break July 25-26.
In 28 games, he was batting .247 with six home runs.


Horror Hero of the 90's, Half Man, Half Bomb
Roger Corman is a film maker who specializes in, for lack of a more elegant bon mot, schlock.
And in an era in which schlock threatens to become the artistic norm, Mr.
Corman is riding high, courted by cable television and movie buffs hooked on cult junk.
His latest project: "Roger Corman Presents," a series of 13 new films (four of them remakes of Corman "classics") getting under way tonight on Showtime, the same pay-cable service that devoted much of last summer to a biker-movie tribute called "Rebel Highway." For Showtime, apparently, junk pays.
As producer, director or both, Mr.
Corman has more than 300 movies to his credit, going back to horror romps of the 1950's and 60's like "The Fall of the House of Usher" and "The Tomb of Ligeia." He was a master of the cheap drive-in staple, and, appropriately enough, he popped up on Saturday for an interview on the Movie Channel's "Joe Bob's Drive-In Theater" as the host, Joe Bob Briggs, presented two Corman chestnuts: "Caroline at Midnight" and "Dinosaur Island."


PNC Buying Midlantic for $3 Billion
In one more sign that independent banking in New Jersey is fast becoming a thing of the past, the PNC Bank Corporation, based in Pittsburgh, announced yesterday that it would acquire the Midlantic Corporation, based in Edison, N.J., for $3 billion in stock.
Just last month, the First Union Corporation of Charlotte, N.C., announced that it would buy the First Fidelity Bancorp of Newark for $5.4 billion and create a banking empire stretching along the East Coast from Connecticut to Florida.


International Briefs; Abbey National Plans A Big Acquisition
Abbey National P.L.C. said yesterday that it had agreed to buy the National and Provincial Building Society for $:1.35 billion, or $2.16 billion, cementing Abbey's position as the second-largest mortgage lender in Britain.
The price that Abbey will pay for the mutually owned building society, which is similar to a savings and loan in the United States, represents an 84 percent premium to National and Provincial's net assets of $:732 million.


The Summer's Films: Some Hits and Misses
A lot of us haven't gone on vacation yet, but by Hollywood's reckoning the summer season is almost over.
Why?
Because all but a handful of summer films have been released, and those to come will be here soon.
They include Kevin Costner's hugely expensive, troubled and much-chronicled epic, "Waterworld," which is to open on July 28, and "Nine Months," which opens on Wednesday in New York and Los Angeles (elsewhere on Friday).
An otherwise innocuous comedy, "Nine Months" has stirred unusual interest because its star, Hugh Grant, was arrested with a prostitute in Hollywood two weeks ago.


Largest U.S. Funeral Chain to Acquire Europe's Biggest, in France
Service Corporation Inc., the world's largest chain of funeral homes and cemeteries, announced an agreement yesterday to buy Europe's largest funeral business, based in France, for $423 million.
The purchase would accelerate Service Corporation's conquest of a region where, last year, it agreed to buy the two largest publicly held funeral companies in Britain.
In agreeing to buy the funeral operations of Lyonnaise des Eaux of France, Service Corporation is betting on potential, not current performance.
It would hope to raise the business's current operating profit margin, a thin 7 percent before taxes, closer to its own 30 percent-plus by increasing efficiency, taking advantage of deregulation and persuading the French to spend more on funerals.


CHRONICLE
Conceding, "I did a bad thing; there you have it," HUGH GRANT was greeted by cheering crowds and applause yesterday as he appeared on "The Tonight Show."
It was Mr.
Grant's first public appearance since his arrest with a prostitute last month.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  Federal Farm Credit Bank is selling $100 million of medium-term notes due in 1997 through Smith Barney Inc.
Callable in six months, the issue is priced at par to yield 6 percent.


MCA Hands Studio Reins to Agent
By naming Ron Meyer, a top talent agent at the Creative Artists Agency, to run the television and film businesses of MCA Inc. today, Edgar G. Bronfman Jr. has signaled to Hollywood and Wall Street that he wants to move quickly to revive a studio that has been sluggish in recent years.
Mr.
Bronfman today formally announced Mr.
Meyer's appointment as president and chief operating officer of MCA at the same time he confirmed that MCA had completed a deal with Doug Morris, who was recently dismissed as chairman of Warner Music's domestic music business, to start a record label.
News of both moves, which leaked out only on Sunday night, surprised many in Hollywood.


To Our Readers
Because of a computer malfunction, the Op-Ed page was omitted from some copies yesterday.
Readers wishing copies of the page may write to Production Quality Control, The New York Times, 229 West 43d Street, New York, N.Y. 10036, or telephone (212) 556-1992.


N.C.A.A. Investigation Clears Marbury
The National Collegiate Athletic Association has decided that STEPHON MARBURY's amateur status was not violated when the Georgia Tech recruit was given a car by the director of an amateur basketball program, university officials said yesterday.


Q&amp;A
Cowbird Instincts
Q.
How does a cowbird from an egg deposited in another species' nest grow up to know it is a cowbird?
A.
Apparently by a well-developed genetic instinct, said Dr.
Ken Rosenberg of the Cornell Laboratory of Ornithology in Ithaca, N.Y.


Just 9 Devils Visit the White House
When the Devils visited the White House today to show off their Stanley Cup, President Clinton was just returning from a visit to, of all places, Nashville.
Far from an omen, the President's itinerary was rendered more of a footnote with word that the team and the New Jersey Sports and Exposition Authority were close to striking a deal to keep the Devils from moving to Tennessee.
That's why Lou Lamoriello, the team's president and general manager, was not on hand for the celebration.
Unfortunately, few others on the team appeared to have as good an excuse for skipping the visit.


U.S. Envoy Visits Crusader in Chinese Jail
Three weeks after he was seized by Chinese authorities, Harry Wu, the American human rights advocate charged with espionage, was permitted a jailhouse interview with the American consul general today.
But his jailers ordered him not to discuss the charges against him, State Department officials said.
Mr.
Wu spoke with the American consul, Arturo Macias, for about 30 minutes from behind a thick glass partition, over a telephone monitored by the authorities.
He said he was not suffering at the hands of his jailers, but Mr.
Macias learned little about the precise nature of the charges or about Mr.
Wu's immediate prospects, the officials said.


The Gephardt Tax Plan
The tax plan proposed last week by the House minority leader, Richard Gephardt, though flawed, finally puts Democrats into the House debate over tax reform.
It also establishes an important principle that Republicans would like to ignore.
True tax reform should preserve fairness by making high-income families bear a heavier burden than poor families.
The major Republican plans twist the code against middle- and low-income families.
Mr.
Gephardt would eliminate taxes for millions of low-income families and reduce tax rates to an eye-catching 10 percent for families earning up to about $60,000 a year.
That leaves about 75 percent of taxpayers paying rates of 10 percent or less.
Families earning more would pay progressively higher rates, topping out at 34 percent.
These progressive rates stand in bold contrast to the flat-tax plan of the majority leader, Dick Armey, and the sales-tax plan of Bill Archer, chairman of the tax-writing committee.
Under these plans, most families would pay about the same rate.


SERB FORCES FIGHT DUTCH U.N. TROOPS IN EASTERN BOSNIA
Bosnian Serb forces, defying a United Nations warning issued only the day before, clashed tonight with Dutch peacekeepers guarding the entrance to a beleaguered town in eastern Bosnia.
The small garrison of United Nations peacekeepers on the edge of the town, Srebrenica, requested NATO air protection, but an air attack was called off when the fighting subsided, United Nations officials here said.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-13 SERBS BATTLE PEACEKEEPERS  Bosnian Serbs clashed with peacekeepers protecting a Bosnian enclave and ordered them and the civilians they were protecting to leave.
NATO air protection was requested, but called off.
A1  DOLE REBUFFS CLINTON ON BOSNIA  Senator Bob Dole refused an invitation to meet with President Clinton, who is trying to maintain support for his Bosnia policy, and said he plans to seek legislation to lift the Bosnia arms embargo.
A10  BURMESE DISSIDENT LEADER FREED  Burmese officials released the Nobel Prize-winning opposition leader from house arrest after six years, apparently without their previous requirements that she leave the country for several years.
A1  CHINA ALLOWS JAIL INTERVIEW  China allowed an American envoy to interview the Chinese-American human rights advocate it had arrested three weeks ago, but little was revealed about charges against him or his prospects.
A8  Despite posturing, Taiwan and China are expanding ties.
A8  NUCLEAR TESTS TO PROCEED  France brushed aside international concerns over its seizure of a ship that was protesting its plans for nuclear testing and said that it will proceed with the tests.
A12  IN BOLIVIA, COCA QUANDARY  Bolivia is under pressure from the United States to cut its coca production, but with many subsistence farmers there depending on the coca crop, there are many political and economic obstacles.
A3  MEXICAN VIOLENCE RAISES FEARS  A resurgence of violence in a Mexican state with a history of such problems has both shaken its residents and raised new questions about the country's stability.
A3  Pope backs women's rights, but diverse roles.
A11  Protestant marchers fought with police in Northern Ireland.
A11  Managua Journal: A national hero on the pitcher's mound.
A4 National A14-17 CLINTON ATTACKS TV VIOLENCE  The President, on a visit to Tennessee, endorsed Congressional proposals to require television makers to install a computer chip that could screen out programs that broadcasters had coded as violent.
A1  SIMPSON DEFENSE BEGINS  O.J.
Simpson's family gathered around him in court and his elder daughter described his demeanor when told of the killing of his former wife.
A1  SUSAN SMITH IS CALLED COMPETENT  As jury selection began in the trial of Susan Smith, a state expert said she was legally competent to stand trial on murder charges for drowning her two sons.
A14  DISPUTE OVER 'WANTED' POSTER  A Republican fund-raising letter features a "Wanted" poster that calls for unseating 28 liberal Democrats, 22 of whom are black, Hispanic, female or Jewish; Democrats criticized the poster as inflaming racial and ethnic hatred.
A16  G.O.P.
MEDICARE PLAN ASSAILED  A large hospital association said Congressional Republicans were moving too fast in their effort to overhaul Medicare.
A16  PACKWOOD HEARINGS ARE SOUGHT  Five of the eight women in the Senate have called for public hearings into the accusations of sexual and official misconduct against Senator Bob Packwood of Oregon.
A16  MAIL BOMB INSURES 2 IN OFFICE  A bomb in a paper package exploded at the headquarters of a long-distance telephone company, injuring two women.
A17  DOOR FALLS OFF PLANE  Passengers clutched a flight attendant to keep her from being swept out of an commuter plane after the cabin door blew off minutes after taking off in Chicago.
A17  Buena Vista Journal: Flood after flood, a small town copes.
A14 Metro Digest B1 CITY DEBT RATING IS LOWERED  A major credit agency lowered its rating of New York City's long-term debt, blaming the sluggish economy but rebuking Mayor Giuliani for what it called financial gimmickry in balancing the budget.
A1  RULING UPHELD ON CHILD SUPPORT  Upholding New Jersey's child-support guidelines, the state Supreme Court rejected a divorced father's arguments that his support payments should be reduced so he can spend the money as he sees fit when he is caring for his children.
A1  BUSINESSMAN OR MOB LEADER?
A Federal indictment depicts Paul H. K. Lai, a well-known businessman, as a top leader of an organized crime group.
But many in Chinatown, and Mr.
Lai himself in an unusual two-hour interview, paint a different portrait.
A1  Business Digest D1  Arts/Entertainment C13-16  Some hits and misses among the summer's movies.
C13  Music: "Turn of the Screw." C15  Dance: Israel's Batsheva company at Jacob's Pillow.
C13  Art: "Video Spaces," at the Museum of Modern Art.
C13  Books: "The Female Thermometer," by Terry Castle.
C16  Television: Roger Corman's "Suspect Device," on Showtime.
C16  Fashion B6-7  Science C1-11 The prairie dog throws his weight around his ecological niche.
C1  Galileo ready to drop probe into the atmosphere of Jupiter.
C1  Sports B8-13  Obituaries D19  Helene Johnson, poet.
Editorials/Op-Ed A18-19 Editorials  Free Harry Wu.
The Gephardt tax plan.
Power tennis.
Representative Johnson's task.
Letters  Russell Baker: Six feet high and rising.
Anders Aslund: Russia's sleaze sector.
Vu-Duc Vuong: Hello, Vietnam.
James K. Galbraith: Greenspan's error.
Chronicle B2 Chess C7 Crossword C16


Power Tennis
Pete Sampras produced a tour de force in power tennis Sunday, winning his third consecutive Wimbledon singles title with a majestic, well-mannered victory over Boris Becker.
The serve-and-volley cognoscenti had to reach back to the days of Pancho Gonzalez or Jack Kramer to recall anything like the speed and precision of the Sampras attack.
Mr.
Becker, no slouch at the power game himself, managed to win the first set in a tie-breaker, but did not come close to breaking Mr.
Sampras's serve the entire day.
The esthetics of the match were not as satisfying.
While the rapid-fire exchanges were more entertaining than endless baseline rallies, it was tempting to wish for a more refined game in which nearly all points are not decided by a service ace or an immediate volley.
Fastball pitchers can be great to watch, but baseball becomes static when most batters strike out.


Women in Senate Seek Hearings on Packwood
Five of the eight women in the Senate, including one Republican, have called for public hearings into the accusations of sexual and official misconduct against Senator Bob Packwood, Republican of Oregon.
"We believe that the reputation of the Senate and the public's interest are best served by open hearings on a matter of such grave importance," the women wrote in a letter to Senator Mitch McConnell, the Kentucky Republican who is chairman of the Select Committee on Ethics.


How an Opportunistic Bacterium Blitzes Its Way Through the Gut
FROM the annals of "Why bother to reinvent the wheel?' and "There's no such thing as a better mousetrap" comes the extraordinary tale of Shigella flexneri's so-called comet tail.
Shigella is a disagreeable rod-shaped bacterium that causes severe diarrhea in humans, spreading so quickly and stealthily through the gut that a person's immune system has no chance to respond.


Warning Against Quick Medicare Cuts
The nation's largest hospital association today warned that Congressional Republicans were moving too fast in their effort to overhaul the Medicare program in the next 90 days.
Officials of the American Hospital Association, at a news conference here, renewed their call for the creation of an independent commission to find long-term solutions to the escalating costs of the 30-year-old insurance program that now covers 37 million elderly Americans.


Corrections
Because of a computer malfunction, the Op-Ed page was omitted from some copies yesterday.
Readers wishing copies of the page may write to Production Quality Control, The New York Times, 229 West 43d Street, New York, N.Y. 10036, or telephone (212) 556-1992.


Corrections
A picture caption yesterday about the Black Holocaust Museum in Milwaukee misidentified the director in some copies.
He is James Cameron, not Lee McDaniel.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball National League  ATLANTA BRAVES -- Signed Daniel Landry, shortstop.
FLORIDA MARLINS -- Signed Andy Bair, pitcher, and assigned him to the Marlins of the Gulf Coast League.
South Atlantic League  SAVANNAH CARDINALS -- Activated Calvin Coach, center fielder, from the disabled list.
Released Byron Taylor, outfielder.
Northeast League  ALBANY DIAMOND DOGS -- Signed John Quintell, catcher.
Released Dave Gilberti, pitcher, and Jim Wolff, catcher.
YONKERS HOOTOWLS -- Named Chris Repetto director of group sales; Mike Schiliro director of promotions; and Ryan Patrick director of broadcast operations.
Football National Football League  BUFFALO BILLS -- Signed Todd Collins, quarterback; Marlon Kerner and Ken Irvin, cornerbacks; and Tony Cline, tight end.
DALLAS COWBOYS -- Signed Charles Haley, defensive end, to a four-year contract extension through the 1998-99 season.
GREEN BAY PACKERS -- Claimed Tommie Stowers, tight end, off waivers from the Kansas City Chiefs.
HOUSTON OILERS -- Signed Michael Roan, Butch Rolle and James Thornton, tight ends; Gary Walker, defensive lineman; C.J.
Richardson, defensive back; and Jason Atkinson and Jimmy Witherspoon, linebackers.
JACKSONVILLE JAGUARS -- Signed Eric Stephens, cornerback.
NEW ENGLAND PATRIOTS -- Signed Dino Philyaw, running back.
PHILADELPHIA EAGLES -- Signed Kevin Bouie, running back.
ST.
LOUIS RAMS -- Re-signed Tommy Maddox, quarterback.
Signed Jon Kirksey, defensive end; and Cedric Figaro and Keith Franklin, linebackers.
Waived Tony Zendejas, kicker, and Henry Rolling, linebacker.
WASHINGTON REDSKINS -- Signed Larry Jones, running back, and Bobby Olive, wide receiver.
Canadian Football League  BALTIMORE STALLIONS -- Announced their nickname.
WINNIPEG BLUE BOMBERS -- Acquired Reggie Slack, quarterback, from the Birmingham Barracudas to complete the Fred Childress trade.
Hockey National Hockey League  PHILADELPHIA FLYERS -- Signed Kevin Dineen, right wing.
International Hockey League  CHICAGO WOLVES -- Signed Steve Maltais, left wing, and Wendell Young, goaltender.
SAN FRANCISCO SPIDERS -- Acquired John Purves and Ian Boyce, forwards, from Fort Wayne for 1995 third- and fifth-round draft picks.


BUSINESS DIGEST
S.&amp; P. Lowers Rating On New York City Debt  Standard &amp; Poor's lowered its rating of New York City's long-term debt, attributing the downgrading to the sluggish local economy and rebuking Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani for what it called financial gimmickry in balancing the city's budget.
The decision reduced the city's bond rating from A-minus, where it has been since 1987, to BBB-plus, among the lowest ratings of any major city in the country.  [ Page A1. ]


Yankees Looking for Summer Wake-Up
Buck Showalter has fielded more questions about Darryl Strawberry than about Paul O'Neill.
George Steinbrenner has sat next to the Yankee dugout more this season than he did all last season.
Danny Tartabull has asked to be traded more frequently than he has asked to have one of his home run balls retrieved.
Don Mattingly's greatest display of emotion was over a replacement player called up to pitch.
And Jimmy Key finished the season with one more victory than the bat boy.
Is the fuzzy picture coming into focus?


In Blow to Mayor, Credit Agency Lowers New York's Bond Rating
A major credit agency yesterday lowered its rating of New York City's long-term credit worthiness, citing both the sluggish economy and fiscal gimmicks it said were used by Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani to balance the city's budget.
The decision by Standard &amp; Poor's lowers the city's rating from A-, where it has been since 1987, to BBB+, among the lowest ratings of any major city in the country.
Of major cities, only Detroit, Philadelphia and Washington have lower ratings.


Medical Breakthroughs Require Caution
To the Editor:
Miriam Shuchman and Michael S. Wilkes in "Medical Breakthroughs, on Line" (Op-Ed, July 7) argue that the public is entitled to swifter access to medical findings via computer services.
They cite a study that found patients with high blood pressure treated with calcium channel blockers had a higher chance of a heart attack than similar patients treated with other medications.
This was presented at a scientific meeting in March, and the authors blame journals for delaying communication in the press about this finding.


Sandoz Buying Genetic Therapy for $295 Million
Sandoz Ltd. said yesterday that it would acquire Genetic Therapy Inc. of Gaithersburg, Md., for about $295 million, or $21 a share.
Since 1991, Sandoz, based in Basel, Switzerland, has owned 3.6 percent of Genetic Therapy, a leading gene-therapy company working on treatments for cancer, AIDS, cystic fibrosis, hemophilia and Gaucher's disease, an inherited enzyme deficiency disorder.


Review/Fashion; Going One-Up On Street Fashion
Truly innovative fashion affects the eye a little like the test for glaucoma at the ophthalmologist's office: it startles and is momentarily discomforting.
Paris is the capital of that sort of fashion, so new it makes you blink.
Designers here can produce the unheard-of, which in fashion is the unseen -- something that after hundreds of years of fashion design, thousands of shows and millions of garments still looks new.
If the men's wear shown in Milan, Italy, this season seemed particularly exciting, it was because expectations had been lowered by years of Milanese houses producing only the expected.
And if the men's wear for next spring and summer that was shown here seemed particularly dull, it was because this is, after all, where the world's most interesting designers show.
But it seemed as if most were already mentally lounging on a deck chair in Deauville.


Crop Duster Killed in Crash
A pilot for a blueberry farm was killed early yesterday when his helicopter went down in a wooded area in Hamilton Township near Atlantic City.


Mild, Modest Teen-Ager Knows How to Seize a Championship
Although he is only 17, Cliff Bayer stands just a few steps from the apex of his sport: fencing with the foil.
The Manhattan teen-ager attributes his successes to a will to win and an innate aggressiveness, two qualities that helped him become the youngest American national champion in June.


A Battle on the Waterfront; Conflicting Visions for the Renewal of the Passaic River
It is unusual for a skipper to advise his passengers to remove their bright red life jackets in midstream to be safe, but the stretch of the Passaic River flowing through downtown Newark is no ordinary waterway.
"I tell people to take their life jackets off because they make an easy target," said Paul J. Lerin, a self-appointed guide who hopes to turn his love of the river into an environmental cleanup business.
"We are in a sniper zone here."


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.75
8.75
7.25
DISCOUNT RATE
5.25
5.25
3.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
5.75
6.77
4.31
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.40
5.37
4.50
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.30
5.26
4.94
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.03
6.04
7.45
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.52
6.52
7.72
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.45
7.45
8.48
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.07
6.11
6.52
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Cowboys' Haley Decides Not to Retire
The All-Pro defensive end CHARLES HALEY has gone from retirement talk to a commitment to play for the Dallas Cowboys until 1999.
A $12 million package turned the trick.
"I want to play every year with everything I've got," Haley said yesterday.
"I want to retire a Cowboy." (AP)


Review/Fashion; Couture Follows Ready-to-Wear
Couture fashion inspires extremes: either you're thrilled at the heights the art form can achieve or you question the motives of the clients who take the front rows.
So it makes perfect sense that Jamie Lee Curtis, wearing her free, white-tweed Gianni Versace couture dress, should declare his show "astonishing," "fabulous" and "as good as you get," while a skeptical Meg Ryan, in her own black leather jacket, attending her first (and probably her last) couture show, said, "I've always been curious what it's about, and now I'm not curious." She added, apologetically, "They are beautiful clothes, though."


Microsoft Hits High on News Of Software
The Microsoft Corporation announced yesterday that it would begin shipping an updated collection of its top-selling software applications on Aug. 24, the same day it is scheduled to release Windows 95, its next generation of operating system software for personal computers.
Investors, which seem to view the future of dozens of computer hardware and software companies as riding on the success of Windows 95, responded by pushing Microsoft's stock to a record high.


Hospital Investigates 2 Suicides
Responding to what appears to be the second suicide in four months by a teen-age patient at the Bergen Pines County Hospital's psychiatric unit, County Executive William P. Schuber said yesterday that he was creating a three-member panel to investigate procedures at the county-run institution.


Shadows of Chinatown: A special report.; Portrait of Man as Mobster Stirs Community's Disbelief
Sprawling across the second floor of a shopping arcade beneath the Manhattan Bridge in Chinatown, the Triple Eight Palace is a popular spot for dim sum.
But in one of its private rooms on a February night in 1992, Federal prosecutors contend, the menu was revenge.
The hierarchy of the Tung On gang had gathered there to plot retaliation for a rash of assaults by the rival Ghost Shadows.
Participants told investigators that Paul H. K. Lai, a well-known businessman, complained angrily that the attacks on the gang that protected his gambling interests had diminished his status.


Integrated Program Smooths Your Path
PERFECTWORKS FOR WINDOWS, version 2.1, is a major integrated program that challenges the leaders in the field, Microsoft Works and Clarisworks.
Integrated programs, which perform several tasks with one piece of software, are usually thought of as beginners' fare, but they can benefit anyone who must run word-processing, spreadsheet, database, painting, drawing and communications programs and who does not want to face the expense and steep learning curve of major titles in each category.
Perfectworks covers all six categories, and does them well.
I will cite the word-processing category for examples, because that is the program I and, indeed most people use most of the time.
In fact I am writing these words with it.
But the other modules are similar, as Microsoft Windows programs should be, and you can switch from writing to drawing to spreadsheeting without having to relearn everything from scratch.


One Is Dead In Rampage On East Side
A man who became enraged in a domestic dispute stabbed his wife and mother-in-law and a 2-year-old child in a Manhattan apartment last night, killing the older woman, a family member said.
He then stabbed another woman, commandeered her car and drove on a wild 45-minute ride on the East Side, hitting at least 17 pedestrians and critically injuring at least two of them.
After police patrol cars finally forced the man's car to smash into a light pole on Avenue C between Eighth and Ninth Streets, the man tried to commit suicide by stabbing himself several times in the chest, the police and witnesses said.
He was listed in critical condition last night at St.
Vincent's Hospital and Medical Center.


Heat and Strangeness Dominate a Fortnight Ruled by the Full Moon
Along with the oddity of finding itself caught in a heat wave that seared its lawns and, despite the switch to heavier balls, kept the aces coming so strongly that even second serves qualified, Wimbledon also seemed to be under the spell of a full moon in this year, the 109th of its presentation.
There were some strange goings-on, most of them unprecedented at the tradition-conscious Grand Slam event, which usually inspires participants to be on their best behavior.


Bash It All You Want; It's Still a Great Game
All right, let everyone get it out of his system.
This is baseball's All-Star Game break, but let's make it baseball's Bash Break.
Yesterday's gone, but spend all day today -- and tomorrow, if your team isn't resuming the season -- bashing baseball and be done with it.
Baseball bashing is the popular sport to play these days.
And the arrival of the All-Star Game on the schedule prompted an even greater gush of assessments and critiques of the state of Major League Baseball.
Some news outlets in recent days acted as if they had discovered for the first time that fans have rebelled.


Simpson Defense Portrays a Man in Shock
Lawyers for O. J. Simpson began his defense today, seeking to establish before anything else that he was grief-stricken and distraught rather than detached and concerned primarily for himself when he was told that Nicole Brown Simpson was slain.
Arms around one another's shoulders as the defendant sat out of reach nearby, members of Mr.
Simpson's family filled the front row on the defendant's side of the gallery as court convened, much as they had gathered at Mr.
Simpson's home on North Rockingham Drive on June 13, 1994, shortly after Mrs.
Simpson and Ronald L. Goldman were killed.


Free Harry Wu
In a cruel miscalculation, China has seized an American citizen and human rights activist, Harry Wu, and made him a victim of deteriorating relations with Washington.
Over the weekend, they charged Mr.
Wu with offenses that could bring his execution.
The Clinton Administration rightly warns Beijing that it risks gravely damaging relations should it persist.
That is strong diplomatic language.
But the Administration's reaction is moderate compared to that in Congress, where Mr.
Wu has frequently testified in recent years and has made many friends.
China will not be able to bully and bluster its way past this issue as it has with too many human rights issues in the past.
Beijing must release Harry Wu.


New Jersey Top Court Backs Old-Fashioned Child Support
Upholding New Jersey's child-support guidelines, the State Supreme Court today rejected a divorced father's arguments that his support payments should be reduced so he can spend the money as he sees fit when he is caring for his children.
The ruling today, in a case involving James Pascale, a divorced father of three who pays $1,150 a month in child support, overturns a ruling by a state appellate court.
More broadly, it runs counter to a trend in other jurisdictions to develop equations for child support that take into account both the time and the money contributed by a parent that does not have primary responsibility for maintaining the home for the children.


Flooding in Southern China Begins to Recede


Observer; Six Feet High and Rising
We used to have health care, but now we have managed care.
"Managed care" is another way of saying "the health business."


New Prosthesis for One-Legged Player
TOMAS MURRAY, who with one leg helped carry Panama's basketball team to a gold-medal round at the Special Olympic World Games, is being fitted for a new prosthesis, compliments of Newington Children's Hospital in Hartford.
Murray, who is 20, lost his left leg near the hip in a train accident when he was 7.


Possessed by Tics and Noises
Tourette syndrome may not be a killer condition, but it is an embarrassing one.
To outsiders, the 100,000 Americans who have it may seem possessed, given to tics, spasms and noises that are likely to startle others in the vicinity.
As someone says on "Twitch and Shout," tonight's vibrant offering in the "P.O.V." series, "What people don't understand, they fear." Laurel Chiten's documentary helps us understand that what seems like peculiar or even menacing behavior is brought on by neurological causes and is absolutely no danger to bystanders.
Lowell Handler, a photojournalist who, like Ms.
Chiten, has Tourette syndrome, introduces us to an actress whose eyebrows have a way of twitching provocatively of their own accord, except when she is performing; a professional basketball player whose compulsive jerks and gestures seem part of his game; an artist, a more severe case, who works with a seeming wildness that otherwise emerges in what he calls freaky movements, and others similarly afflicted.
After a few minutes in their company, the symptoms do not seem all that strange, if strange at all.


The First Day Is a Long One at the Privatized D.M.V.
David Green arrived bright and early this morning at the newly privatized motor vehicle office to take the test for a truck-driver's license.
His promptness did not help.
Mr.
Green, of New Milford, spent an hour in line before a newly hired clerk took his application and other paperwork about 9 A.M.
Then he waited for another new clerk to call his name for the start of the test.
And he waited.
One hour.
Two hours.
Three hours.
Noon passed, and still no mention of his name.


City's Bond Rating: Did Giuliani Do Enough to Help It?
For months, the Giuliani administration watched as the downgrading of New York City's credit rating approached like a slow-moving but inexorable train.
Yesterday, after the train had struck and moved on, the question around City Hall was whether Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani might have done anything to move out of the way.
Even his critics agreed with the Mayor that there was an element of unfairness in the decision by the Standard &amp; Poor's Corporation to lower its rating on the city's long-term bonds, which the agency said was based mostly on the sluggishness of the city's economy.


Batters To Get Room To Breathe
When the moves to speed up the pace of games are announced, presumably on Tuesday, they will not be as previously advertised.
With players complaining bitterly about the owners' announcement a month ago that they would have to stay in the batter's box, a committee representing the clubs, the players and the umpires has decided to allow batters to continue leaving the box, but has restricted the distance they can stray.


Traffic Alert
Because of continuing work on the water main that ruptured Sunday, 40th Street between Seventh Avenue and Broadway is expected to be closed to traffic again today.


International Briefs; Thomson in Deal to Sell 5 Newspapers in Britain
Trinity International Holdings P.L.C. said yesterday that it had agreed to buy five British newspapers from the Thomson Corporation of Canada for $:327.5 million, or $522.4 million, creating one of the biggest provincial newspaper groups in Britain.
The five newspapers, including The Belfast Telegraph in Northern Ireland and The Western Mail in Cardiff, Wales, are part of Thomson Regional Newspapers Ltd., a unit of the Canadian company.
The parent company is undergoing a major revamping, including the sale of 46 newspapers in North America.


An Israeli Whirlpool of Movement and Emotion
Batsheva Dance Company, the Israeli modern-dance troupe that has just performed at Jacob's Pillow Dance Festival for the first time, is a company reborn.
In "Mabul," a vigorous 75-minute work that was presented at the Ted Shawn Theater here on Saturday night, ceaseless originality fuses with eye-riveting energy.
The entire work rushes on like a maelstrom.
Unrelated images are not strung together in the usual nonlinear structure but thrown into a whirlpool of movement and emotions before splattering across the stage with centrifugal force.
Episodes are connected unpredictably.


Pope Calls for an End to Discrimination Against Women
In a special letter issued in Rome in advance of a United Nations international conference on women, Pope John Paul II said yesterday that after centuries of discrimination, equality for women was now a matter not only of justice, but also of necessity.
The letter, addressed to women throughout the world, gave credit to the women's movement for its "substantially positive" achievements, and assumed responsibility for injustices against women committed in the name of the Roman Catholic Church.
But he made clear that there would be no change in the church's position barring women from the priesthood.


Tarango Ducks Confrontation With Rosset
The hot-tempered JEFF TARANGO has withdrawn from the Swiss Open in Gstaad for fear of a confrontation with an angry MARC ROSSET, tournament officials said yesterday.
At Wimbledon, Tarango had accused the French umpire BRUNO REBEUH of being "the most corrupt official in the game," and alleged that Rebeuh had shown bias to players in return for friendship.
He named Rosset, the Olympic champion from Switzerland, as one of those who had benefited from the official's favoritism.
Tarango stormed off the court during his third-round match against ALEXANDER MRONZ of Germany after a dispute with Rebeuh over a line call.
Tarango's French wife, BENEDICTE, then slapped the official twice on the face.
Tarango was fined a record $15,500 for the outburst and may face additional fines or a suspension after an investigation.


Prairie Dog Colonies Bolster Life in the Plains
A RISING sun was just beginning to illuminate the harsh beauty of the Badlands when an early-rising prairie dog emerged from one of thousands of small dirt mounds decorating a swale of the Great Plains.
By midmorning the ground was alive with the golden-tan, foot-long rodents, which are only now becoming recognized as an ecologically crucial species with uncommon power to affect the lives and surroundings of other creatures.
"Look at that landscape out there," said Dr.
Glenn E. Plumb, the wildlife biologist for Badlands National Park, as he gazed out across the prairie-dog town.
"That's a real concentration of biological activity, a lot of complex nature."


By Design; No Gilding of Lilies
Minimal, classic and even conservative are the words to describe the current state of fashion.
Anything fussy or overdecorated just doesn't look cool.
Influential designers have pared down their clothes and the way they are shown, and the trend-setting young women about town have followed suit.
They're tucking their stick-straight hair behind their ears and keeping accessories to a minimum.
Jewelry is almost nonexistent.
When it is worn, it is subtle.
A pair of delicate drop earrings passes muster, and diamond studs have been rediscovered by those with pierced ears.
About the only jewelry worn in multiples is rings.
But forget that old idea of rings on every finger.
The stylish today wear multiples on one finger, stacking narrow bands up to the knuckle, usually on the traditional ring finger.


Samuel Woolley, 86; Engineered Mergers At Bank of New York
Samuel H. Woolley, an executive who helped turn the Bank of New York Corporation into one of the nation's largest financial institutions, died on Sunday at his home in Morris Plains, N.J.
He was 86.
As the chairman and chief executive of the Bank of New York, Mr.
Woolley engineered a series of deals that transformed it from a New York City bank into a statewide bank holding company.


Officer Convicted of Brutality
Ronald M. Johnstone, a Kearny police officer described by prosecutors as someone who would "beat first and asked questions later," was convicted of six brutality charges yesterday by a Federal jury.
But a second officer, Richard Poplaski, was acquitted by the same jury of the one count against him, The Associated Press reported.
The case involved a series of incidents between February 1990 and September 1991.
Mr.
Johnstone's lawyer said an appeal was planned.


What's in a Name? Many Others
THESE languid days of summer demand new and novel ways to be unproductive.
For those who lack the imagination needed to swing in a hammock while discerning pictures in the clouds, or the stamina to listen to talk radio, the personal computer can be a valuable tool.
A computer can generate anagrams, for example.


Maryland Players Suspended for Gambling
Maryland's starting quarterback, SCOTT MILANOVICH, and four other school athletes were suspended by the National Collegiate Athletic Association yesterday for gambling on college games.
The school will appeal the two harshest judgments of the five; they are believed to be the most severe sanctions ever levied against Division I athletes for a gambling offense.


Union Objects to Imported, Exploited Musicians
To the Editor:
Your reviewer of the State Philharmonic of Bialystok, Poland (July 4), seems to believe that we are arguing with the presence of foreign orchestras in New York on the basis of quality as well as price.
Local 802 has no desire to complain when any orchestra visits New York to perform as a featured group.
We believe it is valuable for the public, including our members, to be exposed to new repertory and new performances of standard literature.
A Polish orchestra can bring a unique musical experience to the stage.


Sandoz Sharpens Its Focus on the Drugs of Tomorrow
The acquisition of Genetic Therapy Inc., a small American biotechnology company, by Sandoz Ltd. is the latest part of the big Swiss company's strategy to remake itself by concentrating on its pharmaceutical business, including biotech therapies that it believes will be the treatments of tomorrow.
The Sandoz approach is to stand firmly on two legs in the health care business: One is drugs, where the company is weaving a web of alliances with small, fast-growing research companies in biotechnology; the other is nutrition, where Sandoz hopes to catch the growing markets for infants and the elderly and for specialized products for hospital patients.
Part of this included a $3.7 billion acquisition last year of the Gerber Products Company, the American baby-food producer.


Sports of The Times; Between All The Clouds, A Rising Sun
As he listened to the questions being translated into Japanese, his sunglasses were perched atop his blue "LA" cap and he held his hands behind his blue jersey with "Dodgers" in white across the chest above a red 16.
Sometimes he smiled, sometimes he shook his head, sometimes he muttered, "Mmmmmmm." But when Hideo Nomo was asked if he was overwhelmed by all this attention, he answered quickly, in English.
"Yes," he said.


By Abstention, Eight Teachers Gain Tenure
Eight of 11 teachers were granted tenure by default tonight when conservative school board members, elected to cut taxes, abstained from a vote on tenure, a practice they had pledged to abolish.
Just before the tenure vote, the board unanimously decided that a teacher would obtain tenure if a majority of board members abstained.


Gene Gun Could Treat Hair Loss
IN a promising step in studies of hair growth, researchers at a biotechnology company in California have found a way to fire genetic "bullets" at hair follicles, the tiny hair-making factories in the skin.
"We think this delivery system opens the whole hair-loss field to the possibility of gene therapy," said Dr.
Robert M. Hoffman, the founder and president of Anticancer Inc., a biotechnology company in San Diego.
He and the company's senior scientist, Dr.
Lingna Li, reported their findings in the July issue of the journal Nature Medicine.


State Gets Aid for Homeless
New Jersey will receive $26.7 million of the $900 million in aid to the homeless announced yesterday by the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development.
Paterson, the biggest recipient in the state, will get $7.5 million to provide housing and counseling for 82 homeless people with chronic substance-abuse problems or AIDS.


Managua Journal; For the Pride of Nicaragua, a Home Run in Politics?
In the United States, Dennis Martinez is regarded by baseball fans as a crafty veteran pitcher, an All-Star, the ace of the Cleveland Indians' staff.
Here in his baseball-mad homeland, such achievements are enough to have vaulted him to the status of national hero and possible future President.
"Dennis Martinez is a factor of national unity and pride who is perhaps the most popular man in Nicaragua," said Edgard Castillo, a former sports and foreign news editor at the newspaper La Prensa here.
"Everyone likes and admires him, whether they are Communists or conservatives."


Defying U.S. Threat, Bolivians Plant More Coca
At the coca market in this remote jungle village, where farmers lug 50-pound bags of coca leaves for miles on their backs and bicycles, the talk is of little else but the demands by the United States that Bolivia cut its coca production.
"I don't care how much pressure they put on us to stop growing coca, we will never give this up because we have no other means to survive," said Delfin Olivera, a 24-year-old farmer.
"Coca is natural, it's part of our culture, and it has been here since the beginning of the world."


Jumbo-Jet Plan Is Scrapped By Boeing and Europeans
The Boeing Company and its prospective European partners have decided not to produce a "super jumbo" jetliner capable of carrying 600 to 800 passengers because of a lack of demand from airlines, company officials said yesterday.
But Boeing officials said the company was still considering production of a 500-passenger aircraft by stretching its existing 747 model and was studying a supersonic plane it calls the High Speed Civil Transport.


Corrections
An article on Thursday about a testing proposal by the American Federation of Teachers misstated the union's relative size.
With 875,000 members, it is not the nation's largest teacher's union; the 2.2-million-member National Education Association is.


METROPOLITAN GOLF REPORT
New Jersey
The 75th New Jersey Open, the state's premier tournament, got under way with a fund-raising pro-am yesterday and will finish Thursday at the North Jersey Country Club in Wayne as a highlight of the club's centennial celebration.


Buena Vista Journal; Inundated by Rain, These Folks Wouldn't Move Even for Noah
Speculators banking on bountiful iron ore built this factory town beside a lazy river in the late 1890's, promising an infant Pittsburgh in "Bonnie Buena Vista."
But the iron ran out, and now the river threatens to drown their dream.
Ten days ago, as a submersible pump slurped out City Hall after two floods in six days, a child's drawing in the front hall proclaimed a plaintive new slogan, "Buena Vista: A City Worth Saving."


Corrections
A report in the Guide column of the Connecticut Weekly on Sunday about Canaan Railroad Days misstated the schedule.
The road race, hayride and softball tournament will be this Sunday, July 16, and the country-western concert will be Monday, July 17; they were not held this week.
The arts and crafts show, fireworks and other events will be on July 22, not this Saturday.


Patterns
Flattery Is Lost on Tahari
When it comes to fashion design, the sincerest form of flattery is wholly unwelcome.
Nevertheless, imitating another designer's creations is a way of life on Seventh Avenue, where the aggrieved, real or otherwise, can do little more than complain publicly about knockoffs.


Court Upholds Child Support
The New Jersey Supreme Court yesterday upheld the state's child-support guidelines, rejecting a divorced father's arguments for modifying them.
James Pascale of East Windsor had argued that his child-support payments should be reduced so he could spend the difference the way he chooses when he visits his three children.


Simple Chip Could Mean Control Over TV Violence
The chip that President Clinton referred to in his speech yesterday is a relatively simple and inexpensive device that would enable parents to block television programs transmitted with a signal identifying them as violent or otherwise inappropriate for children.
A V-chip (the "V" stands for violence) could be installed in a television set for as little as $5.
Although the President talked of installing them in "televisions with cable," in fact they could work with broadcast signals as well.
The main factor is not the chip itself, but in whether or not programs are transmitted with an identifying signal.


Only Peace Talks Can Save Northern Ireland
To The Editor:
During the past few days Belfast and Londonderry have been the scene of street riots, which included firebombing of cars and trucks (front page, July 6).
Most significant, the police have also been attacked.
The next step will be the use of guns.
If the rioting continues, the police will fire plastic bullets.
In the past those bullets have killed and maimed.
After that would come the I.R.A.'s use of guns against the police and the British Army, and the story comes full circle.


Helene Johnson, Poet of Harlem, 89, Dies
Helene Johnson, one of the Harlem Renaissance poets who flourished in the 1920's, died on Friday at her home in Manhattan.
She was 89.
Ms.
Johnson, a descendant of slaves, was reared in Boston and in Oak Bluffs, Mass.
She came to New York City in 1927 and became, as the author and longtime librarian of Fisk University, Arna Bontemps, once put it, "the youngest of the young poets and writers who brought about the Negro renaissance, as it was called in Harlem in the 20's." That cultural flowering wilted in the Depression.


Dispute Over Killer's Drug Use
Last month, Darnell Collins of Atlantic City went on a five-day shooting rampage in New Jersey and New York, killing seven people and wounding four others before dying in a shootout with the police.
Friends and relatives said Mr.
Collins, a convicted felon, was a heavy cocaine user who became abusive when he was high.
But New Jersey's Bureau of Parole, which had been responsible for supervising Mr.
Collins after his release from prison in January 1994, said his most recent drug tests -- on Jan. 19 and May 17 -- had been negative.


Region News Briefs; Nassau Retools Budget For High-Salary College
Nassau County officials said today that they had closed an $8 million gap in the new Nassau Community College budget, a revenue shortfall that the college's critics contend was largely a result of the school's extraordinarily high faculty salaries.
The gap in the proposed $118.8 million budget for 1995-96 was erased by transferring money from other county accounts, including the general fund and the police budget, said David A. Vieser, a spokesman for Thomas S. Gulotta, the Nassau County Executive.


From Depths of the Draft to a Spot at Shea
Jason Isringhausen said he had no illusions about being selected by the Mets all the way down in the 44th round of the 1991 amateur draft.
"I was just happy to be drafted at the time," the pitcher said.


Head of Democratic Opposition Is Released by Burmese Military
Daw Aung San Suu Kyi, the Nobel Prize-winning opposition leader in Myanmar, formerly Burma, was released today from house arrest after nearly six years of confinement by the nation's military junta.
The release of Mrs.
Aung San Suu Kyi, who won the 1991 Nobel Peace Prize for her campaign to bring democracy to her homeland, came the day before her detention order expired.


No Need to Wait For Electric Vehicles
To the Editor:
Re "Plan Could Again Delay the Electric Car" (news article, July 4): Gov.
William Weld of Massachusetts, in a compromise with auto manufacturers, proposes to delay demanding that Detroit produce vehicles that meet the zero emission standard until two years after a manufacturer anywhere in the world builds an electric car that meets a set of criteria on performance and price.


Rebuffing Clinton, Dole Seeks End to Bosnian Arms Embargo
Spurning President Clinton's attempt to build support for his Bosnia policy, Senator Bob Dole said today that he planned to bring legislation to the Senate floor that would lift the arms embargo against the Bosnian Government in conjunction with a withdrawal of United Nations peacekeeping forces.
Mr.
Dole signaled that he would move ahead with the bill as early as next week, and he did so just hours before a White House dinner for the Congressional leadership, which Mr.
Clinton had called to discuss foreign policy issues and fend off the rising demands for a United Nations withdrawal from Bosnia.
"The time for make-believe is over," the majority leader said.
"The U.N. mission in Bosnia is a failure."


COMPANY BRIEFS
ALLEGHENY POWER SYSTEM INC., New York, said it planned to move its corporate headquarters to Washington County, Md., by late 1996.
GENERAL ELECTRIC CO., Fairfield, Conn., announced it had formed a joint venture with the Harris Corp. to develop electronic systems to control trains and railroads.
Terms of the deal were not disclosed.


Paris Defends Seizing Ship in Atom Test Zone
France today brushed aside a wave of international protests against the boarding and seizure by French Navy commandos in the South Pacific of a ship carrying protesters against its plans to resume underground nuclear testing at Mururoa Atoll in September.
"France will command respect for the measures it has decided to take by requiring respect for legality in its territorial waters," Prime Minister Alain Juppe said.


Mergers Swallow Up New Jersey Banks
Independent banks are fast disappearing from New Jersey as Midlantic becomes the latest to be acquired.
It will be sold to PNC Bank of Pittsburgh for $3 billion in stock.


RESULTS PLUS
TRACK Victory for Mutola  Maria Mutola of Mozambique narrowly missed the world record in the women's 1,000 meters and Michael Johnson turned in another impressive 200 meters yesterday in the DN Games Grand Prix meet in Stockholm.
Competing for the first time at Olympic Stadium, Mutola was timed in 2 minutes 30.72 seconds, just 5-hundredths of a second off the world record.
It was the second fastest time ever in the seldom-contested distance, which is not on any championship schedule.
Regina Jacobs of the United States finished second in 2:35.46.
Johnson, ranked No. 1 in the world at 200 and 400 meters, took the 200 in a fast 20.15 in slight head wind after easing up near the finish. (AP) TENNIS Muster Streak Stopped Top-seeded Thomas Muster had his 40-match winning streak on clay ended yesterday when he was beaten in the first round of the $560,000 Swiss Open tournament in Gstaad, Sweden.
Alex Corretja of Spain took only 90 minutes to beat Muster, 7-5, 6-1. (AP) SOCCER Brazil Advances, 2-0
In Rivera, Uruguay, World Cup champion Brazil, bidding for its fifth America Cup title, scored two late goals last night to beat Peru, 2-0, and qualify for the second round.
Brazil scored in the 77th minute on a penalty kick by Zinho.
Six minutes later Edmundo took advantage of a rebound off Peruvian goalkeeper Miguel Miranda to score.
The Brazilians joined Uruguay in the second round of the 12-nation championships.
Earlier last night, Colombia beat Ecuador, 1-0, to move closer to the second round.
Ecuador was virtually eliminated after its second straight loss.
The United States, which beat Chile in its opener, plays tonight. (AP)


Only Peace Talks Can Save Northern Ireland; Empty Promises
To the Editor:
The release of British Pvt.
Lee Clegg from prison for the murder of an Irish teen-ager (news article, July 4) only adds to the growing belief that Britain is not serious about the peace process.
In looking back on past events, Britain has only reacted to the situation and rarely, if ever, initiated a positive response.


Orthodox Judges Overturn Betrothal of a Minor
First, Sarah Leah Goldstein was ambushed by a biblical passage that had been ignored for centuries.
Then she was saved by a voice from beyond the grave.
A special assembly of Orthodox Jewish religious judges declared yesterday that Miss Goldstein, whose father betrothed her at age 11 to a man whose identity he would not reveal, was free to marry anyone she pleased.


Monumental Inventory of Insects in a Costa Rican Forest Is Under Way
IN a high-tech laboratory in the middle of one of the world's lushest and most creature-filled rain forests, Dr.
Jack Longino is watching the digitized images of ant faces flashing across a computer screen.
Next to him a technician is passing a procession of beetles labeled with bar codes in front of a scanner, which beeps in recognition as though the beetles were so many cans of soup at the supermarket checkout counter.
Working out of their jungle lab at the La Selva Biological Station on the Caribbean coast of Costa Rica, these researchers are chipping away, one bug at a time, at the monumental task of inventorying every last species of creeping, crawling, flying, scuttling, teeming bug in this unthinkably diverse jungle.


Market Place; Trucks, rails and airlines of the Dow transports surge on the Fed cut.
THE stock market has seen the Federal Reserve cut rates, and it thinks that a recession will be avoided.
In the last three sessions after the Fed's move on Thursday to reduce the Federal funds rate by a quarter of a percentage point, stocks that are sensitive to the economy have performed much better than others.
The Dow Jones transportation average, which is very economically sensitive, has surged 7.3 percent over the last three sessions, the best move over such a period since late 1991.


INSIDE
Medicare Plan Criticized
A large hospital association said Congressional Republicans were moving too fast in their effort to overhaul Medicare.
Page A16.
China Crusader Is Seen
China allowed an American envoy to meet with the jailed Chinese-American rights advocate but not to discuss charges against him.
Page A8.
F.B.I.
Had Agribusiness Spy
A senior executive of Archer-Daniels-Midland secretly taped conversations for a Federal investigation of price practices.
Page D2.
Jordanian Is Sentenced
A man who strangled his wife in New Jersey was sentenced in his native Jordan to 15 years in prison and "hard labor." Page B5.
Subway Service Restored
Subway service was back on track for morning rush hour after Sunday's water main break.
Page B3.


Elephant Storms Out Of Circus in Queens
An irritable young elephant bumped into another elephant during a circus performance in a Queens park, then began fighting and stormed out of the tent, as audience members scrambled up the bleachers to flee the fracas, the authorities said.
About 12 people suffered minor injuries, though none were directly caused by the 15-year-old elephant, named Debbie, officials said.


All-Star Numbers Secondary to Ratings
Before gloom, doom, fog and brown tide swallow up major league baseball, let this be said: its All-Star Game outdraws those of all other sports.
There is still potency in one of the beleaguered sport's family jewels.
But how much of that power will be evident tonight during ABC's telecast?
Will the game's Nielsen rating approach last year's pre- strike 15.7?
Will it drop by as much as baseball's 20 percent attendance decline?
Will the relative meaninglessness of the midseason exhibition be rendered more meaningful than before?


Chess; Kasparov shows he can adjust to slow-motion maneuvering without losing his edge.
In the first round of the final two-game knockout match of the Intel World Chess Grand Prix in New York, Vasily Ivanchuk of Ukraine chose a conservative procedure to confront Gary Kasparov of Russia, one that would deny the Professional Chess Association's champion a quick-opening, sharp counterattack.
That was not a bad strategy, but it certainly was not foolproof: Kasparov won anyway.
The point is that although Kasparov attracts maximum attention with his scintillating attacks, he has as complete a game as Bobby Fischer had 23 years ago.
If the position calls for slow-motion tacking about, he will throw himself into it without losing patience or alertness.
A good example of this was his first game with Ivanchuk, played at the Tribeca Performing Arts Center on June 23.
Both this and the second game, which Kasparov also won, were contested at the quickplay time limit of 25 minutes for all moves.


Stocks Post Some Big Gains, but Dow Eases 0.34
A casual investor looking at just the Dow Jones industrial average might have assumed that the stock market was generally lackluster yesterday.
After all, the Dow eased fractionally at the close after completing its best week in about 11 months, topping both the 4,600 and the 4,700 levels.
But beneath the surface, there was quite a bit of rumbling in active trading.
Some stocks soared and others plummeted as traders moved their funds into groups that they considered undervalued.


Campaigns for Ford and Mercedes in Southern California seem to cover similar creative ground.
IMITATION in most other businesses is called plagiarism, copyright infringement or even intellectual property theft.
Litigation is usually not far behind.
In advertising, however, some form of imitation is sometimes inseparable from creativity.
Allusions to television, cinema and bygone ad campaigns are standard practice.
Copycat ads are typically shrugged off as coincidental by many in the industry but can still embarrass their creators when other ad agencies accuse them of plagiarism, or at least a lack of imagination.


Jordanian Gets 15 Years For Murdering His Wife
A man who strangled his wife in New Jersey was sentenced yesterday in his native Jordan to 15 years of prison and "hard labor." The term was much lighter than he would probably have received in the United States, American officials said, and it seemed to satisfy no one.
After the defendant, Mohammad I. Abequa, was sentenced in Amman, the prosecution and defense both said they would appeal.


What Fits in Europe's Wallet?
Will Rembrandt adorn the franken?
In a small office here, central bankers, historians, artists and even a psychologist are laboring over the vexing task of how to set up a single currency for Europe.


In a Season of Discontent, Japan Hails a Conquering Hero
When Hideo Nomo, a star pitcher for Japan's Kintetsu Buffaloes, decided some months back to leave his team and try to make it in the American major leagues, he was regarded by some people here as almost a traitor to Japanese baseball.
But when Hideo Nomo, Los Angeles Dodger and National League strikeout king, takes the mound as his league's starting pitcher in Tuesday's All-Star Game, his countrymen back home will be rooting for him as a new hero.
For by leaving Japan and showing that a Japanese player can succeed in America, Nomo has given a bigger boost to the reputation of Japanese baseball than he ever could have done by staying.


Region News Briefs; Wall Street Brokerage Is Told to Repay Temple
A Wall Street brokerage firm was ordered today to repay a Mamaroneck synagogue that lost more than $600,000 by investing in high-risk securities.
The ruling, by an arbitration panel of the New York Stock Exchange, upheld a complaint by the Westchester Jewish Center that the brokerage firm of Gruntal &amp; Company had misled the synagogue's treasurer about the level of risk involved in the investment.
The panel said that Gruntal &amp; Company must refund $630,000 to the congregation and pay the synagogue's legal fees of $50,000.


From Vacant to Vegetables


A Continent in Excerpts, From Afrobeat to Wails
With five bands from Africa and one from Haiti, the Africa Fete on Saturday and Sunday afternoon at Central Park's Summerstage tried to represent not only musicians born in Africa but also the diaspora.
That's a vast territory, especially since Africa accounts for 10 percent of the world's population.
One result of this was a multiplicity of styles and viewpoints, with traditional Malian music following a rollicking Zairian pop hybrid, with messages about living for today preceding warnings to think about tomorrow.
Featuring Femi Kuti of Nigeria, Osibisa of Ghana (by way of Britain), Baaba Maal of Senegal, Oumou Sangare of Mali, Tabu Ley Rochereau of Zaire and Boukman Eksperyans of Haiti, the Africa Fete was a superstar event like few others.
Perhaps in future years Western ears, now open to international sounds, will be discriminating enough to want a Malian Fete or a Zairian Fete.


International Briefs; Cutback at ABN-Amro
ABN-Amro Holding N.V., the largest bank in the Netherlands, plans to eliminate about 840 jobs at its head office in Amsterdam in the next four years, a spokesman said yesterday.
The bank, which has about 8,400 employees at the office, said the cuts were part of a plan to increase efficiency.
Jules Prast, chief spokesman for ABN-Amro, said the reduction was part of a job-cutting program instituted shortly after the 1990 merger of ABN and Amsterdam Rotterdam Bank. (Bloomberg Business News)


Archer Official Taped Talks for F.B.I.
Federal investigators used a senior executive of the Archer-Daniels-Midland Company to secretly tape- record conversations with other executives and companies as part of an expanding investigation into possible price collusion on several of the company's products, an official at the company said today.
The tapes, made over the last three years by Mark E. Whitacre, a biochemist who heads Archer's BioProducts division, were played in recent days to other employees being questioned by investigators.


Back in Fashion, Video Installations
Video art, which in its brief history has gone in and out of art-world fashion more than once, seems to be on something of a roll this summer.
Bill Viola, a star of the medium, is representing the United States at the Venice Biennale; Gary Hill, another prime figure, is the subject of a retrospective at the Guggenheim SoHo, and recent gallery shows in New York City have featured installations by Nam June Paik and Mary Lucier, two video stalwarts.
Now the Museum of Modern Art gives a further boost to the video boom with "Video Spaces: Eight Installations," which runs through Sept. 12.
Organized by Barbara London, head of the museum's video program, the show features recent works by Mr.
Viola, Chris Marker, Gary Hill, Judith Barry and Brad Miskell, Teiji Furuhashi, Tony Oursler, Stan Douglas and Marcel Odenbach.


No Headline
This has nothing to do with ideology.
This is about making money. -- SHAO CHUN, a Chinese businessman, on growing links with Taiwan.  [ A8:4. ]


Corrections
An article yesterday about documents removed from the office of the former White House counsel, Vincent W. Foster Jr., after he died, misstated the position taken by Robert B. Fiske Jr., the former Whitewater independent counsel, on the handling of the documents.
Before leaving office, Mr.
Fiske never reached any legal conclusions about the handling of the documents by other White House officials; he did not conclude that no law had been violated in the handling of the documents.


Campbell Plans A Consolidation
The Campbell Soup Company said yesterday that it would consolidate its global account, with billings estimated at $200 million, at three or four agencies from the eight now on its roster.
The review involves all Campbell brands, including Campbell's, Godiva chocolates, Mrs.
Paul's frozen fish, Pepperidge Farm baked goods, Prego spaghetti sauces, Swanson TV dinners and Vlasic pickles.
"We are taking a look at what makes sense for Campbell in terms of aligning our agencies on a global basis," Gary Moss, vice president for global advertising at Campbell in Camden, N.J., said, confirming a report this week in Adweek.


Republican Letter Criticized on Racial and Ethnic Grounds
A new fund-raising letter for Congressional Republicans features a "Wanted" poster that is intended to help unseat 28 liberal Democrats, 22 of whom are black, Hispanic, female or Jewish.
The Democrats said today that the poster was "the latest example of Republican efforts" to fan the flames of racial and ethnic hatred.
The Republicans said that they wanted to unseat liberals, that it was little surprise that many of them would include minorities or women and that they had no intention of highlighting anything but the lawmakers' voting records.


CHRONICLE
The Rolling Stones don't reach quite so far back into musical history as Irving Berlin, but there were kindly jokes about their advancing ages on Sunday at their first live concert in Britain in five years.
Reuters reported that there was also discussion as to whether this might be their last tour and that there had been calls for Queen Elizabeth to knight them.
Clearly reveling in his return to Britain, MICK JAGGER, 51 and twice a grandfather, took to the stage in front of 50,000 fans at Sheffield in central England, as part of the band's worldwide Voodoo Lounge tour, billed as the biggest in rock-and-roll history.


CLINTON TAKES ON VIOLENT TELEVISION
President Clinton campaigned today in the heart of Tennessee for civic values, endorsing Congressional proposals to require television makers to install a computer chip that could automatically screen out programs that broadcasters had coded as violent.
"The question is how can we get beyond telling parents to do something that they physically cannot do for several hours a day unless they literally do want to be a home without a television or monitor their kids in some other way," Mr.
Clinton said at a conference here on the family and the media that was organized by Vice President Al Gore.
"This is not censorship, this is parental responsibility."


Habeas Corpus Aids Guilty and Innocent Both
To the Editor:
President Clinton's support for a narrower writ of habeas corpus for prisoners is misdirected, but not for the reasons relied on by Anthony Lewis (column, July 7).
By referring to habeas corpus as a remedy against confessions under torture, and to its role in protecting "law-abiding citizens," Mr.
Lewis suggests that it is or should be limited to inaccurate convictions.
This is false to the purpose of the writ, which strikes at all unconstitutional detentions -- even of the guilty.
Mr.
Lewis fails to note that the Supreme Court already prevents litigators from wasting the Federal courts' time.
State prisoners must first present claims to state courts and may not pepper Federal courts with a claim twice.
"Frivolous" claims may be dismissed out of hand.
Mr.
Lewis is correct that the hoopla over habeas is unique to death-penalty cases, where only a perverse culture would feel injured by a prisoner who invokes process to save his life.
DANIEL YEAGER Associate Professor California Western School of Law San Diego, July 7, 1995


Genentech Ousts Chief Over a Loan Guarantee Bid
Genentech Inc. said today that its board had ousted G. Kirk Raab as president and chief executive after the disclosure that he had sought a personal loan guarantee of $2 million from the company's majority stockholder, Roche Holdings Ltd. of Switzerland, while the companies were in merger negotiations earlier this year.
Genentech, a biotechnology company based in South San Francisco, Calif., said Arthur D. Levinson, who has been a senior vice president and the company's chief scientist, would succeed Mr.
Raab, who is 60.
The company said Dr.
Levinson, who is 45, was appointed on Friday, after the board asked for and received Mr.
Raab's resignation.


We Can't Re-establish Vietnam Relations
To the Editor:
The United States has never had diplomatic relations with the Socialist Republic of Vietnam or its antecedents.
It is therefore incorrect to state as you do that "President Clinton has concluded that the time has come to re-establish full diplomatic relations with the former enemy" (front page, July 7).
The United States did not recognize the Government of the Democratic Republic of Vietnam when it was established by Ho Chi Minh in Hanoi in September 1945.
When the Soviet Union and China recognized this government in February 1950, President Truman recognized the Government of the State of Vietnam headed by former Emperor Bao Dai.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK'S BOND RATING IS LOWERED
A major credit agency lowered its rating of New York City's long-term credit worthiness, citing both the sluggish economy and fiscal gimmicks it said were used by Mayor to balance the city's budget.
The decision by Standard &amp; Poor's cut the city's rating from A-, where it has been since 1987, to BBB+.  [ Page A1. ]
For months, the Giuliani administration watched as the downgrading of New York City's credit rating approached like a slow-moving but inexorable train.
After the train had struck and moved on, the question around City Hall was whether the Mayor might have done anything to move out of the way.
News analysis.  [ B4. ]
MOBSTER PORTRAYAL STIRS DISBELIEF
A Federal indictment last month depicted Paul H. K. Lai, a well-known Chinatown businessman, as a top leader of an organized crime group that law-enforcement officials believe has begun to rival the Mafia in influence and brutality -- a man who cold-bloodedly ordered murders to protect his gambling and extortion rackets.
But many in Chinatown, and Mr.
Lai himself in an unusual two-hour interview, describe him as a classic immigrant success story, an honorable businessman and benevolent civic leader who even served on an advisory panel for Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo.  [ A1. ]
CHILD SUPPORT GUIDELINES UPHELD
Upholding New Jersey's child-support guidelines, the state Supreme Court rejected a divorced father's arguments that his support payments should be reduced so he can spend the money as he sees fit when he is caring for his children.
The decision, in a case involving James Pascale, a divorced father of three who pays $1,150 a month in child support, overturns a ruling by a state Appellate Court.
More broadly, it runs counter to a trend in other jurisdictions to develop equations for child support.  [ A1. ]
In what Federal officials suggested could be the last big infusion of homeless-assistance money for years to come, the Government awarded New York City $100 million for emergency shelter, permanent housing, drug treatment and day care.  [ B3. ]
ORTHODOX JUDGES OVERTURN BETROTHAL
First, Sarah Leah Goldstein was ambushed by a biblical passage that had been ignored for centuries.
Then she was saved by a voice from beyond the grave.
A special assembly of Orthodox Jewish religious judges declared that Miss Goldstein, whose father betrothed her at age 11 to a man whose identity he would not reveal, was free to marry anyone she pleased.  [ B3. ] ROUGH START FOR NEW D.M.V.
The administration of Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman switched the 23 motor vehicle offices in New Jersey from state to private operation in the name of efficiency and economy.
But the campaign's start was hectic and bumpy across the state, with new clerks working after only a weekend of training on recognizing and processing the multitude of forms and documents for titles, licenses and registration plates.  [ B5. ]
JORDANIAN GETS 15 YEARS FOR MURDER
A man who strangled his wife in New Jersey was sentenced in his native Jordan to 15 years of prison and "hard labor."  [ B5. ] Chronicle B2 Traffic Alert B3


Why Child Care Isn't Like Baby Sitting
To The Editor:
William Safire, usually careful with his choice of words, uses the phrase "job-tied baby sitting" while discussing the need for child care in ". . . As We Know It," his column of July 6 on the privatization of welfare.


New Attack Planned On Ills of Space Travel
A CONUNDRUM of the space age is that humans have spent a great deal of time in orbit yet understand little about how to prevent the ills that bedevil space travelers, a prerequisite if people one day are to trek to distant planets and stars.
More than 300 American and Russian astronauts have logged a total of 38 years in space since Yuri A. Gagarin in 1961 became the first person to ride a rocket into orbit.
Yet at best scientists have only sketchy insights into the causes and cures of such space ailments as nausea, anemia, lethargy, headaches, disorientation, fatigue, depression, motion sickness, heart palpitations, weakened defenses against infectious disease and losses of blood volume, muscle mass and bone.


Truck Drivers Killed in Collision
Two truck drivers were killed yesterday when their tractor-trailers collided during rush hour in the southbound lanes of Routes 1 and 9.
One of the trucks, apparently carrying a load of gasoline, burst into flames, sending thick black smoke hundreds of feet into the air, said the Linden Police Captain, Michael Boyle.


Representative Johnson's Ethics Task
At last, Representative Nancy Johnson of Connecticut has taken a tentative step toward discharging her duty as chairwoman of the House ethics committee.
The committee will hear testimony about Speaker Newt Gingrich's book deal with a publishing firm controlled by Rupert Murdoch.
But the committee's plan to take the testimony in closed session is hardly a way to reassure a properly skeptical public about its dedication to get to the bottom of things.
Mr.
Gingrich says he has no problem testifying in public.
He should demand that the hearing be open.


CHRONICLE
Must be something in the genes: There's nothing surprising about the notion that at least one of Irving Berlin's descendants might go into show business, but it was not always inevitable for the one who did, his granddaughter MARY ELLIN LERNER.
It just took a while.
Ms.
Lerner, 38, intended to be a jazz musician when she studied music, voice and theater at Tufts University, but she said that when she graduated in 1978, "I couldn't figure out exactly how to do that." She added, "I had also been an English major and could see a path into writing more clearly." So she veered off into Columbia Journalism School and then to writing jobs on Mademoiselle, Family Weekly and other magazines.


Nebraska Decides to Shuck the Corn
Forget Cornhuskers; Huskers is the new selling point for Nebraska athletic officials.
The Cornhuskers nickname, begun in 1902, seems, well, corny, to too many football recruits.
Huskers, however, was just fine, so officials have been cutting the corn from printed materials and logos.
"We've found that Cornhuskers and Herbie, the mascot, just don't sell outside of Nebraska," Athletic Director BILL BYRNE said. (AP)


Killed in the Line of Duty


International Briefs; Two Deals for Thorn
Thorn EMI P.L.C., the British music and rentals company, said yesterday that it would pay $106 million to buy the Advantage Companies and the Tidewater Rental Corporation, operators of its United States Rent-A-Center franchises.
Thorn said it would pay $18.50 a share to acquire Advantage, based in Wichita, Kan., and its two subsidiaries, Comcoa Inc. and Advantedge Rental Purchase Inc.
In addition, Thorn said it had agreed to purchase Tidewater Rental, a privately held company associated with Advantage, for an undisclosed sum.
Tidewater operates 20 Rent-A-Center franchises in Virginia. (Bloomberg Business News)


Subway on Track
Working through the night after Sunday's huge water main break, city employees pumped out water, scooped out muck, hosed down subway cars and dried off subway rails, managing to get subway service back in time for yesterday morning's rush.


For a Veteran Traveler, Jupiter Is Within Reach
THE Galileo spacecraft has seemed to take forever to reach Jupiter.
The mission, authorized by the National Aeronautics and Space Administration in 1979, ran into many technical and budgetary delays, and was finally launched from a space shuttle in October 1989.
Since then the spacecraft has traveled 2.3 billion miles on a roundabout course to Jupiter.


Nevitt Sanford, 86, Psychologist Who Traced Roots of Prejudice
Nevitt Sanford, a psychologist whose response to the rise of the Nazis was to develop scientific methods to study prejudice and hatred, died on Friday in a nursing home in Belfast, Me.
He was 86.
The cause was a heart attack while being treated for a broken hip, said his daughter Jane Sanford of Belfast.


Cordiant Seen Naming Chief Today
Cordiant P.L.C. in London is expected to announce the appointment of a new chief executive today to succeed Charles Scott, who is expected to be named chairman of the agency company.
The announcement would end a lengthy search for a new leader for Cordiant, formerly the Saatchi &amp; Saatchi Company, which has been battered by account losses and personnel defections since Maurice Saatchi, its former chairman, was ousted in December.
Mr.
Scott has been serving as acting chairman as well as chief executive; he said last month that he would become chairman if the company was to hire a new chief executive.


International Briefs; In Brief
Mobil Oil B.V., the Netherlands-based unit of the Mobil Corporation, agreed yesterday to acquire 72 gasoline stations in the Netherlands from Elf Aquitaine.
Terms of the sale were not disclosed.
The stations will be incorporated into the unit's network of 274 stations by the end of the year. (Bloomberg Business News)


From the Yearbook Incident to the 'Boot Camp' Parade
THE five Greenwich High School seniors went into deep seclusion last month after news broke that they had slipped a coded message of racial hate into the school yearbook.
Reporters searched all over Greenwich for them, camping outside their homes, knocking on the doors of their neighbors and phoning their relatives.
But the teen-agers were nowhere to be found.
Then, as part of their punishment, they were put in Roy Innis's hands.


Luring Children Into Evil
Benjamin Britten's landmark 1954 chamber opera "The Turn of the Screw" is difficult to bring off.
The story, adapted from the Henry James novella by the librettist Myfanwy Piper, is intricately bound to its setting, a rural country house in Victorian England.
Yet this tale of two children, their absentee guardian, the governess and housekeeper who raise them, and the dead manservant and schoolmistress who come back to lure them into wickedness, is a profoundly ambiguous work.
Britten's music, which quivers with murkiness, utterly captures this ambiguity.
"The Turn of the Screw" does not get produced that often, let alone in a production as musically strong and dramatically convincing as the current one by the Opera Festival of New Jersey in Lawrenceville.
Michael Pratt, the music director of the festival, conducted a vibrant, nuanced and rhythmically incisive performance of Britten's elusive music, imaginatively scored for just 13 instruments.
Britten daringly juxtaposes music of contrasting styles: skittish 12-tone motives are anchored by tonally clear but shifting harmonies; outpourings of plaintive vocal arioso are interrupted by eerie, almost Minimalistic repetitions of simple accompaniment patterns.


Mexico Sells Notes Totaling $1 Billion
For the first time since the start of its current economic crisis, the Government of Mexico successfully re-entered the international credit market today, selling $1 billion in two-year notes to more than two dozen commercial banks.
The Government had originally offered $500 million of the notes but the banks were willing to buy as many as $1.6 billion worth, according to Mexico's Finance Minister, Guillermo Ortiz.
Mr.
Ortiz said the Government decided to limit the offer to $1 billion and that at some point it would attempt other offers, perhaps with longer maturities and smaller premiums.


Baseball's Rebirth Is All-Star Mission
Hideo Nomo could not hide today because everyone from former All-Stars to current All-Stars wanted his autograph, and everyone from old reporters to young photographers wanted more of his time.
Nomo kept bowing, smiling and shaking his head in amazement and amusement at the attention.
Randy Johnson could not hide either because he is 6 feet 10 inches and has a skinny left arm that whizzes a ball 98 miles an hour.
He had to crouch to greet the microphones thrust before him, but he did not smile as often as Nomo.
Still, Johnson was more comfortable because he was not answering questions in Japanese.


Protestants Fight Police In Ulster
Several thousand Protestant demonstrators clashed with the Northern Ireland police tonight after the police had refused for a day-and-a-half to allow the Protestants to march through a Roman Catholic area in the town of Portadown, 25 miles west of Belfast.
The demonstrators threw rocks at the 1,000 members of the Royal Ulster Constabulary, the overwhelmingly Protestant security force in this British province, and the police responded by firing plastic bullets.
Several injuries were reported as some of the demonstrators briefly broke through police lines in an attempt to reach the Catholic area.
No clashes were reported between Protestant demonstrators and the Catholics who had blocked their way, with police support, on Sunday.


Greenspan's Error
The Fed's reduction of one set of interest rates on Friday marked the beginning of the end of Alan Greenspan's war on inflation.
The war began in February 1994 with the Fed's quarter point increase in the rates that banks charge one another for overnight loans and led to a doubling of those rates, to 6 percent from 3 percent.
The financial markets expect further cuts.
The war was phony.
So was the enemy.
Despite nonstop fretting by Mr.
Greenspan, the Fed's chairman, no serious evidence of accelerating inflation ever emerged.
For the first five months of 1995, consumer prices rose at a very modest 3.6 percent annual rate.


U.S. Awards $100 Million To Assist Homeless
In what Federal officials suggested could be the last big infusion of homeless-assistance money for years to come, the Government yesterday awarded New York City $100 million for emergency shelter, permanent housing, drug treatment and day care.
In making the announcement at City Hall yesterday, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani said the grant would be shared by 70 not-for-profit housing and social service organizations and some city agencies, including the Department of Housing Preservation and Development.


Ritts Is TV Repairman for L.P.G.A.
When the Ladies Professional Golf Association announced last month that its search for a new commissioner was complete, the immediate reaction in the golf world was "who?" When the new commissioner was identified as Jim Ritts, the ensuing reaction was "who??!!"
Within golf's clubby confines, where everyone who is anyone shows up under the oak tree at Augusta National each spring, Ritts was an unknown.
So, when the 41-year-old television marketing whiz was named to succeed Charles Mechem, most golf folks were more than surprised.
Stunned would be more like it.


Spasm of Violence Is Shaking a Poor Mexican State
Their names are crudely scratched into the still-wet concrete of their tomb -- Rafael, Carmina, Santos, Sergio, Javier, Luis, Candido, Andres.
There are four more graves of the extended Salgado family back in the mountains.
The graves here on a high bluff near the muddy Balsas River are just some of the signs of a recent spasm of violence in Guerrero, which for centuries has been one of Mexico's poorest and most rebellious states.
Even though people here have grown accustomed to violence, this newest wave of killings has left them shaken.


Devils Seem Close to Deal Keeping Them in Jersey
Nashville is fading fast as the potential future home of the New Jersey Devils.
The Devils and the New Jersey Sports and Exposition Authority, the team's landlord, are close to reaching an agreement that will keep the National Hockey League champions playing at Byrne Meadowlands Arena, two persons with knowledge of the talks said yesterday.
Officials from both sides met yesterday, starting at 9 A.M.
But John Samerjan, an authority spokesman, last night dismissed speculation that a deal was done.
"They're way ahead of themselves if they're saying that," he said.
However, a third person familiar with the negotiations provided a broad outline of a proposed agreement on a renegotiated long-term lease.
It would not, the person said, include taxpayer money.
Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman, whose husband, John, helped bring the two once-feuding parties together, vowed not to permit tax dollars to be part of a save-the-Devils deal.
But she had also promised to do whatever was necessary to avoid being tarred as the Governor who let the champions leave.
The deal would also include the addition of more high-priced club seats and luxury suites to satisfy the Devils' demands for more revenue at the arena, and an increase in what the Devils get from concessions and parking.
The team now gets 34.2 percent of gross revenue from luxury suites, concessions and parking; that is considered low by industry standards but more than what is received by the Nets, the Devils' co-tenant at the arena.
The arena has 29 luxury suites and can accommodate at least 40 more.
But the agreement will not allow the Devils to run the arena, as John McMullen, the team's owner, has wanted to do for many years.
McMullen claims that the Devils lost $2 million during the past season, adding to an $18 million accumulated debt since he acquired the team in 1982.
He has flirted with moving to Nashville, where officials are offering to let him keep a $20 million relocation bonus, 97.5 percent of luxury suite sales and one-third of year-end profits at a new arena under construction.
The most palpable sign that negotiations were advancing came yesterday when the Devils and the authority agreed to postpone a hearing scheduled for this morning in Hackensack, N.J., before Superior Court Judge Peter Ciolino into the authority's request for a temporary restraining order to keep the team from terminating its lease.
On June 27, the Devils said they would terminate their lease on July 6.
"I think this is positive, but you never know what's for certain until this is concluded," said Alan Berman, a lawyer representing the Devils in talks with the authority.
Both sides adjourned a similar hearing last Monday.
"They're still negotiating," Berman added.
McMullen and Robert Mulcahy, the authority's president, accompanied the Devils yesterday to the White House for a Rose Garden ceremony honoring the Stanley Cup champions.
But Lou Lamoriello, the team's president and general manager, remained behind all day to negotiate.
A deal, if concluded, would be a major breakthrough in the stormy relationship between the long-squabbling team and authority, which two weeks ago exchanged nasty allegations of deceit and bad-faith negotiations.
The team said the authority had defaulted on its lease 13 different ways; the authority said the charges were concocted in an attempt to pack up for Nashville.
The drama over the Devils' future competed with the compelling story of their drive for their first-ever N.H.L. championship, which they achieved with a four-game sweep of the Detroit Red Wings.
Would the former Colorado Rockies finally reach glory, only to be lured away by Tennessee with promises of untold wealth?
The long-contentious relationship between the team and the authority grew even worse, when, on the day the Devils won the title, they sent the authority notice that they would terminate their lease after the 1996-97 season.
Then, on June 27, one day before a parade at the arena to celebrate winning the Stanley Cup, the team told the authority that it would terminate its lease on July 6.
But the recent tension in this landlord-tenant dispute was the outgrowth of a long-simmering feud that had been growing nasty since last December, when the authority suspended the team's lease during the N.H.L. lockout.
The authority called it a technicality that was negated when the season began.
However, the team charged that the lease suspension was an attempt to deprive the team of its share of luxury suite revenue from non-hockey events.
That incident triggered the Devils' demand for an audit of authority finances to discover whether other revenues had been withheld over the past 13 years.
The Devils claimed that at least $11 million had been held back, and charged the authority with being uncooperative in the audit.


Politics Aside, Many in China Are Expanding Business With Taiwan
As relations between the United States and China worsen, barely a day goes by without a Chinese leader spewing invective about Taiwan and how Washington treats it.
But away from China's diplomatic huffing and puffing, senior and mid-level officials who grapple with how to modernize China's economy are steadily expanding business ties with Taiwan, the island nation that is increasingly seen by mainlanders as a model for how to do business more efficiently and profitably.


Unreasonable in the Age of Reason
THE FEMALE THERMOMETER  18th-Century Culture and the Invention of the Uncanny
By Terry Castle
Illustrated. 278 pages. Oxford University Press. Cloth, $35; paper, $15.95.
All eras have their popular stereotypes, and in the case of the 18th century, we think immediately of the Enlightenment with its devotion to scientific rationalism, its belief in pragmatism and progress.
But in much the same way that historians like Peter Gay and Steven Marcus have debunked Victorian stereotypes of repression and stuffy propriety, so other historians and critics have worked to strip the 18th century of its self-confident and simplistic image as the Age of Reason.
The latest among these efforts is Terry Castle's lively new study of 18th-century culture, "The Female Thermometer."


Subway Crews Spend Night Cleaning Water Main Mess
Working through the night after Sunday's huge water main break, city workers pumped out water, scooped out muck, hosed down subway cars and dried off subway rails, managing to get subway service back in time for yesterday morning's rush hour.
Officials said yesterday that they still did not know what caused the 93-year-old pipe to rupture south of Times Square just before dawn Sunday.
They said that while water-main breaks were common in a system as vast and old as New York's, Sunday's rupture was unusual because it happened in a very large pipe and occurred in the summer, instead of in cold weather, when main breaks are more prevalent.


Open Invitation To Make Pitch For Tax Breaks
For lawmakers and lobbyists looking for tax breaks, this is the time to be heard.
The House Ways and Means Committee today held the first of two days of hearings about what are euphemistically called "miscellaneous tax reforms." These involve small changes in the tax law that would mean big savings for particular companies, industries and individuals.


Tax Collection Up in Jersey City
The property-tax collection rate in Jersey City is at its highest level since 1958, a spokesman for Mayor Bret Schundler announced yesterday.
City officials say the rate for the fiscal year that ended June 30 was 94.2 percent.
Part of the credit, they say, goes to the city's aggressive marketing of tax liens to investors who pay off overdue taxes and then collect up to 18 percent interest from delinquent property owners.
When Mayor Schundler took office in 1992, his spokesman said, the collection rate stood at 82.8 percent.


New York's Haunted Houses
Gov.
George Pataki of New York is expected to sign a bill that will please real estate agents, stifle writers of horror stories and shed light on a strange current of medieval thought that has never been purged from the American psyche.
The legislation, passed by the State Senate and Assembly, would exempt realtors from having to disclose if a property they are selling has a stigma, that is, if it is haunted or if some ghastly catastrophe -- a suicide or gruesome murder -- has ever occurred there.


Seagate Technology Inc.(SEG,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Taking On the Management; Irate Guests? No, the Hotel Owners Are Up in Arms
The verdict amounted to a loud wake-up call for the hotel industry.
In February, a Federal jury ordered the Stouffer Corporation to pay $7.85 million to the one-time owners of a failed hotel in the Philadelphia suburbs that had been run by Stouffer's hotel management arm from 1987 to 1992.


Bogicevic to Coach Centaurs
VLADISLAV BOGICEVIC, a former Yugoslav midfielder who starred for the Cosmos from 1978 to 1984, joined the New York Centaurs yesterday as coach of the A-League team.
Bogicevic, who will coach his first game tonight in Chicago in the United States Open Cup, replaced LEN ROITMAN, who stepped down to concentrate on his duties as general manager. (AP)


N.A.A.C.P. Faces Squabble About Its Road to the Future
The 86th annual convention of the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People is in town, and for the past couple of days this has not been a good place to be named Newt, Clarence or Rush.
The icons of the American Right have been ridiculed, scorned and mocked by the more than 2,000 convention delegates during the five-day gathering that began on Saturday and is to end on Thursday.


Eating Well
THE Department of Agriculture kicked off its new school lunch program last month in Washington with a carnival, banners, speeches and games -- and lunch created by several award-winning chefs.
The event was part of the Team Nutrition program, a broad effort to educate children about the importance of a good diet, and the department's campaign to prove that it's possible to serve good-tasting and healthful food to children in school cafeterias and still stay within lunch budgets.
As always, the trick will be getting the children to eat the food.


Maryland Passer Suspended
Maryland quarterback SCOTT MILANOVICH, the most prolific passer in school history, has been suspended for eight games by the National Collegiate Athletic Association for gambling on college sports, The Associated Press reported, citing unidentified sources.
The penalty, the most severe handed to a Division I athlete for such a violation, is all because of a handful of bets reportedly totaling $200.


U.S. Tells How It Cracked Code of A-Bomb Spy Ring
The American intelligence establishment today unveiled one of its oldest secrets: how a small team of code-breakers found the first clues that the Soviet Union sought to steal the blueprints for the atomic bomb in World War II.
Using just brain power -- no computers, no stolen skeleton keys -- the cryptographers slowly cracked what was thought to be an unbreakable code.
They painstakingly turned gibberish into powerful evidence of a Soviet spy ring whose ranks included Julius and Ethel Rosenberg.


Salomon Says It Will Report Another Loss
Does the bad news ever stop?
Salomon Inc. unexpectedly warned yesterday that it would report a loss of approximately $65 million in the second quarter because of reversals in trading for its own account and at its Phibro commodity business.
The loss, at an investment firm already shaken by defections of more than 30 managing directors in the last few months, put a question mark over the survival of the company's top management -- in particular, Deryck C. Maughan, chairman and chief executive of Salomon Brothers Inc., the company's brokerage unit.


Syms Corp.(SYM,N) reports earnings for Qtr to May 27


With New Genentech Chief, Science Takes Center Stage
Early in his 15-year career as a scientist at Genentech Inc., Arthur D. Levinson began asking for, and receiving, management responsibilities.
On Monday, he got more than he might have ever asked for when he was named president and chief executive, following the ouster of G. Kirk Raab.
Mr.
Raab was asked to step down on Monday following the disclosure that he sought a personal loan guarantee of $2 million from the company's majority shareholder, Roche Holding Ltd., while negotiating the sale of the balance of Genentech to Roche.
A former marketing executive with Abbott Laboratories, Mr.
Raab made Genentech as well known for its aggressive sales practices -- some of which resulted in legal inquiries -- as for leading-edge biotechnology.


Accounts of Violence by Paramilitary Groups
A month after members of right-wing paramilitary organizations told a Senate subcommittee that they were ordinary, law-abiding citizens who only owned guns to protect themselves, a group of local, state and Federal officials today told other lawmakers that similar groups had assaulted, harassed and threatened them, members of their families and co-workers.
Appearing before seven House Democrats at an informal hearing, witnesses described an escalation of intimidation and violence by members of self-styled militias, white supremacists and other fringe groups like the Freemen, Wise Users, and Constitutionalists, whose profound dislike of government and regulations shape their political agendas.


AT WORK WITH: Dr. Kenneth H. Cooper; The Fit Commandment
TO eat lunch with Dr.
Kenneth H. Cooper, whose 1968 book, "Aerobics," helped start the fitness movement, is intellectually provocative but hardly sensuous.
Dr.
Cooper, who has written 10 books, more than 10 million of which are in print in the United States alone, eats the way he exercises -- with the strictest discipline.
It was 2 in the afternoon, lunchtime at the 30-acre Cooper Aerobics Center in Dallas, which includes a clinic, a health club, a hotel and the Cooper Institute for Aerobics Research.
At the cafeteria, Dr.
Cooper chose the same lunch he has every day: a cup (not even a bowl) of soup, salt-free crackers and unsweetened iced tea. (Prisoners probably have more variety.)


Prague Journal; For Statues, the City's Soul, a Very Wearing Time
With his red plastic bucket, some putty-like material and a spatula, Jan Branda is an expert on outdoor chins, noses, fingers and feet.
Lovingly, he restores glowing expressions to pockmarked cherubs, rubs down delicate hands encrusted with layers of grime and glues back feet splintered by severe weather.


Keycorp Reviews Corporate Account
Keycorp, the banking and financial services company, is seeking an agency to handle its corporate branding account, which is now handled by various agencies on a project-by-project basis.
Though the billings were not disclosed, Adweek estimated them at $40 million.
John Fuller, a Keycorp spokesman in Cleveland, confirmed a report of the review this week in Adweek.
He said Monday that the Advertising Agency Register in New York had been hired to help manage the review.
A decision is expected at the end of September, he added.


Batter Up in Atlantic City
The State Casino Reinvestment Development Authority agreed yesterday to provide $9 million for a minor league baseball stadium at Bader Field, the airport in Atlantic City, and $30 million for a 500-room hotel to be linked by a pedestrian walkway to a new convention center that is now under construction.


The Mystical, With Passions Running High
Opera Manhattan's mission is the presentation of rarely heard if not quite unknown works, mostly from the French repertory.
But instead of presenting a complete work in its current run, which opened on Monday evening at St.
Peter's Church and closes tomorrow, the company is offering a survey of its recent finds in "Myths and Immortality," a program that includes the first act of Alberic Magnard's "Guercoeur," a scene from the middle of Ernest Chausson's "Roi Arthus" and the finale of Ernest Reyer's "Sigurd."
Passions run high in these late Romantic works, and so does the level of mystical and poetic discourse.
In "Guercoeur," the noble title character, having triumphed over tyranny and expecting to spend blissful days with his wife, Giselle, and his comrade Heurtal, has suddenly died.
But Paradise and its delegation of Goddesses have no appeal for him: he persuades them to let him live as a mortal one day longer.


Two Inmates to a Cell Defies Health Standards
To the Editor:
The decision to double up inmates in cells in New York State prisons is a mistake (news article, July 8).
In the long run it will prove costly.


Defense Team For Simpson Attacks Time Of Dog's Cry
Lawyers for O. J. Simpson began chipping away at the prosecution's time line today, bringing in several witnesses to say that all was calm and eerily quiet outside Nicole Brown Simpson's condominium at the moment prosecutors say Mrs.
Simpson's dog was howling over the bodies of its owner and her friend.
Danny Mandel and Ellen Aaronson, young entertainment industry employees on a blind date, testified that their walk through the misty Brentwood neighborhood on June 12, 1994, from the Mezzaluna restaurant to Ms.
Aaronson's apartment, took them past Mrs.
Simpson's home at 875 South Bundy Drive around 10:25 P.M.
There, they testified, they saw nothing unusual, like bloody paw prints, nor heard anything unusual, like people scuffling or dogs wailing.


Yeltsin Taken To Hospital Suffering Heart Pain
President Boris N. Yeltsin, whose visibly declining health has long provoked speculation here, was rushed to the hospital today with what his press service described as "acute" heart pains.
Within hours the Kremlin began issuing statements saying that the 64-year-old President was "fully in control," that he would continue with his work while in the hospital, and that his pains had subsided.


World News Briefs; U.N., Doubting Iraq, Declines to Lift Sanctions
Expressing unanimous doubt that Iraq has come clean about its program to develop biological weapons, the Security Council declined today to lift the economic sanctions it imposed after Iraq invaded Kuwait nearly five years ago.
Gerardo Martinez Blanco of Honduras, the chairman of the Security Council this month, said there have been "no changes" in the sanctions imposed on Iraq in August 1990.
Some other members of the Security Council expressed skepticism that Iraq would clear up enough questions to justify lifting sanctions when the next review comes due in September.


Market Place; A fledgling restaurant chain cashes in on the brew pub trend.
SOME investors are betting that small breweries have a future, and one company they have focused on is Rock Bottom Restaurants Inc. of Boulder, Colo.
Analysts say it is the leading contender to build a national chain of brew pubs.
The United States once had hundreds of local brewers practicing a rich tradition but their number had dried up to 60 by 1980, according to the Institute for Brewing Studies.
Now, a renaissance is in full swing, the trade group says, with local brews on tap at 658 microbreweries and brew pub restaurants, which serve proprietary beers.


Marshall &amp; Ilsley Corp.(MRIS,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Gannett Co. (GCI,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 25


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; After the Saatchi storm, Cordiant hires 'someone who has been a demanding client himself.'
CORDIANT P.L.C., beset by difficulties since the stormy departures of the founding Saatchi brothers, is seeking to reverse its flagging fortunes by hiring a consumer marketing specialist who has never met -- and doesn't know -- either Saatchi.
Cordiant, the world's fifth-largest agency company, with $11 billion in billings, said yesterday in London that Robert L. Seelert would become chief executive, effective immediately.
Mr.
Seelert, 52, who formerly led companies that market brands from Maxwell House coffee to No Nonsense hosiery, will oversee operations that include the Bates Worldwide and Saatchi &amp; Saatchi Advertising Worldwide agencies.


Man Arrested in Drive-by Death
A 20-year-old Freehold man has been arrested and charged with the murder of a 4-year-old girl in what the police said was the first drive-by shooting in Asbury Park.
Evonia Kettles was sitting on the windowsill of her grandmother's apartment Monday afternoon when she was struck in the chest by a bullet fired from a passing car.


Esiason Vows To Keep The Whiners In Check
Sometime during the 1980's, the Jets' roar became a whine.
No more, asserted Boomer Esiason today as he surveyed the 1995 team at the opening day of a voluntary minicamp.
The real summer action officially starts in two weeks.


Let's Look Again at Cumulative Voting
To the Editor:
Re "A Court Running in the Wrong Direction" (editorial, July 6):


Federal Paper Board Co.(FBO,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 17


Alliance Semiconductor Corp.(ALSC,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


National League Gets the Best of Home-Run Battle
Frank Thomas, the Chicago White Sox's burly slugger, won the All-Star Home Run Derby on Monday, but the National League ganged up on him tonight and won the All-Star Game.
After Thomas socked a two-run home run in the fourth inning, Craig Biggio, Mike Piazza and Jeff Conine hit bases-empty home runs, powering the Nationals to a 3-2 victory, the league's second straight after the American League had won six games in a row.


Book Notes
Eco Dips Into the 17th Century
With his first two novels, "The Name of the Rose" and "Foucault's Pendulum," Umberto Eco proved he could navigate medieval history as easily as computer culture.


Neutrality 5-2 on Rail In the Meadowlands
Neutrality drew the rail today and was listed as the 5-2 favorite for Saturday night's $1 million Meadowlands Pace in East Rutherford, N.J., the premier pacing event in harness racing.
"I hope the oddsmakers are right," said Neutrality's trainer and part-owner, Bruce Nickells, whose horse will be driven by Ron Waples.
"I think it's great we got that inside post, and I'm looking forward to racing my colt. He's good and sound."


Why Are Lawyers Taking Over the Country?
To the Editor:
Re "The Law School Cartel" (editorial, July 7): I'm neither familiar with nor particularly interested in the American Bar Association's law school pay structure cartel.
There are more serious problems with a profession that has come to dominate civil discourse and institutional leadership in the United States.


Future of U.N. Force In Bosnia Is in Doubt
The fall of Srebrenica has thrown the future of the United Nations mission in Bosnia into jeopardy, senior American and Western European officials said.
Military commanders expressed concern over heightened risks to United States and NATO forces by Bosnian Serbs emboldened by their victory.
And in Paris, President Jacques Chirac said that France would send troops to Srebrenica if the United Nations asked that the enclave be recaptured from Bosnian Serb forces.
Article, page A6.


Why Are Lawyers Taking Over the Country?; No Cartel
To the Editor:
"The Law School Cartel" (editorial, July 7) uncritically accepts the Justice Department's reasoning behind its consent decree with the American Bar Association.
My 25 years of full-time law teaching convince me that the association either lacks or does not exercise any market power over law school salaries.


Cancer Link Contradicted By New Hormone Study
Just one month after a study found that women who took hormone replacement therapy after menopause had an increased risk of breast cancer, another study has found no such effect.
The new study, being published today in The Journal of the American Medical Association, compared some 500 women aged 50 to 64 who had newly diagnosed breast cancer with a similar group of healthy women.
The authors found no link between use of the hormones and breast cancer.
In fact, they found that women who had used hormones for eight years or longer had, if anything, a lower risk of breast cancer than those who had never taken them.


Collective Bancorp Inc.(COFD,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


LaRoche Industries Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


U.S. and NATO Face Unhappy Choices for U.N. Force in the Balkans
The fall of Srebrenica has thrown the future of the United Nations mission in Bosnia into jeopardy, senior American and Western European officials said today.
The Bosnian Serbs' seizure of the United Nations-protected enclave "raises the question as to whether the U.N. force will be able to stay in Bosnia and perform their humanitarian mission," Defense Secretary William J. Perry said in an interview on Cable News Network.


Ribbon Cutting at Newark Homes


Nomo Steps to the Mound, And All Japan Is Watching
Takeshi Komatsu should have been at his office this morning.
Instead, dressed in his suit and carrying his briefcase, he was standing with about 200 other people in a light rain, staring at a huge television screen mounted on the side of a building.
"I'm going to go right after Nomo finishes," promised Komatsu, who works for a construction company.


Galliano Is Named Designer for House of Givenchy
An hour after Hubert de Givenchy presented his final haute couture collection here today, the owners of the Givenchy fashion house named its new designer: John Galliano, the British designer who has been credited with putting couture style into ready-to-wear clothes.
Mr.
Galliano's first collections for Givenchy will be an haute couture line that will be shown in January and a ready-to-wear line to be shown in March.
He will continue to design for his own label.


Personal Health
CORONARY bypass surgery has given hundreds of thousands of Americans with atherosclerotic heart disease a new lease on life by circumventing badly diseased coronary arteries that are in effect heart attacks waiting to happen.
Now surgeons are turning their attention to another set of arteries that can become major killers: the carotid arteries, which run through the neck and supply oxygen-rich blood to the brain.
When the walls of the carotids become thickened and the passageways through which blood must flow are narrowed by fatty deposits, it takes but a small blood clot to cut off the blood supply to part of the brain, causing a stroke.
Stroke, which can result in severe and permanent disability, is the nation's third-leading cause of death, after heart disease and cancer.
Carotid artery disease is believed to be responsible for 20 percent to 30 percent of strokes.
It can be dangerous even for symptom-free people; each year 2 percent to 5 percent of those with serious carotid narrowing but no symptoms suffer strokes.


Law Journals Attack 'Shopping' of Manuscripts
Law professors know that to move into their profession's tenured ranks their work must be published in law journals, the more prestigious the better.
For many professors, that has meant competing for offers from good journals and then using them to parlay their way into better ones.
Now the good journals, tired of their stepping-stone status, are fighting back.
Their weapon?
Offers that come with short deadlines, after which they disappear.


Fancy This, Fancy That
THERE was no "Where to, lady?"
It was, "Do you have any food?"


Big Hurt's Bat Leaves A Lasting Impression
Frank Thomas left for the airport after hitting a two-run homer in the fourth inning tonight, and he must have placed the rest of the American League's touted offense in his suitcase.
Once Thomas departed, his teammates never scored again and the National League displayed power of its own by walloping three homers and rallying for a 3-2 victory.
While Thomas was flying from Dallas to Chicago because the White Sox have a workout Wednesday afternoon, the American League was fizzling and Manager Buck Showalter was scheming.
Showalter did not disguise how important it was for him to win this ballyhooed exhibition game, as he said it was even more important than returning every player to his team uninjured and even more important than playing both Rangers All-Stars.
Was the Yankee owner George Steinbrenner at the Ballpark in Arlington?


New Lethal Illness Carried by Ticks Is Identified
A newly identified and sometimes fatal bacterial illness transmitted by the same tick that carries Lyme disease has stricken at least a dozen people in the tick-infested suburbs north of New York City in the last several weeks, medical researchers say.
The disease, which can produce more severe flu-like symptoms than Lyme disease, is easily treatable once diagnosed, though it responds to only one type of antibiotic while Lyme responds to several, the researchers said.


After Mad Scramble in Queens, Elephants Are Retired to Florida
Two prickly circus elephants that caused a melee on Monday night in Queens were retired from performing yesterday as animal rights advocates publicized the fact that one of them had been involved in a previous violent incident.
According to the advocates and newspaper accounts, one of the elephants had been involved in a woman's death in New London, Conn., in 1985.


Squatters of 13th Street Vs. Power of City Hall; More Than a Symbolic Battle for Control
With about $1.5 million in Federal money for low-income housing available to the city last July, New York officials set out to use it.
Working with a Lower East Side housing group, they would renovate five rundown city-owned tenements on East 13th Street and create apartments for poor people.
As simple as it might have seemed, the effort has been anything but.


Southtrust Corp.(SOTR,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Kunstler, in a Lesser Role, Has His Day at Terror Trial
If things had gone his way, William M. Kunstler, the lawyer prominent for representing many political radicals, would have had a starring role as the chief defense lawyer in the biggest terrorism trial ever to come to an American courtroom.
Instead, Mr.
Kunstler appeared yesterday in a cameo role, barely an hour long, as a defense witness at the six-month-old trial, in which 11 Islamic men are charged with a terror-bombing and assassination conspiracy.


Dr. Ethel Wortis, 93; Led Civic Groups
Dr.
Ethel Emerson Wortis, a physician long active in civic affairs, died on Sunday at the San Simeon Nursing Home in Greenport, L.I.
A former resident of New York City, she was 93 and lived in Southold, L.I.
For nearly three decades, she was associated with the Women's City Club of New York, holding various offices, including that of president in the 1950's.
She was a past president of the Women's Medical Association of New York City and was active in the League of Women Voters, the Women's Prison Association and the Society of Friends.


CHRONICLE
HUGH GRANT, the British actor who has all but monopolized the tabloids for the last two weeks, appeared at the premiere of his latest movie with his girlfriend, ELIZABETH HURLEY, on his arm just hours after he pleaded no contest yesterday to charges of lewd conduct in a public place with a Hollywood prostitute, The Associated Press reported.
Mr.
Grant and Ms.
Hurley smiled but said nothing as they walked up a red carpet leading into the Century City theater in Los Angeles.
Ms.
Hurley, a model, wore a short, body-hugging white dress and high white pumps.


China Critic Goaded Beijing to Arrest Him
To the Editor:
Re "Chinese-American Dissident Is Arrested on Spying Charges" (news article, July 8): Much as I admire Harry Wu's courage in his attempt to expose China's cruelty to its citizens, I am puzzled by his Don Quixote-ish behavior.
Repeatedly he ventured into China, sometimes in disguise, to look for blemishes, knowing full well he would be discovered and taken into custody.


Privatization Pains at D.M.V.
It may take as long as two weeks to get the state's newly privatized motor vehicle agencies running smoothly, Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman said yesterday.
"Anytime you do something this massive, there are bound to be disruptions," the Governor told The Associated Press.


Parthenon Frieze
To the Editor:
Re "New Analysis of the Parthenon's Frieze Finds It Depicts a Horrifying Legend" (Science Times, July 4):


Mercantile Bankshares Corp.(MRBK,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


To Many Relatives of Missing, 'a Pretty Bad Day'
In 1968, Ann Holland learned that her husband, Tech.
Sgt.
Melvin Holland, was missing in Laos -- leaving her, at 28, with five young children to raise.
"Since then, I've gotten up every day, and asked God to help me get through the day, and some days have been worse than others," said Ms.
Holland, who lives in Ocean Park, Wash.
"This is a pretty bad one."


The Master Builder
Mike McCormack, the Carolina Panthers president, enjoys telling a story about the time his general manager, Bill Polian, traveled to a South Carolina town to drum up support for an expansion team that would play in Charlotte, N.C.
"After Bill had given his speech, this guy came up to him and said, 'So what is it that you do? Are you like the recruiting coordinator for the team?' " McCormack said.
"The only experience people around here have with pro football is from this being the television-viewing area of the Washington Redskins for many years. They relate everything to college football."


For Business, A Decision Aiding Trade
American business executives hailed the Clinton Administration's announcement yesterday that it would extend diplomatic ties to Vietnam, describing it as a step toward putting them on equal footing with foreign competitors there.
But they said that diplomatic recognition alone would not unleash an investment boom because a foundation for normal trade relations between the two countries does not exist.
They said that the next step is for a formal trade agreement to be worked out by both countries, and guidelines set by Washington for Government-backed investments.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Executives Praise Recognition of Vietnam American business executives hailed the Clinton Administration's decision to extend full diplomatic recognition to Vietnam as a step toward putting them on equal footing with foreign competitors there.
But they said that the diplomatic move alone would not unleash an investment boom because a foundation for normal trade relations between the two countries does not now exist.
One trade group urged the Clinton Administration to move quickly to negotiate a trade agreement with Hanoi.  [ Page A9. ] Market Drifts to a Loss In what analysts called a drifting market, stocks pulled back as many traders sold issues that have had strong run-ups this year.
The Dow fell 21.79 points, to 4,680.60.  [ D8. ] The dollar climbed against leading currencies on expectations that the German central bank would cut interest rates.
The dollar rose to 1.4065 marks and to 87.54 yen.  [ D15. ] Consumer Borrowing Rises The Federal Reserve said consumer borrowing increased to $11.51 billion in May, the 24th consecutive month it has risen, led by strong credit-card use.  [ D3. ] Marketer to Head Cordiant Cordiant, the agency holding company, named Robert L. Seelert, who has led companies that market brands like Maxwell House and No Nonsense, as chief executive.
Stuart Elliott: Advertising.  [ D7. ] Motorola Earnings Up 31% Motorola said that its net income rose 31 percent in the second quarter, to $481 million, and that it had resolved a nagging problem of bulging cellular telephone inventories.  [ D3. ] Russia's First Hostile Bid Bank Menatep, one of Russia's largest banks, made an unprecedented hostile offer for a controlling interest in the Red October candy company, arguably Russia's favorite chocolatier.  [ D4. ] U.P.S.
Pact With J. C. Penney United Parcel Service has agreed to a five-year, $1 billion contract to become the preferred carrier for J. C. Penney's small-package air deliveries.  [ D3. ] New Chief for Burger King Grand Metropolitan reached within its own executive ranks and named Robert C. Lowes as chief executive of Burger King.
Mr.
Edwin McDowell: Business Travel.  [ D5. ]


Tredegar Industries(TG,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


A Labor of Love to Save Yiddish From Extinction
IT was one of those anomalies that New Yorkers cherish, an on-line invitation for this Sunday to "the second annual guided Yiddish tour of the American Museum of Natural History, starting with the newly renovated dinosaur exhibit," followed by a picnic in Central Park.
"On last year's museum trip, we had 45 young people," said Binyumen Schaechter, the director of Yugntruf, a social group of young adults devoted to discussing, arguing, joking, flirting and carrying out significant parts of their lives in a language that has been in accelerated decline since the 1920's.


BBDO Is Added To AT&amp;T's Roster
The AT&amp;T Corporation has added BBDO Worldwide to its roster by assigning the agency's New York office to a team creating advertising to promote the AT&amp;T sponsorship of the 1996 Summer Olympics.
Though the billings have not been determined, Adweek estimated spending at $40 million.


Rexene Corp.(RXN,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


First Empire State Corp(FES,A) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Metro-North Girding For a Possible Strike
Metro-North Railroad, saying that it expects 17 of its 19 labor unions to go on strike as early asmidnight Saturday, released a detailed contingency plan yesterday, indicating that it could transport about half its 70,000 weekday rush-hour commuters to and from Manhattan on shuttle buses.


Senate Agrees to 2 Compromises On Bill to Overhaul Regulations
In a pair of concessions to Democrats, the Senate took the first steps tonight to weaken legislation that would strictly limit the ability of Federal agencies to write regulations on health, safety and the environment.
Senators on both sides said they wanted to work out differences that have threatened to stall the legislation, which is sponsored by Senator Bob Dole of Kansas, the majority leader, but is opposed by the Clinton Administration.


In Venezuelan Hinterland, Gold Beyond Imagining
Scouring the vast Amazon wilderness for gold in the late 19th century, cricket-playing British miners and hard-bitten Venezuelan panners missed the mark by only 88 kilometers.
That 55-mile distance south of the town of El Dorado, engineers at a jungle camp here hunched over computer models one recent morning, drawing blueprints for what is to be the largest gold mine in Latin America.


Metropolitan Diary
ZIEGFELD THEATER, packed house, second night of "Apollo 13."
Movie is 5 to 10 minutes late in starting, and the crowd is impatient.


Food Notes
At Long Last Local
With summer in full swing, wonderful produce from farms in the region has started arriving in markets.
New Jersey blueberries are as low as $1 a pint.
Local corn is now at farm stands and in the Greenmarkets for 30 to 35 cents an ear.
Vine-ripened tomatoes from New Jersey are also beginning to appear, at around $1.29 a pound, just in time to pair with big bunches of basil, $1 each.


Raiders' Move Is Approved
After 13 years in Los Angeles, the Raiders are being welcomed back to Oakland, Calif., with near unanimity.
The Alameda County Board of Supervisors voted by 5-0 yesterday to approve the deal that would make the Raiders the first American team to return to its roots.
The Oakland City Council gave its seal of approval last night, 9-0.
"It is an economic shot in the arm and one that is symbolic of good things to come," said Councilwoman SHEILA JORDAN, who had been a critic of a failed 1990 deal for the Raiders' return.


A Range of Emotions About Closer Ties
President Clinton's announcement that the United States would establish relations with Vietnam provoked emotions as divided as feelings about the Vietnam War itself.


U.S. to Seek Death Penalty, Bombing Suspect Is Notified
Federal prosecutors in Oklahoma City today formally notified lawyers for Timothy J. McVeigh that they had invoked a procedure to seek the death penalty against the former Army sergeant accused of blowing up the Federal Building in Oklahoma City.
In a letter today to Mr.
McVeigh's lawyer, Stephen Jones, Federal prosecutors advised the defendant that he would be indicted before Aug. 11 with "one or more crimes potentially punishable by death." The letter was signed by Patrick Ryan, the United States Attorney in Oklahoma City.


Safeway Inc.(SWY,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 17


A Recovering Mantle Is Vowing Amends
A gaunt and frail Mickey Mantle, making his first public appearance since a life-saving liver transplant nearly five weeks ago, emphasized today that a hard-partying former baseball star had become a remorseful doer of good deeds, thankful just to be alive.
He urged the dozens attending a news conference at the Baylor University Medical Center and all the nation's families to see him not as a hero but as an example of the worst sort.


Chargers Re-sign Humphries
San Diego quarterback STAN HUMPHRIES, who led the Chargers to their first Super Bowl appearance last season, agreed to terms yesterday on a new four-year contract.
Humphries, 30, has led Diego to two American Football Conference West titles.
Last season, he directed the team to the Super Bowl -- a 49-26 blowout by the San Francisco 49ers.
Humphries joined the Chargers in 1992. (AP)


U.S. and NATO Face Unhappy Choices for U.N. Force in the Balkans
The fall of Srebrenica has thrown the future of the United Nations mission in Bosnia into jeopardy, senior American and Western European officials said today.
The Bosnian Serbs' seizure of the United Nations-protected enclave "raises the question as to whether the U.N. force will be able to stay in Bosnia and perform their humanitarian mission," Defense Secretary William J. Perry said in an interview on Cable News Network.


Must You Select My Lap for Your Nap?


Ex-Patient Sues His Psychiatrist
Michael Komons was acquitted of murder charges by reason of insanity in 1990, two years after he stabbed his wife 100 times in the head with a screwdriver.
In a civil trial that began in Superior Court yesterday, Mr.
Komons, of Highlands, is suing a psychiatrist, Dr.
Ira Morganstern of Asbury Park, who treated him briefly before the killing.


A Season of Unpleasant Surprises for the Mets
No one was expecting the Mets to be well above .500 at the midpoint of the season or pushing the Braves for the lead in the National League East.
Staying in contention for a wild-card berth seemed a more realistic goal.
Certainly improvement on last year's 55-58 record was expected.
But those hopes have given way to another bummer of a season.
All the Mets, except one, are spending the All-Star Game break at home, trying to figure out why they have more losses (44 against 25 victories) than any other team in the league and trail first-place Atlanta by 18 1/2 games.


Executive Undoes Subway Chaos, Wielding Pen or Broom
As Sunday drew to a close after the huge water main break near Times Square, commuters were told to prepare for the worst: the vital West Side I.R.T. line would likely have major delays or be shut completely the next day, causing havoc as the work week began.
While New Yorkers often instinctively brace for the worst, the history of other recent subway disasters should have told them not to worry.
The trains would instead be back on track, bringing commuters to work despite the previous day's chaos.


Lewis S. Kraft; Builder, 72
Lewis S. Kraft, a retired New Jersey builder, died on Thursday at the Medical Center of Princeton, N.J.
He was 72 and lived in Princeton.
The cause was complications from a stroke, his family said.


CHRONICLE
HUGH GRANT, the British actor who has all but monopolized the tabloids for the last two weeks, appeared at the premiere of his latest movie with his girlfriend, ELIZABETH HURLEY, on his arm just hours after he pleaded no contest yesterday to charges of lewd conduct in a public place with a Hollywood prostitute, The Associated Press reported.
Mr.
Grant and Ms.
Hurley smiled but said nothing as they walked up a red carpet leading into the Century City theater in Los Angeles.
Ms.
Hurley, a model, wore a short, body-hugging white dress and high white pumps.


New Lethal Illness Carried by Ticks Is Identified
A newly identified and sometimes fatal bacterial illness transmitted by the same tick that carries Lyme disease has stricken at least a dozen people in the tick-infested suburbs north of New York City in the last several weeks, medical researchers say.
The disease, which can produce more severe flu-like symptoms than Lyme disease, is easily treatable once diagnosed, though it responds to only one type of antibiotic while Lyme responds to several, the researchers said.


After Mad Scramble in Queens, Elephants Are Retired to Florida
Two prickly circus elephants that caused a melee on Monday night in Queens were retired from performing yesterday as animal rights advocates publicized the fact that one of them had been involved in a previous violent incident.
According to the advocates and newspaper accounts, one of the elephants had been involved in a woman's death in New London, Conn., in 1985.


Freed Burmese Democrat Is Conciliatory
Speaking to hundreds of rapturous supporters who had waited nearly six years for this moment, Daw Aung San Suu Kyi called today for a new spirit of compromise between the democracy movement here and the junta leaders who released her from house arrest this week.
Mrs.
Aung San Suu Kyi, the opposition leader and Nobel Peace Prize winner who was freed from confinement on Monday, appeared before the public for the first time since July 1989.
She told the crowd gathered outside the gates of her dilapidated lakeside home that she would continue to fight for democracy in Myanmar, formerly Burma.


Suntrust Banks Inc.(STI,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Just How Distressing Is Lactose Intolerance?
WHEN it comes to lactose intolerance, the head may play as big a role as the digestive system in many cases, scientists say.
The results of a new study suggest that many people wrongly believe that consuming any quantity of milk, even the small amounts they put in coffee or on breakfast cereal, causes abdominal problems if they have trouble digesting lactose, the sugar in milk.


Yesterday in Washington
BUDGET -- A House subcommittee approved a spending bill that provides $60.7 billion for next year, but cuts $9.3 billion from scores of programs dealing with health and safety, education, job training and assistance for the poor.
The White House chief of staff, Leon E. Panetta, said that if the cuts reached President Clinton's desk in their current form, "he will veto them."  ABORTION -- Along party lines, the House Appropriations Committee voted to ban health insurance coverage for abortions for Federal employees.
If approved by Congress, the action would essentially give Federal employees the same policies they had during the Reagan and Bush Administrations.


On Takeover Of Lilco, Ally Of Pataki Is On Other Side
Three weeks after the Pataki administration denounced a prominent Democrat's plan for a state takeover of the Long Island Lighting Company, a major Republican official and ally of the Governor today embraced that plan, saying it was the best he had seen for reducing the Island's high electricity rates.
Robert J. Gaffney, the Suffolk County Executive, told an Assembly committee hearing here that he agreed with most of the main elements of the takeover plan unveiled last month by Richard M. Kessel, the Democratic chairman of the Long Island Power Authority.
And Mr.
Gaffney urged his fellow Republican, Gov.
George E. Pataki, to at least devise an alternative proposal incorporating important aspects of the authority's plan.
"I believe the current LIPA proposal could work for Suffolk County," Mr.
Gaffney told the hearing at the State University of New York at Farmingdale, where the Assembly Speaker, Sheldon Silver, served as chairman.
"This Lilco takeover proposal is the benchmark by which I will measure any future proposal."
Mr.
Gaffney, a longtime critic of Lilco management who is up for re-election this fall, distanced himself from the position taken by the Pataki administration on the plan last month, when aides to the Governor derisively dismissed the authority's plan as "irresponsible" and "irrelevant." Since then, Mr.
Pataki's aides have said that the Governor is working on his own proposal for reducing electricity rates on Long Island but have declined to say what it entailed or when it might be unveiled.
Mr.
Kessel, primary author of the takeover plan, is a longtime ally of Mr.
Pataki's Democratic predecessor, Mario M. Cuomo.
Mr.
Pataki's support is considered crucial to a takeover.
Officials of the power authority say that without his endorsement, the power authority could not obtain financial backing from Wall Street for the buyout, which would be paid for with tax-exempt bonds.
Still, in the view of many politicians and others on Long Island, Mr.
Gaffney's public words of encouragement have given a political boost to both the takeover plan and the power authority, a lame-duck panel that is dominated by holdovers from the Cuomo administration.
The authority's board is to be replaced in September by an expanded and restructured panel whose members will largely be determined by Mr.
Pataki.
Political observers say that Mr.
Gaffney is walking a tightrope on the state takeover question, trying to appeal to voters on the issue of rate reduction but not embarrass the Governor.
Patrick V. Halpin, a Democrat and the Suffolk County Executive before Mr.
Gaffney defeated him four years ago, said the problem for the Republicans is that the takeover notion was first proposed last fall, by Governor Cuomo, and has since been championed by the lame-duck chairman of LIPA, Mr.
Kessel, who served as executive director of the state Consumer Protection Board under Mr.
Cuomo.
"Pataki's problem is he's not supporting this because Cuomo proposed this and now Kessel, as chairman of LIPA, is advancing it," said Mr.
Halpin, a cable television talk-show host.
"So Bob Gaffney has made the decision, 'I'm going to be on the side of lower electric rates.' "
Under the $9.2 billion takeover proposal, LIPA officials say they would buy Lilco stock for $17.50 a share and could, through a variety of financial savings that would accompany a public takeover, reduce Lilco's electric rates by 20 percent over the next three to five years.
In addition, LIPA officials said they had an agreement with a large private utility, which they declined to name, to run Lilco for an annual fee.
Suffolk County officials, in particular, are interested in the takeover plan, because the public acquisition of Lilco would relieve the county of what looms as a potentially devastating burden: the payment of hundreds of millions of dollars to the utility to settle the overassessment of taxes on the defunct Shoreham nuclear power plant.
Lilco has successfully sued to recover tax money it paid before the utility was forced to abandon the plant.
Under state law, a public takeover would erase that liability.
On Long Island, reaction to the proposal has been mixed.
Officials of the Long Island Association, the region's most influential business group, have criticized the plan, saying that, among other things, the proposal overstates the potential savings to ratepayers.
Lilco, meanwhile, has rejected the $17.50 a share offer -- last fall, Mr.
Cuomo had offered $21.50 -- but LIPA officials say they could make another offer.


Star Banc Corp.(STB,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


For MCA and Hollywood, a Generational Shift
For the entertainment community, it's the end of an era.
In a move that signals a generational shift in Hollywood, MCA Inc. formally announced today that Lew Wasserman, one of the titans of the entertainment business, had stepped down as its chairman and was given the honorary title of chairman emeritus.


As Usual, Serbs Call The Shots
After the collapse last month of United Nations attempts to protect Sarajevo, the fall today of the eastern Bosnian Muslim enclave of Srebrencia was a crippling blow to the peacekeeping mission, one that was clearly sought by the Bosnian Serbs.
The Serbian attack made several things clear.
The first was that if the Bosnian Government wants to resolve the Bosnian conflict by fighting, as it has suggested through an offensive around Sarajevo in the last month, then the Serbs will hit back where the Bosnian Army is most vulnerable -- in the surrounded eastern enclaves.


Nomo Steps to the Mound, And All Japan Is Watching
Takeshi Komatsu should have been at his office this morning.
Instead, dressed in his suit and carrying his briefcase, he was standing with about 200 other people in a light rain, staring at a huge television screen mounted on the side of a building.
"I'm going to go right after Nomo finishes," promised Komatsu, who works for a construction company.


Argonaut Group Inc.(AGII,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Indurain Gives a Lesson in Climbing
On its first of two days in the Alps and the ninth of 20 daily stages, the Tour de France began to resemble a two-man race today.
The two are Miguel Indurain, the defending champion, and -- in a big surprise -- Alex Zulle, the "other" Swiss contender.
"Miguel is the professor of the Tour," said his Banesto team's director, Jose-Miguel Echavarri, just Monday .
"Now and then, he gives a lesson."


Finally, Opening the Door All the Way
The wonder is not that the United States is establishing normal diplomatic relations with Hanoi, two full decades after the fall of Saigon; the wonder is that it took so long.
Presidents have come and gone since those final apocalyptic scenes of a long, wretched war -- the American Ambassador fleeing from Saigon with the embassy's flag folded under his arm, the fevered scramble for the last seats on the last helicopter out.
Neither Gerald R. Ford nor Jimmy Carter nor Ronald Reagan nor George Bush could bring himself to recognize the government that Washington had demonized for so long, though Bush started down the path.


Citizens Bancorp (Md.) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Leader Financial Corp.(LFCT,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


A Father-to-Be Who Glowers and Hallucinates
Decked, clobbered, sent flying on Rollerblades and smooched by Tom Arnold, Hugh Grant undergoes a colossal hazing in Chris Columbus's "Nine Months," the film marking his initiation into big-ticket American comedy.
In light of the extracurricular drubbing Mr.
Grant has also received lately, "Nine Months" looks even more like a trial by fire.


Grand Met Picks New Chief For Burger King Subsidiary
After hunting globally for a new chief executive of Burger King to lead the battle against its archcompetitor, McDonald's, Grand Metropolitan P.L.C. announced yesterday that it had reached within its own executive ranks.
Robert C. Lowes, 49, who has been the Paris-based chief executive of the parent Grand Met's European food operations, will head up the newly resurgent Burger King chain of 7,800 restaurants in 57 countries from the restaurant company's Miami headquarters.


Recognizing Reality in Vietnam
America is well served by President Clinton's decision to normalize relations with Vietnam.
From commercial competition to the defense of human rights in Vietnam, from the search for American remains to Pacific defense strategy, United States interests can only benefit.
So can America itself.
The rancorous divisions of the Vietnam War still ripple through the political life of the country 20 years after Saigon fell and the last American helicopters lifted off the embassy roof with desperate Vietnamese clinging to them.
Washington's motives for fighting in Vietnam were terribly flawed, and 58,000 Americans paid for the arrogance and ignorance with their lives.


METRO DIGEST
FEW CHARGES IN POLICE SPREE INQUIRY
After a two-month investigation into a drunken spree by New York City police officers through six Washington hotels, police officials said that no more than seven of the 942 officers in the capital at the time faced serious departmental charges.
The small number of officers identified stands in sharp contrast to initial reports from Washington, which indicated that dozens upon dozens of drunken New York officers were grabbing women, spraying fire extinguishers, pulling fire alarms and prancing about nude.  [ Page A1. ]


An Androgynous Salsa That Forgoes Formality
Albita Rodriguez, a young, Cuban-born singer, may be virtually unknown among fans of salsa, the music she sings, but she's no stranger to fashion magazines.
It's not hard to see why.
She counts Madonna as a fan.
She lives in Miami.
Though she comes from an exotic place, her androgynous looks are European, and therefore seem more mainstream than those of many performers from the Caribbean.
Ms.
Rodriguez, who opened for the singer Marc Anthony at S.O.B.'s on Monday night, sings regularly at Centro Vasco, a small club in Miami, and was recently signed by Crescent Moon, a record label owned by Gloria Estefan.
Her newest record, "No Se Parece a Nada" is clearly the product of a fashion-industry sensibility, along with designer clothes, designer haircut and a designer cover.
The package is one face of the new salsa, a face, in this case, that looks to everyone from Edith Piaf to Annie Lennox for its presentation and seems bent on attracting an audience beyond the Hispanic world.


AK Steel Holding Corp.(AKS,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


U.S. GRANTS VIETNAM FULL TIES; TIME FOR HEALING, CLINTON SAYS
Saying the time was at hand to "bind up our own wounds," President Clinton today extended full diplomatic recognition to Vietnam 22 years after the American withdrawal from a bitterly divisive war that still scars the national psyche.
Mr.
Clinton, the one-time student protester who avoided serving in a war he once said he "opposed and despised," announced the normalization of relations in a brief ceremony in the East Room attended by military figures, the families of those still missing in action and members of Congress who were veterans of the war and prisoners of the Vietnamese.


IP Timberlands Ltd.(IPT,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Francis (Reds) Bagnell, 66, Star Of Penn's Single-Wing Offense
Francis (Reds) Bagnell, a one-time water boy for the University of Pennsylvania football team who went on to anchor its powerful single-wing offense from 1948 to 1950, died Monday at Hahnemann Hospital in Philadelphia.
He was 66.
The cause of death was heart failure, said a hospital spokesman.
With a shock of red hair that inspired his nickname and a fiery competitiveness distinguishing his play on the field, Bagnell was an explosive tailback who became the primary weapon in Penn's backfield.
In the single wing, the tailback received the hike and then had a number of options that included running, handing off or pitching the ball to another runner, and passing.
Playing out of this formation, Bagnell was a powerful runner both inside and outside, and was also an accurate passer.
During his senior season, 1950, he threw 88 passes without an interception.


Actor's Breathing and Speech Show Improvement, Doctor Says
Although the actor Christopher Reeve is able to perform only two movements -- shrugging his shoulders and turning his neck from side to side -- his chief physician said today that she was optimistic about his progress and hoped to wean him from a ventilator in a few months.
"We have done something fantastic," said Dr.
Marca Sipski, medical director of Kessler Institute for Rehabilitation, where Mr.
Reeve arrived two weeks ago.
After a riding accident May 27 that damaged his spinal cord, Mr.
Reeve had not been able to breathe on his own, but now his respiratory muscles have begun to function, she said.


After Mad Scramble in Queens, Elephants Are Retired to Florida
Two prickly circus elephants that caused a melee on Monday night in Queens were retired from performing yesterday as animal rights advocates publicized the fact that one of them had been involved in a previous violent incident.
According to the advocates and newspaper accounts, one of the elephants had been involved in a woman's death in New London, Conn., in 1985.


Mile by Mile, Bite by Bite
Summertime . . . and the eating can be as memorable as a Gershwin melody, especially for travelers.
Vacation dining can mean one fine French wine after another or soulful North Carolina church picnics or roadside dandelions in California or firehouse steaks -- a bit too well done -- in Buffalo.
James Barron collects fond food memories from dedicated travelers.
C9


Foreign Affairs; Meddling For Peace
Strap on the electrodes and rev up the car battery.
It's time for President Clinton to administer another jolt of shock therapy to Britain's Prime Minister, John Major.
He's gone wobbly again on Northern Ireland.
The cease-fire in Northern Ireland is fast approaching its first anniversary, Sept. 1, and yet efforts to build on this longest pause to the fighting in Belfast for 25 years are totally stalled.
There is blame aplenty to go around, but clearly the strongest, most influential actor in this drama -- the British Government -- could do the most to get peace talks going now and instead is doing the least.
London is paralyzed by a deep ambivalence about dealing with the Irish Republican Army.
Even though it is ready in principle to negotiate with the Irish Catholic militants, the British Government seems to be looking for any excuse not to do so.


For Many of Those Who Fled Vietnam, a Day of Sadness, Anger and Hope
For Yen Do, editor of the largest Vietnamese-language daily in America, the establishment today of diplomatic relations between Hanoi and Washington marks the end of a half century of war that has tortured his nation and scattered two million of its people around the world.
It welcomes Vietnam into the community of nations, opens new possibilities for its economic development and may help efforts to foster democracy and human rights after 20 years of Communist rule, said Mr.
Yen, who edits Nguoi Viet Daily News here in the community known as Little Saigon, 30 miles south of Los Angeles.


Business Travel; A travel industry study shows it's best to keep on the move to avoid becoming a victim of crime.
MANY companies brief their employees about safety precautions while traveling.
But while tourists have been victims in a number of well-publicized brutal crimes in recent years, the rate of crime against adult American travelers is actually 40 percent less than the rate for Americans in general.
According to a recent report, for every 1,000 American adults, there were 213 crimes against their property or person in 1994.
In that same period, the rate for travelers, who were defined as someone more than 100 miles from home, was 127.8 crimes for every 1,000 travelers.
The data were weighted to account for the fact that Americans are at home more than they travel.


New Burmese Spirit


Don't Count Out Cone-to-Yanks Deal
David Cone is obviously the most desirable starter available if the Yankees can somehow execute a trade for the Toronto right-hander, but Manager Buck Showalter continued to paint a dismal picture regarding the possibility of the Yankees pursuing another quality pitcher.
"I get the impression that we're not going to do anything now," Showalter said before managing the American League against the National League in tonight's All-Star Game at the Ballpark in Arlington.


Travel Tales: 'What I Ate on My Summer Vacation'
THE eating on a vacation can be as memorable as the traveling.
Consider the cafe down the street from the hotel in Florence that stays open until all hours and serves a great Brunello (who knew the plane from Naples would be so late?).
Then again, meals on the road can be nightmarish enough to be in a Chevy Chase movie.
Maybe the children want Mickey D's and the parents want Michel Rostang.
In Paris, where McDonald's and Mr.
Rostang both have restaurants, it is possible to satisfy everyone.
In Anguilla, the Caribbean island where Mr.
Rostang runs a second restaurant but where McDonald's has no beachhead, it is not.


RESULTS PLUS
SOCCER  U.S. Loses to Bolivia
The United States lost by 1-0 to Bolivia last night, endangering the Americans' chances of advancing to the second round of the America Cup, which represents the South American championship.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.75
8.75
7.25
DISCOUNT RATE
5.25
5.25
3.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
5.75
5.78
4.23
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.37
5.40
4.44
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.31
5.30
4.87
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.11
6.03
7.41
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.58
6.52
7.68
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.48
7.45
8.48
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.07
6.07
6.51
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Service Merchandise Co.(SME,N) reports earnings for Qtr to July 2


Frustrated School Board Wages War on Tenure for Teachers
Over the last year, after school property taxes jumped nearly 30 percent, financially troubled blue-collar voters here in the Patchogue-Medford school district elected a new school board that has created a furor by calling for an end to job tenure for teachers.
The new board, whose six members all belong to a conservative taxpayers' party, locked horns with the teachers' union even before the incoming members took control, arguing that the tenure system is too costly, protects incompetence and should be eliminated.


Stocks Pull Back, With Dow Falling 21.79 Points
The stock market pulled back yesterday, with many traders taking profits in issues that have had strong run-ups this year.
"It was a drifting market," said Robert N. Gordon, president of Twenty-First Securities Corporation.
"Selling was predominant all day, but it wasn't anything major. A real correction would have been a lot more."


Don't Count Out Cone-to-Yanks Deal
David Cone is obviously the most desirable starter available if the Yankees can somehow execute a trade for the Toronto right-hander, but Manager Buck Showalter continued to paint a dismal picture regarding the possibility of the Yankees pursuing another quality pitcher.
"I get the impression that we're not going to do anything now," Showalter said before managing the American League against the National League in tonight's All-Star Game at the Ballpark in Arlington.


Dow Jones &amp; Co. (DJ,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt *
Aristar Inc., Tampa, Fla., a unit of Great Western Financial Corp., is selling $100 million of senior notes due in 2000 through Goldman, Sachs.
The notes are priced at 99.906 to yield 6.322 percent.
The noncallable issue is rated A3 by Moody's Investors Service Inc., A- by the Standard &amp; Poor's Corp. and A by Duff &amp; Phelps.


TV Power to the Parents
President Clinton has embraced a simple but promising measure to empower parents to screen out violence from the television programs their children can watch at home.
The proposal, part of the Senate-passed telecommunications bill, requires television makers to install a computer chip that lets parents block out programs that are rated violent.
The chip-and-rating system could offer an elegant way to let parents impose their own viewing values without raising the menace of Government-imposed censorship.
But that can only happen if the bill is amended to keep the Government entirely out of the ratings effort.
Under the bill, the television industry would develop its own rating codes, similar to movie ratings devised by the film industry.
The special codes would be transmitted along with each program, enabling a computer chip in the television set to screen out any programs with ratings parents deem objectionable.


Inquiry Into Police Rampage Ends In Charges to 7 but Few Answers
After a two-month investigation into a drunken spree by New York City police officers through six Washington hotels, police officials said yesterday that no more than 7 of the 942 officers in the capital at the time faced serious departmental charges.
The small number of officers identified stands in sharp contrast to initial reports from Washington, which indicated that dozens upon dozens of drunken New York officers were grabbing women, spraying fire extinguishers, pulling fire alarms and prancing about nude.
Washington hoteliers estimated at the time that up to 100 New York officers were involved.


Executive Undoes Subway Chaos, Wielding Pen or Broom
As Sunday drew to a close after the huge water main break near Times Square, commuters were told to prepare for the worst: the vital West Side I.R.T. line would likely have major delays or be shut completely the next day, causing havoc as the work week began.
While New Yorkers often instinctively brace for the worst, the history of other recent subway disasters should have told them not to worry.
The trains would instead be back on track, bringing commuters to work despite the previous day's chaos.


Judge Delays Order To Disclose Source In a TV Libel Case
A judge today withdrew his order that ABC News disclose the name of a confidential source used in a report that is the subject of a $10 billion libel suit by Philip Morris Companies Inc.
The report, broadcast last year on the television news program "Day One," said the tobacco industry "artificially adds nicotine to cigarettes to keep people smoking and boost profits."
Today, Judge Theodore J. Markow of Richmond Circuit Court wrote that before he required ABC News to disclose its source, Philip Morris would have to supply more evidence that it could not get the information elsewhere and that it had a compelling need for the information.


Wine Talk
ONCE upon a time, "blend" was an ugly word in the wine business.
It implied something inferior.
Jug wines were blends; third-rate varietals were blends.
A cheap cabernet sauvignon might be 50 percent cabernet and 50 percent carignan or some other undistinguished grape.
The best wines, like Beaulieu Vineyards' Private Reserve, were proudly advertised as "100 percent cabernet sauvignon."


Transactions
Baseball  American League
MINNESOTA TWINS -- Signed Mark Redman, pitcher, and assigned him to Fort Myers of the Florida State League.
Agreed to terms with Jason Bell, pitcher.


As Nomo Steps to the Mound, All Japan Is Watching Intently
Takeshi Komatsu should have been at his office this morning.
Instead, dressed in his suit and carrying his briefcase, he was standing with about 200 other people in a light rain, staring at a huge television screen mounted on the side of a building.
"I'm going to go right after Nomo finishes," promised Komatsu, who works for a construction company.


Progress Reported In Devils' Talks
Lawyers for the Devils and New Jersey Sports and Exposition Authority continued negotiations yesterday on a new 12-year lease with financial sweeteners designed to keep the Stanley Cup champions from going to Nashville.
Only hours after high-level, round-the-clock talks ended at 2:45 A.M. yesterday, both sides moved in New Jersey Superior Court to adjourn until tomorrow a hearing into the authority's request for a temporary restraining order to keep the team from terminating its lease at Byrne Meadowlands Arena.


Big Hurt's Bat Leaves A Lasting Impression
Frank Thomas left for the airport after hitting a two-run homer in the fourth inning tonight, and he must have placed the rest of the American League's touted offense in his suitcase.
Once Thomas departed, his teammates never scored again and the National League displayed power of its own by walloping three homers and rallying for a 3-2 victory.
While Thomas was flying from Dallas to Chicago because the White Sox have a workout Wednesday afternoon, the American League was fizzling and Manager Buck Showalter was scheming.
Showalter did not disguise how important it was for him to win this ballyhooed exhibition game, as he said it was even more important than returning every player to his team uninjured and even more important than playing both Rangers All-Stars.
Was the Yankee owner George Steinbrenner at the Ballpark in Arlington?


After Mad Scramble in Queens, Elephants Are Retired to Florida
Two prickly circus elephants that caused a melee on Monday night in Queens were retired from performing yesterday as animal rights advocates publicized the fact that one of them had been involved in a previous violent incident.
According to the advocates and newspaper accounts, one of the elephants had been involved in a woman's death in New London, Conn., in 1985.


New York City Unions Cooperate in Crisis
To the Editor:
Criticism of Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani and the New York City municipal unions by the Citizens Budget Commission regarding $600 million in budget concessions is uninformed and unfair (news article, July 4).


Mercury Finance Co.(MFN,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Merck Selling Medco Care to Kohlberg, Kravis
Merck &amp; Company said yesterday that it had reached agreement to sell its Medco Behavioral Care Corporation to Kohlberg, Kravis, Roberts &amp; Company and the company's management team for $340 million.
Medco Behavioral Care is a specialty managed health care company that provides mental health benefits like counseling services, psychiatric care and substance abuse programs for more than 15 million people.
The purchase, which includes $315 million in cash, would be a breakthrough for Kohlberg, Kravis, which has been seeking a toehold in the health care business for more than two years.


Abuse of the Homeless Proves Costly
Andrew Cuomo, an Assistant Secretary of Housing and Urban Development, has now delivered the first official verdict on reports that employees of the Grand Central Partnership physically abused homeless people when they tried to remove them from cash-machine lobbies and other sites in Manhattan.
It was not a favorable verdict.
Mr.
Cuomo's department canceled a $547,000 Federal grant to the Partnership on the basis of what he said was "substantial evidence" that Partnership workers had harassed and abused the homeless.


Goldman, Sachs Hires Irish Executive
Goldman, Sachs L.P. said yesterday that Peter Sutherland, the former director general of the World Trade Organization, would join the Wall Street firm as a general partner and chairman of Goldman Sachs International.
Mr.
Sutherland, 49, is also a former attorney general of Ireland and served in Brussels as the European Community's commissioner responsible for competition policy for five years until 1989.
From 1989 to 1993, Mr.
Sutherland was chairman of Allied Irish Banks, the bank based in Dublin.


Paychex Inc.(PAYX,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


A Contractor Is Indicted In Kickbacks
A prominent New York City contractor was arrested yesterday on charges that he bilked several major corporations out of more than $7 million in an elaborate kickback scheme at Manhattan construction sites.
State prosecutors charged that the builder, Ted Kohl, the president of the Herbert Construction Company, padded subcontracts for work inside office buildings and then received illegal payments from the subcontractors through a bogus company he controlled, according to an indictment unsealed yesterday.


CHRONICLE
Denizens of Martha's Vineyard, relax: PRESIDENT CLINTON and his family are not taking their vacation there this year.
In fact, they will be thousands of miles away, at a ranch owned by Senator JOHN D. ROCKEFELLER 4th, Democrat of West Virginia, near Jackson Hole, Wyo.
It is in Grand Teton National Park.
"The only thing I can say is, there better be a golf course somewhere," Mike McCurry, the White House press secretary, told reporters yesterday.


What Would Happen if E.T. Actually Called?
ARE WE ALONE?
Philosophical Implications of the Discovery of Extraterrestrial life  By Paul Davies  Illustrated. 160 pages.
Basic Books. $20.


Enough Wrath And Fear to Thrust Philosophy Offstage
The philosophizing wizard known as Prospero is a very angry man these days.
As portrayed by Patrick Stewart, in George C. Wolfe's blazingly vital, vastly enjoyable production of "The Tempest" at the Delacorte Theater in Central Park, the dispossessed Duke of Milan seems white-hot with a fury that gives new punch to his phrase "rough magic."
Unlike most Prosperos of recent years, who have been presented as practitioners of an ordering art that parallels the playwright's and director's crafts, Mr.
Stewart's fascinating, combustible performance suggests that the real squall of the title is within the character himself.


Birthday Party for Dalai Lama Draws Chinese Protest to India
The Chinese Government has expressed disapproval over a three-day 60th birthday party for the Dalai Lama here last week at which the exiled Tibetan religious and political leader spoke out against the Chinese occupation of his homeland.
"The birthday celebrations were more than a religious function or birthday reception," a Chinese Embassy spokesman said on Monday.
"We regard it as political, and we will take up this matter accordingly with the Government of India."


COMPANY BRIEFS
CALIFORNIA STATE BANK, West Covina, Calif., said it planned to buy Landmark Bancorp for about $36.8 million in cash and stock.
ROCKWELL TELECOMMUNICATIONS, Newport Beach, Calif., a unit of Rockwell International Corp., said it planned to invest about $200 million to expand its Newport Beach chip-manufacturing plant.
TALLEY INDUSTRIES, Phoenix, said its marine engineering subsidiary had received two five-year Navy contracts valued at $246 million.


U.S. GRANTS VIETNAM FULL TIES; TIME FOR HEALING, CLINTON SAYS
Saying the time was at hand to "bind up our own wounds," President Clinton today extended full diplomatic recognition to Vietnam 22 years after the American withdrawal from a bitterly divisive war that still scars the national psyche.
Mr.
Clinton, the one-time student protester who avoided serving in a war he once said he "opposed and despised," announced the normalization of relations in a brief ceremony in the East Room attended by military figures, the families of those still missing in action and members of Congress who were veterans of the war and prisoners of the Vietnamese.


Bastille Day, West
New York's French restaurants will be popping corks for Bastille Day, July 14.
The party that Provence, 38 Macdougal Street (near Prince Street), has given for the last four years remains one of the most spirited.
The street is closed to traffic and is turned into a playing field for petanque, the French version of boccie.
Some of the city's best chefs compete in the tournament all day.
This year's event starts at 11 A.M. on Friday, with finals and awards ceremonies around 5 P.M.
Spectators can join the revelry, which is expected to continue through the evening.
Food and drink can be purchased at Provence.


Graf Is Out of Fed Cup
STEFFI GRAF, fresh from winning her sixth Wimbledon singles title, has withdrawn from Germany's Fed Cup semifinal match against Spain because of back problems.
Graf's withdrawal will prevent a repeat of the Wimbledon final, in which she beat ARANTXA SANCHEZ VICARIO.
The German team captain, KLAUS HOFSASS, chose ANKE HUBER, SABINE HACK, MEIKE BABEL and CLAUDIA PORWICK for the July 22-23 match at Santander, Spain. (AP)


Elizabeth Adams, 'Madam Alex,' 60
Elizabeth Adams, the flamboyant Madam Alex who operated a Beverly Hills prostitution ring for two decades until she was arrested in 1988 and displaced by her former assistant, Heidi Fleiss, died on Saturday at Cedars-Sinai Medical Center in Los Angeles.
She was 60.
Peter L. Knecht, her longtime friend and lawyer, said that Mrs.
Adams, a native of Manila, had had heart surgery and that her life support system was disconnected.


White House In Agreement On Raid Files
The White House legal counsel said today that he had averted a confrontation with House Republicans by agreeing to permit them to have limited access to 28 Presidential documents on the Government's ill-fated efforts in 1993 to dislodge the Branch Davidians from their compound near Waco, Tex.
Abner J. Mikva, the White House lawyer, said in an interview that he would allow lawmakers to read but not copy the documents, which include President Clinton's handwritten notes, early speech drafts and memos to Mr.
Clinton from his aides.
Two memos to the President are recent notes from Mr.
Mikva.


Noonan, Ranger Forward, And Fuhr Sign With Blues
The St.
Louis Blues, always active on the free- agent market, have signed right wing BRIAN NOONAN, who had 14 goals and 13 assists last season for the Rangers, and goaltender GRANT FUHR.
Terms of Noonan's contract were not disclosed, but The St.
Louis Post-Dispatch reported on Monday that Noonan signed a three-year, $2.8 million deal.


House Republicans Move on Spending Bills
House Republicans moved swiftly on several fronts today to complete committee work on next year's appropriations bills -- reinstituting a ban on giving Federal employees health insurance policies that cover abortions, cutting the budget for environmental protection by a third and eliminating scores of programs dealing with job training, education and assistance for the poor.
The Clinton Administration began the day by holding out an olive branch to Republican Congressional leaders, but by late afternoon it was threatening to veto the bills, accusing the Republicans of starting a war.


The Patakis Take a Vacation (Don't Ask Where)
With swimming trunks and sand shovels presumably in tow, George E. Pataki, his wife and several of their children slipped out of the family mansion in Garrison on Monday and headed quietly off for their first vacation since he became Governor.
They left no forwarding number.
No one would begrudge the man a few days' rest, but his secrecy marks something of trend: when he and his wife, Libby, left town for a few days after the election in November, his office adamantly refused to say where they went.
Then, one press officer let out that he went to the Adirondacks for a couple of days in the mountain air.


AT&amp;T Expected to Buy Stake In an Internet Access Provider
Cementing its recent link with one of the country's largest corporate Internet access providers, the AT&amp;T Corporation will spend $8 million to buy a stake in the BBN Planet Corporation, according to an executive familiar with the company's plans.
Executives at both companies declined to comment about the AT&amp;T investment, which is expected to be announced today.


Canandaigua Wine Co.  (WINEA,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Tuition to Rise at Local Colleges
Tuition at county and community colleges will rise by an average of 5.6 percent for the next academic year, the New Jersey Council of County Colleges said in its latest survey.


Transactions
Baseball  American League
MINNESOTA TWINS -- Signed Mark Redman, pitcher, and assigned him to Fort Myers of the Florida State League.
Agreed to terms with Jason Bell, pitcher.


Finesse Times Two
THE sartorial manner of the two chefs as they greeted visitors in the dining room of C. T., the French restaurant at 111 East 22d Street, said it all.
Pierre Troisgros, the renowned chef of the three-star restaurant in Roanne, France, that bears his family name, wore a dark blue suit, crisp white shirt and colorful tie adorned with little chefs.
Claude Troisgros, 39, his son and the chef and owner of C. T., wore blue jeans, a short-sleeved shirt and loafers.
The younger Mr.
Troisgros, who spent 15 years running a restaurant in Brazil before coming to New York, exuded the style and swagger of a young chef on a roll.
His father, by contrast, could be a cartoon model of the stereotypical French chef: round, baldish, with a gray mustache and an easy smile.


Nationals' Relievers Live Up to Their Notices
When the National League All-Stars needed the big outs tonight in their 3-2 victory, three relief pitchers got them: Heathcliff Slocumb of the Phillies, Tom Henke of the Cardinals and Randy Myers of the Cubs.
Slocumb arrived in the seventh inning with runners on second and third, one out, the score 2-2 and Ivan Rodriguez up.


A Hitch Develops in Drug-Testing Plans
As more than 5,000 athletes from 80 countries visit Atlanta this summer to test the various arenas that will be host to the 1996 Summer Olympics, organizers had hoped to begin operating the Olympic drug lab as well.
But with the Games a year away, the designated lab has yet to gain accreditation from the International Olympic Committee.
So the drug-testing apparatus that was supposed to be tested this summer will not be, and will instead be handled by I.O.C.-accredited labs in Los Angeles and Indianapolis.


Don't Count Out Cone-to-Yanks Deal
David Cone is obviously the most desirable starter available if the Yankees can somehow execute a trade for the Toronto right-hander, but Manager Buck Showalter continued to paint a dismal picture regarding the possibility of the Yankees pursuing another quality pitcher.
"I get the impression that we're not going to do anything now," Showalter said before managing the American League against the National League in tonight's All-Star Game at the Ballpark in Arlington.


Bosnian Serbs Overrun Town Protected by U.N.
Routing a small peacekeeping force and brushing off NATO air attacks, Bosnian Serb forces swept today into the town that is the heart of a United Nations "safe area." At least 20,000 civilians fled to the north, where many huddled with little food or water around the enclave's last United Nations military outpost.
This afternoon, the Bosnian Serbs slipped past the Dutch forces guarding the entrance to the town of Srebrenica.
The Dutch called in NATO warplanes, which United Nations officials said struck two Bosnian Serb tanks in air strikes this afternoon, but they were unable to stanch the Serbian advance.


RESULTS PLUS
GOLF Zabriski Adds to Laurels
Bruce Zabriski of Winged Foot, 1994 Professional Golfers Association National Club Player of the Year and 1993 winner of both the New York State Open and Met Golf Association Open, shot a 68 and a 71 yesterday to finish with a 54-hole total of 212 in winning the Westchester Golf Association Open championship at the Fenway Golf Club, Scarsdale, N.Y.
Frank Bensel of Ridgeway was one stroke back with 213 after shooting 73 and 69.
Ken Bakst of Sunningdale was low amateur with 219 with rounds of 74-71 in the final day.
DACHISEN LEADS JERSEY OPEN: At Wayne, N.J., Chris Dachisen, looking to become the first golfer to win the New Jersey Open on his home course since 1986, shot a three-under-par 68 to share the first-round lead with David Quinn yesterday.
Dachisen is the head pro at North Jersey Country Club. (AP) TENNIS  Noah Comeback Loser
Yannick Noah of France was beaten in the first round of the $560,000 Swiss Open tournament at Gstaad yesterday in his first appearance in ATP competition in four years.
He was beaten by another Frenchman, Cedric Pioline, 6-3, 7-6 (9-7), despite a set point in the tie breaker. (AP)
TEAM TENNIS KICKS OFF NEW SEASON: The defending World Team Tennis champions, the New Jersey Stars, open their eight-match home schedule tonight against the Florida Twist and will play again Friday night against the Charlotte Express at the Forrestal Conference Center in Princeton.
The Stars are led by Martina Navratilova and Coach Craig Kardon.
Also on the New Jersey roster are Mariaan de Swardt, Richard Matuszewski and Brad Pearce.
SOCCER U.S.
Loses to Bolivia
The United States lost by 1-0 to Bolivia last night, endangering the Americans' chances of advancing to the second round of the America Cup, which represents the South American championship.
Marco Etcheverry scored in the 24th minute after taking a pass from Luis Cristaldo at the top of the box, faking a shot, then dribbling past defender Alexi Lalas and beating goalkeeper Brad Friedel.
The United States (1-1-0), which was invited to the 12-nation tournament along with Mexico, beat Chile in the opener and likely must tie or defeat Argentina in its final first-round game Friday night if it is to move on.
Bolivia is also 1-1-0. (AP)


Greenbrier Cos.(GBX,N) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Frustrated School Board Wages War on Tenure for Teachers
Over the last year, after school property taxes jumped nearly 30 percent, financially troubled blue-collar voters here in the Patchogue-Medford school district elected a new school board that has created a furor by calling for an end to job tenure for teachers.
The new board, whose six members all belong to a conservative taxpayers' party, locked horns with the teachers' union even before the incoming members took control, arguing that the tenure system is too costly, protects incompetence and should be eliminated.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-9  U.S.
OFFER TO VIETNAM  President Clinton extended full diplomatic recognition to Vietnam 20 years after the American withdrawal from the bitter, divisive war.
A1  PATH TO A POLICY SHIFT  News analysis: The wonder is not that relations are being established with Hanoi but how long it took.


Discount Auto Parts Inc.(DAP,N) reports earnings for Qtr to May 30


Book Notes
Eco Dips Into the 17th Century
With his first two novels, "The Name of the Rose" and "Foucault's Pendulum," Umberto Eco proved he could navigate medieval history as easily as computer culture.


Old Name Is New For North Castle
Rotando Partners in Stamford, Conn., is returning to its roots by reverting to its original name, North Castle Partners, after a string of name changes in the last four years.


Partners in Sleaze
Under just about any circumstances putting out "Wanted" posters for political opponents is an exercise in poor taste.
But the latest effort in this dismal genre, from Representative Bill Paxon and the Republican Congressional campaign committee, goes beyond tasteless to reprehensible.
Those "wanted" for removal from politics are 28 liberals accused of failing to greet the Contract With America with the rubber-stamp adoration of the Republicans.
Mr.
Paxon says that 170 Democrats fall into that category; the group selected for the poster contains an oddly disproportionate number of black, Hispanic, Jewish and female lawmakers.
The poster's 28 mug shots include 10 blacks, 1 Hispanic, 9 women and 8 Jews, some fitting in more than one category.
Only six of the pictures are of white men who are not Jewish.
These include Representative Richard Gephardt, the House minority leader, and David Bonior, the Democratic whip.


Metro-North Unveils Plan For Strike It Says Is Likely
Metro-North Railroad, saying that it expects 17 of its 19 labor unions to go on strike as early as midnight Saturday, released a detailed contingency plan yesterday, indicating it could transport half its 70,000 weekday rush-hour commuters to and from Manhattan on shuttle buses.
If a strike is called, the railroad said that it would cancel service on weekends and that during the week it would be forced to carry commuters by buses -- including some that lack air conditioning -- along clogged suburban roads to subway stations in the Bronx.


Arcadian Partners L.P.  (UAN,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Nomo Steps to the Mound, And All Japan Is Watching
Takeshi Komatsu should have been at his office this morning.
Instead, dressed in his suit and carrying his briefcase, he was standing with about 200 other people in a light rain, staring at a huge television screen mounted on the side of a building.
"I'm going to go right after Nomo finishes," promised Komatsu, who works for a construction company.


Coming to Classrooms: The Real Pocahontas Story
This summer, children will be inundated with Pocahontas, Walt Disney's latest cartoon queen.
They will slurp grape juice from Pocahontas mugs, practice spelling with Pocahontas pencils, win Pocahontas dolls on the Boardwalk and snuggle in Pocahontas pajamas.
But come September, their teachers will stand at chalkboards and debunk Disney's sanitized version of the Pocahontas story, as they have debunked so many others: Columbus, Jefferson, Custer, Kennedy.


Judge Rules Susan Smith Is Fit for Trial on Murder Charges
The presiding judge has ruled that Susan Smith is mentally competent to stand trial in the drownings of her two sons, even though the state's psychiatrist says she may try to sabotage her own defense if she takes the stand, because she wants to die.
Mrs.
Smith, pale, listless and dependent on the anti-depressant drug Prozac to help her understand the court proceedings, is aware that she is on trial for her life, Judge William Howard of Circuit Court ruled today.


Big Hurt's Bat Leaves A Lasting Impression
Frank Thomas left for the airport after hitting a two-run homer in the fourth inning tonight, and he must have placed the rest of the American League's touted offense in his suitcase.
Once Thomas departed, his teammates never scored again and the National League displayed power of its own by walloping three homers and rallying for a 3-2 victory.
While Thomas was flying from Dallas to Chicago because the White Sox have a workout Wednesday afternoon, the American League was fizzling and Manager Buck Showalter was scheming.
Showalter did not disguise how important it was for him to win this ballyhooed exhibition game, as he said it was even more important than returning every player to his team uninjured and even more important than playing both Rangers All-Stars.
Was the Yankee owner George Steinbrenner at the Ballpark in Arlington?


Judge Rules Susan Smith Is Fit for Trial on Murder Charges
The presiding judge has ruled that Susan Smith is mentally competent to stand trial in the drownings of her two sons, even though the state's psychiatrist says she may try to sabotage her own defense if she takes the stand, because she wants to die.
Mrs.
Smith, pale, listless and dependent on the anti-depressant drug Prozac to help her understand the court proceedings, is aware that she is on trial for her life, Judge William Howard of Circuit Court ruled today.


Business Travel; A travel industry study shows it's best to keep on the move to avoid becoming a victim of crime.
MANY companies brief their employees about safety precautions while traveling.
But while tourists have been victims in a number of well-publicized brutal crimes in recent years, the rate of crime against adult American travelers is actually 40 percent less than the rate for Americans in general.
According to a recent report, for every 1,000 American adults, there were 213 crimes against their property or person in 1994.
In that same period, the rate for travelers, who were defined as someone more than 100 miles from home, was 127.8 crimes for every 1,000 travelers.
The data were weighted to account for the fact that Americans are at home more than they travel.


Nomo Steps to the Mound, And All Japan Is Watching
Takeshi Komatsu should have been at his office this morning.
Instead, dressed in his suit and carrying his briefcase, he was standing with about 200 other people in a light rain, staring at a huge television screen mounted on the side of a building.
"I'm going to go right after Nomo finishes," promised Komatsu, who works for a construction company.


Bandag Inc.(BDG,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Sports of The Times; 'I'll Try To Make Up For Stuff'
HE didn't look strong enough to bunt, much less hit a home run.
Pale and thin from his liver transplant surgery nearly five weeks ago, Mickey Mantle walked slowly, painfully.
He needed help to get into and out of a chair.
But he flashed his mischievous smile and he projected a new sense of who he is and what he means now to others.
"Don't be like me," he was saying now.
"God gave me a good body to play baseball and I just. . . ."


Fancy This, Fancy That
THERE was no "Where to, lady?"
It was, "Do you have any food?"


Wendell Phillips, Church Rector, 89
The Rev.
Wendell W. Phillips, a senior priest in the Episcopal Diocese of New York and rector emeritus of Christ's Church in Rye, N.Y., died on Friday at his home in Clinton, N.Y.
He was 89.
Father Phillips was the rector of Christ's Church from 1939 until his retirement in 1977.
He was named an honorary canon of the Cathedral Church of St.
John the Divine in 1974.


For Many of Those Who Fled Vietnam, a Day of Sadness, Anger and Hope
For Yen Do, editor of the largest Vietnamese-language daily in America, the establishment today of diplomatic relations between Hanoi and Washington marks the end of a half century of war that has tortured his nation and scattered two million of its people around the world.
It welcomes Vietnam into the community of nations, opens new possibilities for its economic development and may help efforts to foster democracy and human rights after 20 years of Communist rule, said Mr.
Yen, who edits Nguoi Viet Daily News here in the community known as Little Saigon, 30 miles south of Los Angeles.


Gibson Allen, 88; Civil Engineer Built Madison Sq. Garden
Gibson M. Allen, a civil engineer who oversaw many large construction projects in New York, including the current Madison Square Garden, died on Sunday at the Williamsburg (Va.) Community Hospital.
He was 88 and had moved to Williamsburg from Scarsdale, N.Y., in 1972.
Mr.
Allen worked for the Turner Construction Company for 44 years.
Perhaps the most daunting enterprise he tackled was construction of the current Madison Square Garden Center, which opened in 1968.


After Mad Scramble in Queens, Elephants Are Retired to Florida
Two prickly circus elephants that caused a melee on Monday night in Queens were retired from performing yesterday as animal rights advocates publicized the fact that one of them had been involved in a previous violent incident.
According to the advocates and newspaper accounts, one of the elephants had been involved in a woman's death in New London, Conn., in 1985.


Nationals' Relievers Live Up to Their Notices
When the National League All-Stars needed the big outs tonight in their 3-2 victory, three relief pitchers got them: Heathcliff Slocumb of the Phillies, Tom Henke of the Cardinals and Randy Myers of the Cubs.
Slocumb arrived in the seventh inning with runners on second and third, one out, the score 2-2 and Ivan Rodriguez up.


Founders Never Barred Aid to Education
To the Editor:
In "Budget Cuts: Less Than Meets the Eye" (Op-Ed, July 6), David Boaz suggests that we divest the Federal Government of all activities not "strictly defined" in Article I, Section 8 of the Constitution.
There is, he asserts, "no authorization" in that clause to "finance and regulate education" (among other things).


A Newark Bishop to Retire
For 19 years, the Rev.
Robert F. Garner has been Auxiliary Bishop of the Archdiocese of Newark, overseeing the day-to-day administration of the 74 Catholic churches in Bergen County, one of the four counties that make up the archdiocese.
He has presided at thousands of confirmations, hundreds of baptisms and hundreds of weddings.
But in April he turned 75, the age at which a bishop is required by canon law to resign.
Pope John Paul II accepted Bishop Garner's resignation yesterday.
No replacement has been named.


Journal; The God Patrol
In case you haven't heard, there is no religious freedom in America -- but the religious right, thank heaven, is riding to the rescue.
The Christian Coalition -- armed with the blessings of both Newt Gingrich and Bob Dole -- is now pushing hard for a Religious Equality Amendment to the Constitution.
Our preacher politicians will make sure that anyone who wants to express religious sentiments in a public forum can do so without fear that some hostile court might blow the whistle, invoking some picky principle about the separation of church and state.
For those who just can't wait for Congress to finish rewriting the Bill of Rights and want a preview of how the Religious Equality Amendment would work, there's a test case playing out right now in Utah.
Last month, a choral teacher at West High School, a public school in Salt Lake City, chose two Christian songs for his choir to perform at graduation -- but was stopped by a Federal court, which insisted that secular anthems be sung instead.
Most students and parents were furious; the class valedictorian likened the court's repression to that of China's Tiananmen Square.
If only the Religious Equality Amendment were in place, the choir could have sung just what it wanted, and how much happier the graduation would have been!


Microbrewery With Big Plans Opens in Hong Kong
DAVID TOLLIDAY-WRIGHT bellied up to the wooden bar, squinted at a beetle-brown bottle with an unfamiliar label -- Crooked Island Ale, it said -- and watched as a reddish, pale liquid was caressed by a bartender into a tall glass.
Mr.
Tolliday-Wright moved the glass to the light, dim as it was, humphed theatrically, lifted the glass to his lips and inhaled a mouthful of foamy brew.
Silence.
"Eh," he said, the words gradually forming. "Not bad. It's not bad, not bad at all."


Tyson Reportedly Works Hard
MIKE TYSON is training harder than ever and has already knocked down "seven or eight" sparring partners, according to his co-manager, JOHN HORNE.
All of Tyson's workouts have been closed to the public, but Horne said yesterday that the former champion's weight is 219 pounds, his old fighting weight.
According to Horne and his partner, RORY HOLLOWAY, Tyson does road work at 4 A.M., running three to four miles.
Then he does calisthenics at the gym, followed by work with a strength and conditioning coach and sparring.
He has been sparring for several weeks.


Black Caucus Tells the President of Its Fears for Affirmative Action
President Clinton met with the Congressional Black Caucus today to hear its concerns on affirmative action, voting rights and the Federal budget and said that next week he would announce the results of his long-awaited review of Federal preference programs that are based on race and sex.
The 80-minute meeting in the State Dining Room of the White House, the President's first with the group this year, was a sensitive one because many black officials adamantly oppose any effort to scale back job and contracting programs intended to redress past discrimination, or basing them on financial need instead of race.


U.S. GRANTS VIETNAM FULL TIES; TIME FOR HEALING, CLINTON SAYS
Saying the time was at hand to "bind up our own wounds," President Clinton today extended full diplomatic recognition to Vietnam 22 years after the American withdrawal from a bitterly divisive war that still scars the national psyche.
Mr.
Clinton, the one-time student protester who avoided serving in a war he once said he "opposed and despised," announced the normalization of relations in a brief ceremony in the East Room attended by military figures, the families of those still missing in action and members of Congress who were veterans of the war and prisoners of the Vietnamese.


Dissidents Step Up Pressure
Dissident National Basketball Association players are increasing pressure on the league, which instituted a lockout after a failed attempt to reach a new labor agreement.
Jeffrey Kessler, a lawyer representing a large group of dissident players including Patrick Ewing and Michael Jordan, said yesterday that he has filed papers seeking a preliminary injunction to stop the lockout.
A hearing in Federal court has been scheduled for Sept. 6 in Minneapolis before Judge David S. Doty.


No Headline
"Any nitwit who slides down a bannister in the nude in front of 150 people is a  moron, guaranteed." WILLIAM J. BRATTON, New York Police Commissioner.  [ B4:1. ]


Synovus Financial Corp.(SNV,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Two Are Given More From Campbell Soup
The Campbell Soup Company has expanded its relationship with two of its agencies as it undertakes a consolidation of its accounts worldwide.
Margeotes/Fertitta &amp; Partners in New York, which handles the Godiva brand of premium-priced chocolates, has been named to introduce in the United States a line of premium-priced pasta sauces licensed from Barilla S.p.A. in Italy.
The billings for Barilla pasta sauces, which will compete against brands like Classico, were not disclosed.
Also, FCB/ Leber Katz Partners in New York, a unit of True North Communications that handles brands like V-8 juices, has been named to handle Swanson canned poultry, previously handled on a project-by-project basis by Eicoff &amp; Company in Chicago.
The billings were not disclosed.


Tearful Blades Still Brief About Shooting
Breaking into tears in an emotional news conference in his parents' front yard, Seattle Seahawks wide receiver Brian Blades today proclaimed his innocence in the shooting death of his 34-year-old cousin, Charles Blades.
"I'm here today looking all of you in the eye and telling you the death of my cousin Charles was an accident," a wobbly-legged Blades told an assemblage of reporters and cameramen in the front yard of his parents' home.


Miller (Herman) Inc.(MLHR,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to June 3


INSIDE
Files Show How U.S. Broke Soviet A-Bomb Spy Ring
Newly declassified Government documents revealed how the United States, using a small team of code-breakers, found the first clues that the Soviet Union sought to steal the blueprints for the atomic bomb in World War II.
Page A10.
Battle of East 13th Street
A seemingly simple plan to renovate five rundown tenements has enmeshed New York City in an endless battle with squatters armed with faxes and lawyers.
Page B1.
Mother Competent for Trial
Susan Smith was ruled competent to stand trial for drowning her two sons, despite warnings from a psychiatrist that she might try to sabotage her own defense.
Page A11.
Yeltsin Is Hospitalized
President Yeltsin of Russia, whose visibly declining health has long provoked speculation, was hospitalized with what his press service called "acute" heart pains.
Page A3.
More Woes for Wall St.
Firm
Salomon, which has been troubled by losses and executive departures, said it would report a loss of $65 million for the quarter.
Page D1.


Muslim Leader Slain in Paris


Suspect in Rampage Had Violent Outbursts of Temper, Relatives Say
Long before he was accused of going after his wife with a meat cleaver, stabbing his 2-year-old nephew, killing his mother-in-law and driving a stolen car into a crowd of homeless people, Venerando Agas had shown signs of a fatal temper, relatives say.
Mr.
Agas's daughter, Kathleen, said that her father, an immigrant from the Philippines, had once beaten her so badly she ended up in the hospital and that the police had been called in before to settle his rages.


First Virginia Banks Inc.(FVB,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Ornda HealthCorp (ORND,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Drought in East
To the Editor:
Dawn of a drought (news article, July 6)?
In a wide area of the East, the drought has been a big problem for some time.
Forest fire danger in Ontario is so great that all campfires are forbidden.
DOUG MARKS JR.
Dumont, N.J., July 7, 1995


If the Meal Plan Doesn't Suit, Don't Worry. It's Flexible.
THIS meal of pork in a sweet mustard marinade with Chinese broccoli and potato salad is a flexible affair.
Add dessert and the menu would be quite suitable for company.
If you desire, substitute lamb or chicken for the pork.
Chinese Broccoli and Potato Salad  1 pound tiny new potatoes 1 pound whole broccoli or 8 ounces ready-cut broccoli florets (3 1/2 to 4 cups) 4 ounces whole red onion 1 large clove garlic 1 tablespoon toasted sesame oil 3 tablespoons rice vinegar 1 1/2 tablespoons dry sherry 1 teaspoon reduced-sodium soy sauce Freshly ground black pepper to taste.
1.
Scrub potatoes and place in a large pot; cover with water and bring to boil.
Cook 10 to 20 minutes, depending on the size of the potatoes.
2. Remove tough stems from whole broccoli. Cut florets into bite-size pieces.
3. Mince onion and garlic.
4.
In a serving bowl large enough to hold the potatoes and broccoli, mix the oil, vinegar, sherry and soy sauce.
5.
About 5 minutes before potatoes are cooked, add broccoli in a steamer basket to the cooking potatoes and cook until broccoli is tender but still firm.
6. Add onion and garlic to dressing.
7.
When broccoli and potatoes are done, drain.
Stir broccoli into dressing.
Cut up potatoes into halves or quarters, depending on size, and stir gently into dressing.
Yield: 2 servings.
Approximate nutritional analysis per serving: 350 calories, 8 grams fat, 0 milligrams cholesterol, 145 milligrams sodium, 9 grams protein, 60 grams carbohydrate.
Pork in Sweet Mustard Marinade
1/2 cup plain nonfat yogurt 1 tablespoon hot sweet mustard 1 tablespoon lemon juice 1 large clove garlic Freshly ground black pepper to taste 8 ounces pork tenderloin  1/8 teaspoon salt, optional.
1. Turn on broiler, if using.
2. Combine yogurt and mustard in bowl large enough to hold pork.
3. Squeeze in lemon juice; mince garlic, and add it and the pepper.
4.
Wash and dry pork, and cut into four pieces; marinade in mixture, turning to coat both sides well.
5.
Prepare stove-top grill, if using.
Grill or broil pork about 8 to 10 minutes, turning once and basting with yogurt-mustard mixture before turning.
6. Cook only until slightly pink inside.  Season with salt, if desired.
Yield: 2 servings.
Approximate nutritional analysis per serving: 280 calories, 6 grams fat, 80 milligrams cholesterol, 330 milligrams sodium, 30 grams protein, 25 grams carbohydrate.
Game Plan  Cook potatoes.
Prepare pork through Step 4.
Prepare broccoli and potatoes through Step 6.
Cook pork.
Finish potatoes and broccoli.


BanPonce Corp.(BPOP,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


U.S. Tells How It Cracked Code of A-Bomb Spy Ring
The American intelligence establishment today unveiled one of its oldest secrets: how a small team of code-breakers found the first clues that the Soviet Union sought to steal the blueprints for the atomic bomb in World War II.
Using just brain power -- no computers, no stolen skeleton keys -- the cryptographers slowly cracked what was thought to be an unbreakable code.
They painstakingly turned gibberish into powerful evidence of a Soviet spy ring whose ranks included Julius and Ethel Rosenberg.


Leaving a New York Life of Music
When you're an acclaimed leader in your profession working nonstop in its capital, 17 years is a long time to go without a real job.
You can get a real hankering for health insurance.
So Amy Kaiser, music director of the Dessoff Choirs and the Mannes Chamber Singers, teacher at the Manhattan School of Music, guest conductor for the Metropolitan Opera Guild and longtime principal conductor of the 92d Street Y's school concert series, is forsaking Manhattan for St.
Louis.


Total System Services Inc.(TSS,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


CHRONICLE
HUGH GRANT, the British actor who has all but monopolized the tabloids for the last two weeks, appeared at the premiere of his latest movie with his girlfriend, ELIZABETH HURLEY, on his arm just hours after he pleaded no contest yesterday to charges of lewd conduct in a public place with a Hollywood prostitute, The Associated Press reported.
Mr.
Grant and Ms.
Hurley smiled but said nothing as they walked up a red carpet leading into the Century City theater in Los Angeles.
Ms.
Hurley, a model, wore a short, body-hugging white dress and high white pumps.


For Many of Those Who Fled Vietnam, a Day of Sadness, Anger and Hope
For Yen Do, editor of the largest Vietnamese-language daily in America, the establishment today of diplomatic relations between Hanoi and Washington marks the end of a half century of war that has tortured his nation and scattered two million of its people around the world.
It welcomes Vietnam into the community of nations, opens new possibilities for its economic development and may help efforts to foster democracy and human rights after 20 years of Communist rule, said Mr.
Yen, who edits Nguoi Viet Daily News here in the community known as Little Saigon, 30 miles south of Los Angeles.


First Union Corp.(FTU,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Jun 30


Corrections
A picture caption yesterday with an article about Western reaction to Serbian gains in Bosnia referred incorrectly in some editions to the forum in which senior American military officers were testifying.
It was the House National Security Committee, not the National Security Council.


An Inadequate Police Investigation
The investigation into the drunken rampage by New York City cops in Washington, D.C., has ended with disappointing findings -- and a report that the public deserves to see in some form but that the Police Department will not release.
The net result is diminished confidence in the department's ability to police itself.
Two months ago, drunken officers tore through several Washington hotels groping women, destroying property and pulling false alarms, which, at one hotel, forced elderly guests into the rainy predawn streets.
The department waited far too long to get a vigorous investigation under way.


Corrections
A picture caption in The Living Section yesterday about the Fancy Food Show at the Jacob K. Javits Convention Center misidentified the group whose wares were being sampled.
It was Pasta Mama's of Richland, Wash., not Putney Pasta of Vermont.


RESULTS PLUS
GOLF  Montgomerie Has Lead
Colin Montgomerie tied the course record with an eight-under-par 64 yesterday at Carnoustie to take a two-stroke lead after the first round of the $1.04 million Scottish Open.


First Bank System Inc.(FBS,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Jun 30


International Briefs; Swedish Company Talks of a Suitor
Shares in Arjo A.B., a Swedish producer of medical equipment, surged more than 25 percent yesterday after the company said a takeover offer for it might soon be made.
"Arjo has received an unsolicited approach that may or may not lead to an offer for the company," Arjo and the British investment bank SBC Warburg, a unit of the Swiss Bank Corporation, said in a joint statement.
No details were given.


Honoring Arthur Ashe
To the Editor:
Arthur Ashe, in addition to being an excellent tennis player, was a scholar, author and humanitarian.
He was the first black man to win the United States Open (1968), the Australian Open (1970) and Wimbledon (1975).


What Music Did St. Francis Listen To?


Siliconix Inc.(SILI,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Jul 2


NASA Readies Space Shuttle For Takeoff
The space shuttle Discovery was being readied today for its Thursday launching as NASA controllers kept an eye out for woodpeckers and inclement weather.
The shuttle, scheduled for a liftoff at 9:41 A.M., Eastern daylight time, with a crew of five, will take a communications satellite into space.
The Discovery was originally scheduled to make the eight-day mission, the spacecraft's 21st trip into space, five weeks ago, but NASA engineers postponed the mission because woodpeckers nesting on a nearby gantry bored holes in the insulation surrounding the spacecraft's external fuel tank.


Harnisch Knows The Time Is Now
The way Pete Harnisch figures it, things cannot go much worse for him in the second half of the season.
Acquired in an off-season trade with Houston to add a veteran arm to the Mets' pitching rotation, Harnisch's homecoming has been a frustrating experience.
The Commack, L.I., native and former Fordham pitcher is 1-7 with a 4.23 earned run average, his only victory having come against the Padres on May 30 in San Diego.
Since then he has lost five straight decisions, obscuring that fact that he kept the Mets in the game in a lot of his early starts before falling victim to a struggling bullpen.


Europeans Debate Options For a U.N. Force in Bosnia
Despite assurances of their determination to continue the United Nations peacekeeping mission in Bosnia, European Governments hinted today they were considering the possibility of pulling back or pulling out after Bosnian Serb troops overran the "safe area" of Srebrenica on Tuesday.
"Withdrawal must remain an option," the British Foreign Secretary, Malcolm Rifkind, told the House of Commons today in London.
Other Members of Parliament warned of further disasters in other parts of Bosnia.


A School! But First, Dinner at Charles's
IF reading "The Hot Zone" isn't your idea of fun in the sun, consider enrolling in the Prince of Wales's American Architectural Summer School, where no day will be a beach day and classicism will not refer to Classic Coke or classic rock.
The school is to open next year.
Yes, the irrepressible Prince is at it again, this time on our shores.
To raise money for the American outpost of his neotraditional Institute for Architecture in London, the Prince will give an intimate dinner party tomorrow night at Highgrove, his Gloucestershire estate.


Ribeirao Preto Journal; Newcomers Flood Brazil Interior: Count the Pools
With its swimming pools, shopping malls, freeways and suburbia sprawling to the edges of orange groves, this booming region cannot shake its press label: "California brasileira."
"It wasn't so great," said Gilberto S. Maggioni, president of the local chamber of commerce, grimacing when reminded of the first newspaper comparison a few years back to an American state that Brazilians revere as the promised land.
"That 'California brasileira' talk only brought us an enormous amount of migrants."


International Briefs; Smith New Court In Acquisition Talks
Smith New Court P.L.C. said yesterday that it was holding talks with a "small number of parties" that could result in a takeover of one of the brokerage firm, one of Britain's largest remaining independent stockbrokers.
And this morning, The Financial Times reported that Merrill Lynch &amp; Company was in takeover negotiations with Smith New Court.
The paper said Merrill Lynch was aiming to conclude a deal within days.
Officials of Merrill Lynch could not be reached for comment last night.


China Is Insisting Clinton Reaffirm One-China Policy
Delivering its first outline of "practical steps" to begin thawing its relations with the United States, the Chinese Government said today that President Clinton should reaffirm that there is only one China and that Taiwan is part of China, and declare that Taiwan's President will not be allowed to make any more visits to the United States.
A senior Chinese Foreign Ministry official, speaking on the condition that he not be identified, cited a restoration of the status quo on Taiwan before last month, when its President was allowed to visit the United States, as a minimum requirement for Washington before another high-level meeting between the two countries could be held.


Executive Changes
CONAGRA INC., Omaha, appointed James O'Donnell senior vice president and chief financial officer.
DIGITAL MICROWAVE CORP., San Jose, Calif., named Charles Kissner president and chief executive.


Unusual Furniture, Unusual Fashion
UNUSUAL furniture and unusual fashion merged in SoHo this month.
J.
Morgan Puett, an artist and fashion designer with a shop at 140 Wooster Street (between Houston and Prince Streets), invited her friends Jim Zivic and Warner Wada to move their design business, Burning Relic, from a nearby studio to her place.
Ms.
Puett said they wanted to "treat the store like a creative campsite where ideas get ping-ponged" back and forth.


3 Companies Are Charged in Power-Cable Accident That Shut Newark Airport
Three New Jersey construction companies have been accused of violating a state law in connection with the pile-driving accident last January that knocked out all electrical power at Newark International Airport's three passenger terminals and forced the airport to close for a day.
The state's Board of Public Utilities issued the citations last Friday but announced them only yesterday; they charged the companies under a year-old law designed to guarantee that the routes of buried electrical cables and pipelines are clearly marked before construction crews begin digging or doing other work near them.


Celebrating Kinship With Family Rituals
MY discovery of family ritual was an accident.
When my daughter was a newborn, I was alone, bathing her, and we seemed to slip into another time.
The water, her miniature body, the soap were no longer part of the everyday, the usual rub-a-dub-dub.
The elements of the bath seemed clear and essential.
Everything came sharply into focus.
We both became alert, sensing something different.
I grabbed her shoulders and, my voice echoing off the tiles, declared, "You are my daughter."


Tobacco Held to Be Drug That Must Be Regulated
The Food and Drug Administration has concluded for the first time that nicotine is a drug that should be regulated, and it has proposed limited, initial steps for regulating tobacco products, officials said today.
But in a sign of the delicacy of the issue -- and of the opposition in the Republican Congress to new restraints on smoking -- the agency is not using the authority it has to act on its own.
Instead, it has thrown the issue to the President, by submitting proposed regulations to the White House.
The proposals themselves are modest, involving only new limits on tobacco advertising and measures to curtail sales to young people.


Market Place; Better technology helps oil and gas drillers return to good times.
BOOM times seem to be here again for the oil and gas drillers.
Drilling in the Gulf of Mexico is back at the levels of its heyday in 1990, when oil and gas prices surged because of fears that the Persian Gulf war would lead to shortages.


Buildings, State By State
SKYSCRAPERS on major flight paths and obscure vernacular buildings off the beaten trail are the subjects of a series of guidebooks that are appearing just in time for summer touring.
Oxford University Press is publishing the state-by-state architecture guides, the first of which are for Iowa, Michigan, Alaska and the District of Columbia.


What Tells Jokes and Is for Adults Only?
On a recent edition of the Movie Channel's "Joe Bob's Drive-In Theater," the film producer Roger Corman told the host that in today's entertainment market, "erotics are on a downward curve." Somebody forgot to tell Showtime, which happens to be the Movie Channel's sister network.
Tomorrow Showtime will introduce its new weekendlong "Night Time" block of late-night comedies intended to be what the service calls edgy and provocative.
Read that as raunchy.
Pay cable continues pursuing material that the commercial networks generally cannot touch.
Cable calls the stuff "adult." On the other hand, there's the letter writer in New York magazine who, after reading an article about today's stand-up comics, says she "felt the need for a long shower to scrub off the diseased excrement that now passes for comedy." There's no accounting for taste, evidently.


COMPANY BRIEFS
AASCHE TRANSPORTATION SERVICES INC., Shannon, Ill., a transporter of perishable and frozen foods, will acquire Polar Express Corp., Tontitown, Ark., in a $10 million stock transaction.
BROWNING-FERRIS INDUSTRIES, Houston, said its BFI Waste Services unit had received a $109 million contract to design, build and operate a waste transfer station in Hong Kong.


CHRONICLE
Forget for a moment that LEONARD M. MARKS is a trial lawyer who counts among his clients Billy Joel, Eddie Murphy and Sir Andrew Lloyd Webber.
For more than a month, Mr.
Marks has been devoted to preparations for a ceremony to commemorate the bombing of Hiroshima, Japan.
The event will be held tonight at the Cathedral of St.
John the Divine.
Among those expected to appear in the program: Takashi Hiraoka, Mayor of Hiroshima; Eli Wallach; Geraldine A. Ferraro; Lukas Foss; Shigeko Sasamori, the adopted daughter of Norman Cousins and a survivor of the 1945 bombing, and Grace Thorpe, daughter of Jim Thorpe, who has worked to prevent nuclear dumping on American Indian reservations.


Alfonso Zirpoli, Federal Judge, Is Dead at 90
Alfonso J. Zirpoli, a senior Federal district judge in San Francisco who was known for his commitment to individual rights, died on Monday at his San Francisco home.
He was 90.
President John F. Kennedy named Judge Zirpoli to the bench in the Northern District of California in 1961.
He reached senior status in 1975 and continued to work with a reduced caseload until his retirement five years ago.


No Headline
"It was quite a horrifying scene. There was screaming and crying and panic. They didn't know where they were being taken to." -- STEPHANE OBERREIT, of Doctors Without Borders, describing the refugees in Potocari, Bosnia.  [ A1:6. ]


CHRONICLE
The Miss America Pageant minus its bathing suits?
That is a distinct possibility, LEONARD HORN, the chief executive of the Miss America Organization, announced yesterday at a news conference at the Plaza Hotel.
During the Sept. 16 telecast of the pageant on NBC, viewers will be asked to call a "900" number and to vote on whether to proceed with the swimsuit parade.
Should even a one-vote majority say nay, Mr.
Horn said, the swimsuit portion will be canceled on the spot.
What happens next year remains to be seen.


Get Your Ice Cold . . .


Alcan Aluminium Ltd.(AL,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Jun 30


First Chicago and NBD to Merge as Banks Scurry to Grow
The First Chicago Corporation and NBD Bancorp Inc. announced yesterday that they had agreed to merge in a deal valued at about $5.3 billion, providing yet another example of the relentless consolidation that is changing the landscape of commercial banking.
The merger will create a Midwestern banking powerhouse, the First Chicago NBD Bank Corporation, ranked No. 8 in the country with $120 billion in assets.
Moreover, it will have the country's fourth-largest credit card business and the biggest market share in Illinois, Michigan and Indiana.


Barnett Banks Inc.(BBI,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Jun 30


Washington Federal Inc.(WFSL,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Jun 30


Ulster Protestants March, Celebrating History, as Catholics Jeer
At 9:35 this morning, to the martial airs of fife-and-drum bands, the several hundred Protestant men of the Ballynafeigh Orange Lodge marched stiffly across a bridge over the Lagan River into an angry Roman Catholic neighborhood, to celebrate the 305th anniversary of Northern Irish Protestantism's proudest historical event -- its victory over Irish Catholicism.
As they and their ancestors have done for about 100 years, most of the Orangemen wore black suits draped with orange sashes and stoles, white gloves, and bowler hats, and carried furled black umbrellas.
They looked straight ahead, casting only sidelong glances at the police officers of the Royal Ulster Constabulary in riot gear, as they sealed off the parade route on the Lower Ormeau Road from the Catholics who live there.


Wolverine World Wide Inc.(WWW,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Jun 17


Inkless Fingerprinting Starts For New York City Welfare
There is no ink, no paper towels, no wiping your hands afterwards, just two fingers pressed briefly against the glass of a computer screen.
But sitting on the steps of the St.
Nicholas welfare center in Harlem yesterday, Rani Taylor said the details of the procedure made no difference.
"Fingerprinting is fingerprinting," Ms.
Taylor said as she waited in line for her turn.
"Why should you have to go through it? They've already got your photo and your Social Security number."


Republicans Attack Clinton on Vietnam
Republicans in Congress bitterly attacked President Clinton today for extending full diplomatic recognition to Vietnam and accused him of selling out the families of Americans missing in Vietnam.
In a first Congressional hearing on the President's decision on Tuesday to establish relations -- 22 years after the American withdrawal from the war -- Republicans on the House International Affairs Committee spoke with unusual passion in asserting that President Clinton was in an unseemly rush to recognize Vietnam even though it has not provided a full accounting of the 1,618 Americans missing there.


Joel David Morgan; Artist Manager, 35
Joel David Morgan, an artist manager and concert presenter, died on Tuesday at St.
Vincent's Hospital in Manhattan.
He was 35 and lived in Manhattan.
The cause was AIDS, said Candace Flores, a friend.


Public to Decide Swimsuit Issue
Forget about feminists.
Even the chief executive of the Miss America Organization says he opposes the swimsuit segment of the annual pageant.
"I personally cannot rationalize putting a young college woman in a swimsuit and high heels," the A.P. yesterday quoted Leonard Horn as saying.


Keeping Mother's Trial in Hometown Could Be Crucial
The decision by Susan Smith's lawyer to keep her capital murder trial in her hometown might ultimately save her life, say legal experts and the people who have lived their lives in the same, small place.
As her lawyers and the state's prosecutor today continued the arduous process of picking a jury to hear the case, it was increasingly clear that it may be difficult to find 12 people in this close-knit community who will send her to die in the electric chair.


The Pop Life
Hard Times for Posters
On Tuesday Mayor Giuliani created an executive task force composed of representatives of 15 different city agencies to crack down on graffiti.
What this means for New York rock bands is trouble.
Included in the city's definition of graffiti is the posting of handbills on public property or on a private establishment whose owner does not want posters plastered on it.
There are many kinds of bills around Manhattan, advertising anything from a sublet to a cologne, but the majority of them are for concerts.
Community groups find them an eyesore; others say they are a cultural asset.
The Mayor's effort to enforce laws against defacement as part of his quality-of-life initiative began in October, when he created an anti-graffiti and vandalism unit of the New York City Police Department (that unit will now coordinate the new task force in conjunction with the Mayor's office).
Since then, a number of local rock bands have discovered that putting up posters for their concerts may mean a night in jail, after which they are instructed to return for a court date.
If found guilty, offenders are generally fined $50 to $250 or ordered to perform community service.


Essay; The Time Has Come
On the central moral-military challenge of his Presidency to lead the Western world in collective defense against bloodstained aggression -- Bill Clinton will be remembered in history as a man who feared, flinched and failed.
The policy long urged by Senator Bob Dole was to lift the pernicious arms embargo to Bosnians who want to fight for their country, and to support the defenders with air strikes at ammo dumps and supply lines of the invading Serbs.
Events have proved the Dole policy right.


Towing-Bids Ruling Is Criticized
An appellate court decision upholding the right of toll road authorities to award towing contracts without competitive bidding has drawn the wrath of Assemblyman Paul R. Kramer, Republican of Hamilton Township.
Mr.
Kramer, chairman of the Independent Authorities Committee, recently tabled a bill that would also have authorized no-bid contracts.


August Belmont 4th, 86, Horseman and Banker
August Belmont 4th, a member of the socially prominent banking and horse racing family and the grandson of the founder of Belmont Park and breeder of the champion Man o' War, died Monday in Easton, Md., where he made his home.
He was 86.
The cause of death was a stroke, the family said.


Pulitzer Publishing Co.(PTZ,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Jun 30


School Prayer Anxieties
The motivations behind President Clinton's speech on religion in the schools were obvious and in some ways laudatory.
For purposes of his re-election, Mr.
Clinton needs to reassure swing voters that he endorses traditional religious values and practices.
He also needs to slow the legislative rush to pass an ill-advised Religious Equality Amendment being pushed by the Republican leadership in Congress.
Much of the President's speech at a suburban Virginia high school was devoted to stating existing law, making the obvious point that a variety of private religious actions and meetings are allowable on public school property.
That is to say, there is simply no need for an amendment to the First Amendment's guarantees of religious freedom.


Rockets Confirm Maxwell's Release
VERNON MAXWELL gave up on the Houston Rockets, and now the two-time defending champions have given up on him.
The Rockets confirmed yesterday they waived the mercurial Maxwell, also known as Mad Max, on June 30, the day before the National Basketball Association lockout of players halted any club-player dealings.


AT HOME WITH: Jennifer Saunders; Absolutely Catching, Bad Habits and All
It would be strange if Jennifer Saunders didn't identify at least a little with Edina Monsoon, the frenetic, trend-abusing publicity agent she plays in the television series "Absolutely Fabulous." After all, she created the character and has written the scripts for all 18 episodes.
But it only goes so far, Ms.
Saunders said, considering the matter as she sat behind a desk whose admirable lack of clutter spoke volumes about her organizational skills. (It spoke untruthfully, as it turned out. She admitted that earlier in the day she spent an hour and a half shoving everything out of sight.) If Edina's obsessions crackle around her like sparks from a Roman candle, Ms.
Saunders's waft gently, subtly.


A Second Fed Bank Study Finds Disparities in Mortgage Lending
White mortgage applicants with bad credit histories were only half as likely to be rejected for loans as black or Hispanic applicants with similar credit records, the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago concluded in a study released today.
But the report, the latest effort by Government experts to measure bias in lending practices, did not find that discrimination by banks was widespread in all circumstances.
Black and Hispanic applicants with good credit histories were about as likely as white applicants with comparable records to receive bank approvals for mortgages, the study found.


Pfizer Names A Woman as Unit President
Pfizer Inc. appointed Karen L. Katen yesterday as president of its United States Pharmaceuticals Group, which generated about 30 percent of Pfizer's revenues of $8.3 billion last year.
Ms.
Katen, 46, a corporate vice president of Pfizer, has been executive vice president of the 4,500-member unit since 1993.
She will now be one of a handful of female executives with the possibility of becoming chief executive of a big pharmaceutical company in the next decade.


Study Says Cost Of Atom Bombs Is $3.9 Trillion
The United States has spent far more on nuclear weapons than it has acknowledged, about one-fourth to one-third of the entire military budget since 1945, according to an independent study made public today.
The study's authors reached their conclusion by totaling the costs of research and development, weapons delivery systems, security, communications and control systems, dismantlement costs and environmental cleanup.


Senior F.B.I. Agent Suspended in Probe Of a Deadly Siege
The Federal Bureau of Investigation has suspended a senior career agent as a result of a Justice Department inquiry into whether officials destroyed important documents about the agency's bloody 1992 standoff with a white separatist in Idaho, law-enforcement officials said today.
The suspension of the agent, E. Michael Kahoe, who was an official at F.B.I. headquarters during the Idaho siege, sent a shock wave through the agency's upper ranks.
Louis J. Freeh, the F.B.I.
Director, rushed to Capitol Hill on Tuesday to advise lawmakers of the development, including Senator Orrin G. Hatch, a Republican of Utah and chairman of the Senate Judiciary Committee.


Anti-Violence Chip for TV Gets Key Backing in House
Even as Senate Republicans expressed their opposition to Government requirements aimed at curbing violence on television, proposals for a so-called V-chip to block violent shows gained ground in the House today.
Representative Michael G. Oxley, Republican of Ohio, an influential member of the House Commerce Committee, threw his support behind legislation that would require television manufacturers to include a chip to block violent shows in all new sets and predicted that the House would pass the measure this month.


Events: Design Shows, Walking Tours, a Cruise
Design Times Four  American Craft Museum, 40 West 53d Street; (212) 956-3535.
Four design shows open today and continue through Oct. 1.


Steps Against Nicotine
The Food and Drug Administration has concluded for the first time that nicotine is a drug that should be regulated as such, and has proposed limited steps for regulating tobacco products, Federal officials said yesterday.
But, in a sign of the delicacy of the issue, the agency is not using the powers it has to act on its own, instead submitting proposed regulations to the White House.
Article, page A18.


China Gives Big Van Deal To Mercedes
Snubbing American car manufacturers and fueling suspicion that China would make American industry pay for the diplomatic dispute with Washington, China today gave a much-coveted $1 billion contract to Mercedes-Benz of Germany
The decision to award what is one of the biggest automotive deals in China was announced as President Jiang Zemin, on a four-day visit to Germany, toured the Mercedes plant in Sindelfingen, about 100 miles south of here.


Courtroom Superstars, Videotaped Confessions
What do William Kennedy Smith and Colin Ferguson, Joel Steinberg and Hedda Nussbaum, the Bobbitts,the Menendez boys and O. J. Simpson have in common?
Right.
All have starred in hit televised trials, and you can catch highlights of their performances again Saturday on "The Show Business of Crime and Punishment." Given their prominence on the program and the graphic scenes of violence and sex captured by the camera, you may wonder whether the pictures are merely examples of the evening's themes or whether the themes are merely pretexts for the pictures.
To give the producers the benefit of the doubt, this edition of "America Undercover" does provide a snappy review of the spreading use of camcorders by the police at the scene of a crime, and of other evidence provided by surveillance cameras and videotaped confessions.
It is pointed out, for example, that in the Central Park jogger rape trial the jury was more impressed by confessions that had been videotaped than by the old-fashioned ones that had been written down by the police.
Defendants may take consolation from the acquittal of Dr.
Jack Kevorkian, often in court for assisting in suicides, by the grace of a video camera that showed the departed taking an active role in his own demise.


Congressman Is Cleared of Breaking Oath
The House Ethics Committee said today that it would take no action against Representative Robert G. Torricelli, Democrat of New Jersey, on charges of violating a secrecy oath by making public classified information.
Mr.
Torricelli had contended in a letter to President Clinton, a copy of which he gave to The New York Times, that a Guatemalan military officer who was a paid agent of the Central Intelligence Agency had ordered the killings of an American innkeeper and a guerrilla leader married to an American lawyer.
The Times published an article on the letter on March 23.


There's life in Paris couture's old guard yet: C12


Court Didn't Dismiss Affirmative Action
To the Editor:
"A Court Running in the Wrong Direction" (editorial, July 6), accusing the Supreme Court of "flawed logic and misreading of evidence," misreads what the Court has done on affirmative action.
The Court's decision cannot be portrayed as a "repudiation of affirmative action," nor is it fair to attribute to the Court the premise that "African-Americans no longer need the law's protection."


Parole Officer Is Suspended Over Killings
A New Jersey parole officer who had been supervising Darnell Collins when he went on a murderous rampage last month in New Jersey and Manhattan was suspended yesterday after officials learned that, hours before the killings began, Mr.
Collins had telephoned the parole officer to say that he was "having a problem with drugs."
Mario Paparozzi, the assistant chief of New Jersey's Bureau of Parole, said Mr.
Collins told the parole officer, John Goodman, on the afternoon of June 16, a Friday, that he expected to be accepted into a drug treatment program the following Monday.


Tilting Against the Poor
A House Appropriations subcommittee dominated by Republicans voted this week to chop education programs for poor students and job training programs for low-paid workers.
It scaled back a program designed to cut medical costs by identifying unnecessary medical procedures.
It eliminated entirely a program that helps states design new educational standards.
The vision behind the G.O.P.'s 1996 budget for education, labor and health is radically different -- and woefully misguided.


International Briefs; Mitsubishi Cutbacks
The Mitsubishi Motors Corporation, Japan's third-largest auto maker, said yesterday that it would cope with an expected fall in exports caused by the strong yen by reducing the number of its temporary workers.
Mitsubishi said it had eliminated 700 temporary workers at its factories since April and plans to dismiss 300 more by September -- down to a total of 2,300, a cut of about 30 percent.


U.S.I.A. Earns Its Keep In Pakistan Violence
To the Editor:
I read with dismay your July 6 news article on Congressional action to dismantle the United States Information Agency.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-14  BOSNIAN SERBS TAKE 'SAFE AREA'
Bosnian Serb forces seized the last U.N. stronghold in a "safe area" of eastern Bosnia, along with as many as 40,000 civilian refugees, and swiftly began busing the women, children and elderly toward Bosnian Government territory.
A1  PULLOUT PLAN ASSUMES WORST
As the chances of a U.N. pullout from Bosnia rise, the U.S. and its NATO allies have all but completed plans to carry out an evacuation plan that assumes the worst: cramped sea ports, snow, fighting and poor roads.
A1  RABBIS WARN ISRAELI SOLDIERS
In a ruling that could affect thousands of Orthodox Jews in the Israeli Army, a group of rabbis said soldiers must refuse orders to hand over bases in the West Bank to the Palestinians.
A3  SECRET TRIALS IN NIGERIA
With reports from Nigeria that secret tribunals have begun sentencing and possibly executing Government opponents, there have been rising calls worldwide for the respect of human rights.
A9  BEIJING'S 'STEPS' FOR U.S.
THAW
Offering "practical steps" to thaw relations with Washington, Beijing said President Clinton should reaffirm that Taiwan is part of China and declare that Taiwan's President would not be allowed to visit the U.S. again.
A8  Environmentalists fear the Danube's flow may change.
A12  A Spanish mother worries that Tibetan monks control her son.
A13  As Ulster Protestants marched, Catholics jeered.
A14  Ribeirao Preto Journal: Brazil's interior prospers.
A4  National A14-21, B9-10  CLINTON WEIGHS IN ON PRAYER
The President said the First Amendment "does not convert our schools into religion-free zones," and ordered the Government to distribute guidelines explaining the wide degree of religious expression allowed in schools.
A1  FALLOUT FROM AN F.B.I.
INQUIRY
The F.B.I. suspended a senior agent as a result of a Justice Department inquiry into whether officials destroyed important documents about the agency's bloody 1992 standoff with a white separatist.
A1  SIMPSON VEHICLE AT ISSUE
Prosecutors at the O. J. Simpson trial zeroed in on the testimony of a witness who said he saw a white sport utility vehicle leaving the crime scene the night that Nicole Brown Simpson and Ronald Goldman were killed.
A1  THE OLYMPICS' WIDE REACH
The Olympics are still more that a year away, but dozens of cities within a five- to six-hour radius of Atlanta are now vying for medals in a sort of Hospitality Games.
A1  TOWN CRUCIAL TO MOTHER ON TRIAL
The decision by Susan Smith's lawyer to keep her murder trial in her South Carolina hometown might ultimately save her life, say legal experts and the people who have lived their lives in the town.
A18  F.D.A.
CALLS NICOTINE A DRUG
Officials said the Food and Drug Administration had concluded for the first time that nicotine is a drug that should be regulated as such, and proposed steps for regulating tobacco products.
A18  A study detailed American spending on nuclear weapons.
A19  An N.A.A.C.P. audit was reported to show lavish spending.
A21  Senators rejected an exemption for a meat-safety rule.
B9  Metro Digest B1  PAROLE OFFICER SUSPENDED
A New Jersey parole officer who had been supervising Darnell Collins when he went on a murderous rampage last month in New Jersey and Manhattan was suspended after officials learned that Mr.
Collins telephoned the officer hours before the killings began, to say that he was "having a problem with drugs." A1  Business Digest D1  Arts/Entertainment C13-20  A change in Academy Award rules for full-length documentaries.
C13  Ringo Starr, back on tour.
C13  Music: Pop Life C16  Dance: Two Pilobolus originals perform a new work.
C13  Books: "Giant Bluefin," by Douglas Whynott.
C17  Television: Comedy shows.
C17  "The Show Business of Crime and Punishment." C18  The Home Section C1-12  At home with Jennifer Saunders.
C1  Sports B13-19  Baseball: Yanks trounce Royals.
B13  Harnisch needs improvement.
B15 Columns: Berkow on Isringhausen B13  Cycling: Indurain stays on target.
B18  Football: Bennie Blades is hurt.
B19  Golf: King puts pressure on shelf.
B13  Hockey: Deal to keep Devils seems set.
B18  Track and Field: Morceli breaks his 1,500 mark.
B13  Obituaries B11-12  Max O. Urbahn, architect.
B12  Editorials/Op-Ed A22-23  Editorials  School prayer anxieties.
Inadequate police investigation.
Tilting against the poor.
Hope for Burmese democracy.
Letters  William Safire: The time has come.
Maureen Dowd: West Coast story.
Richard A. Gephardt: The 10 percent solution.
Thomas Beller: Why?
Don't ask.
Chronicle D20  Bridge C17  Crossword C17


World News Briefs; Kashmir Rebels Threaten To Kill Their Hostages
Kashmiri insurgents holding five Western hostages -- an American, two Britons, a German and a Norwegian -- threatened today to kill them if the Indian Government does not free more than 20 captured guerrilla leaders.
In a statement to The Associated Press in Srinagar, the capital of the disputed state of Jammu and Kashmir, the militants warned that the hostages would be killed if their demands were not met by Saturday.
Muslim rebels fighting for independence in India's only Muslim-dominated state have kidnapped Westerners before, but the captives have always been freed unharmed.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  First Security Corp., Salt Lake City, is selling $125 million of subordinated notes due in 2005 through CS First Boston.
The notes are priced at 99.787 to yield 7.03 percent.
The noncallable issue is rated Baa1 by Moody's Investors Service and BBB by the Standard &amp; Poor's Corporation.
New England Education Loan Marketing, known as Nellie Mae, is selling $100 million of medium-term notes due in 1998 through Smith Barney.
The notes are priced at 99.878 to yield 6.17 percent.
The noncallable issue is rated A1 by Moody's and A- by S.&amp; P.


Firstbank Puerto Rico (FBP,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Jun 30


Speed Up. Raise This. Expand That. Whew!
The rebellion brewing among major league hitters need not arise.
The originally announced plan to speed up games by making them remain anchored in the batter's box has been abandoned.
Instead, batters will be permitted only to stray no farther than three feet from the box when they step out.
"I don't go for strolls when I hit," Wade Boggs of the Yankees remarked after hearing about the rule that will be implemented July 28.
Boggs had been an outspoken critic of the original plan, but he can live with the three-foot rule.


Corrections
A picture caption yesterday about the decoding of Soviet espionage cables misidentified the responsible agency.
It was done by the National Security Agency and a forerunner, the Army Signal Intelligence Service, not by the Central Intelligence Agency.


Indurain Loses No Time In Second-Place Finish
In what is beginning to appear to be an inevitable march to his fifth consecutive victory in the Tour de France, Miguel Indurain rode another impressive race today only to chalk up another second place.
That made three in the last four daily stages, plus his victory Sunday in the individual time trial.
Even if he did not win the last of two Alpine stages, Indurain lost no time to a rider who threatens his reign.
The winner was Marco Pantani, an Italian who rides for the Carrera team and who is considered to be one of the strongest climbers in the sport.


Provident Bancorp Inc.(PRBK,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Jun 30


Why? Don't Ask
Hugh Grant's public embarrassment distressed many of his fans and gave the rest of the English-speaking world a sugar rush of Schadenfreude.
Not only was England's floppy-haired star caught with a prostitute in a BMW on Hollywood's Sunset Boulevard, he had the exquisite sense of timing to do it on the eve of his new feel-good comedy, "Nine Months."
Pleasure in the misery of others is not the healthiest of emotions, but given this set of circumstances it seems forgivable.
Sex is rivaled only by shame for the public's attention, and this story has both, with fame and beauty thrown in -- not to mention a perfume called "Pleasures," which his girlfriend, Elizabeth Hurley, is promoting.


Watson Rejoins Country Club He Quit
TOM WATSON has rejoined the country club where he learned golf as a boy, nearly five years after he resigned when it rejected a Jewish applicant, according to his broher-in-law, CHARLES RUBIN, who is also his manager.


It's Another World Mark For Morceli In the 1,500
Until now, Noureddine Morceli had been pumping his slender arms, clenching his crooked teeth and running with great success against the records of others.
But tonight, as he sprinted the last lap utterly alone, the Algerian was running only against himself.
It was his own world record in the 1,500 meters that Morceli was trying to break under a yellow moon on the Cote d'Azur.
And it was his own record that fell in spectacular fashion as Morceli finished the metric mile in 3 minutes 27.37 seconds, the equivalent of a 3:45 mile.
Morceli, who holds world marks at four distances, set the mile record at 3:44.39.


Increase Sought in Water Rates
United Water New Jersey, which serves 175,000 customers in Bergen and Hudson counties, is asking the State Board of Public Utilities for an 8.8 percent rate increase, effective next spring, the company announced yesterday.
The increase, the first since 1991, would amount to an average of $28 a year for each residential user, officials said.


Premier Bancorp (PRBC,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Jun 30


Closer Scrutiny Urged in Rescue
New Jersey's United States Senators, Bill Bradley and Frank R. Lautenberg, and Representatives Robert G. Torricelli, Democrat of Englewood, and Marge Roukema, Republican of Ridgewood, yesterday urged Secretary of State Warren Christopher to take more aggressive action in monitoring rescue efforts at a shopping mall in Seoul, South Korea, that collapsed last month.


Stock Option Plan Pays Off For Chemical Bank Workers
It was touch and go, but 38,000 workers at the Chemical Banking Corporation became a little wealthier yesterday thanks to an afternoon surge in the stock market that pushed Chemical stock up 37.5 cents to $50.375, allowing them to cash in on a special share offering the company announced a year ago.
The offering was similar to the stock-option plans available to top executives of the company, except that it was offered only to employees below the rank of senior vice president, and was decidedly less lucrative than the executive plans.
But even if the stock plan offered to tellers, branch managers and others was not enough to make them rich, it caught their attention and made the stock price a prime topic of discussion the last three days.


Max O. Urbahn Is Dead at 83; Designed Vast NASA Building
Max O. Urbahn, a prolific architect of government buildings whose work included the design of what is generally believed to be the largest structure in the world, the Vehicle Assembly Building at Cape Canaveral, Fla., died on Sunday at his home in Stonington, Conn.
He was 83.
Mr.
Urbahn, who had his own firm in New York City from 1946 until 1978, designed buildings for all three United States military services, the Coast Guard, and various Federal agencies.
NASA was his client for the Vehicle Assembly Building, a vast box designed in 1965 to shelter the Saturn rockets that powered American astronauts to the moon.


Plans for U.N. Pullout Paint Bleak Picture Full of Pitfalls
As the chances of a United Nations pullout from Bosnia rise, the United States and its NATO allies have all but completed plans to carry out an evacuation plan that assumes the worst: cramped sea ports, snow, fighting and poor roads.
President Clinton has promised to send as many as 25,000 American soldiers for a 60,000-member NATO force to extricate 24,700 United Nations peacekeeping troops spread out over Bosnia.


Margot Wittkower; Interior Designer, 93
Margot Wittkower, one of the first women to practice interior design in Europe and the widow of the art historian Rudolf Wittkower, died on July 3 at her home in Manhattan.
She was 93.
Mrs.
Wittkower, whose original name was Margot Holzmann, was born in Berlin in 1902.
After establishing herself as a designer in Berlin, she left for London with her husband in the 1930's.
She continued her work there, specializing in apartment interiors and furniture design.
The Wittkowers were especially drawn to neo-Palladian architecture, and she eventually became an authority on the subject.


New Posts for 2 Times Critics
New assignments for two critics on the cultural news staff of The New York Times were announced yesterday by Joseph Lelyveld, executive editor.
Bernard Holland was named chief music critic.
He succeeds Edward Rothstein, who was appointed to the new position of cultural critic at large.
Mr.
Holland, 62, has been a music critic at The Times since 1981.
A native of Norfolk, Va., he was graduated from the University of Virginia, where he studied literature and philosophy.
From 1958 to 1966 he studied piano and composition at the Vienna Academy of Music, at the Paris Conservatory and in London.
Before joining The Times he wrote about classical and popular music for several publications, including The Pittsburgh Post-Gazette.
Mr.
Rothstein, as critic at large, will cover a range of subjects, among them cultural policy, technology, intellectual life and esthetic issues.
Before his appointment as chief music critic in 1991, Mr.
Rothstein, now 42, was the music critic of The New Republic and a contributor to several journals.
He holds degrees from Yale and Columbia and a doctorate in music and mathematics from the Committee on Social Thought at the University of Chicago.
He is the author of "Emblems of Mind: The Inner Life of Music and Mathematics," which was published by Times Books in the spring.
The appointments will take effect with the new music season in the fall.


Secret Trials Are Reported In Nigeria
With reports from Nigeria that secret tribunals have begun sentencing and possibly executing opponents of the military Government, there have been rising calls internationally for the release of political prisoners and the respect of human rights.
In recent days, Nigerian newspapers have repeatedly hinted that at least 18 military officers and 5 civilians have been secretly convicted of plotting to overthrow the Government of Gen.
Sani Abacha and given long prison terms or death sentences.
According to a report in The Times of London last week, some detainees may have already been executed.


Celanese Canada reports earnings for Qtr to Jun 30


How a Cottage Charmed a Town
NOBODY liked my house.
"No hope for it," warned a neighbor when I braked, responding to the empty house's siren call.


Danube's Flow May Change and Opponents Aren't Waltzing
Between its wooded banks, the River Danube flows murky, muddy, green-brown, but free.
And that, for many, is just the point.
Moves are afoot to change the Danube's flow, adding locks and other features so that commerce can move more easily along it.
Environmentalists object, including a group centered here in this bucolic region 80 miles northeast of Munich.


AIDS Housing Fees Will Be Redirected
New York City announced yesterday that it would substantially cut its payments to hotels that provide emergency housing to people with AIDS and would use the money to develop permanent housing for AIDS cases.
Starting on Sept. 1 the city will cut by nearly 20 percent the payments made to operators of 40 single-room-occupancy hotels who provide emergency housing for people with AIDS referred by the Human Resources Administration.
The H.R.A. now pays $900 to $1,500 a person monthly.
The new fees will range from $720 to $1,260.


Keep Emergency Rooms for Real Emergencies; H.M.O. Decisions
To the Editor:
Bravo!
Your July 9 front-page article on health maintenance organization care was enlightening but frightening.
I do not think the American people realize that their health care is being controlled by the chief executive officers of their health maintenance organization plan.


John J. Conway, 79, Educator And a Harvard Institution, Dies
John J. Conway, a historian and educator who in 18 years at Harvard University befriended many of the students whose curriculum he helped to shape, died on Tuesday in Massachusetts General Hospital in Boston.
He was 79.
Dr.
Conway, who lived in Boston and in Conway, Mass., had suffered a stroke the day before, said his wife, Jill.


The 10% Solution
The Democrats and Republicans have finally reached a consensus that tinkering at the margins of the tax code will not provide the tax reform the nation wants.
The core issue is, what kind of reform?
Leading Republicans have proposed dramatic changes, including a national sales tax, which would replace the income tax, and a single-rate flat tax.
These plans share the virtue of simplicity but defeat the principle of progressive taxation, under which you are taxed according to your ability to pay.


Ethics Panel Fails to Agree On a Hearing On Packwood
The Senate Ethics Committee failed again today to reach agreement on whether to hold public hearings on allegations of sexual and official misconduct against Senator Bob Packwood, as pressure for such hearings appeared to be building.
The committee had planned to meet on Thursday, but after tonight's session, no new meeting had been scheduled.
"I don't know what the schedule's going to look like," Senator Richard H. Bryan, Democrat of Nevada and vice chairman of the committee, said as the meeting broke up tonight.
"That will be up to the chairman."


Ringo, the Fourth Beatle, Is Back Behind Those Drums
His comic timing and downtrodden look made him the natural cinematic focus of both "A Hard Day's Night" and "Help!," and his inventive but never showy drumming was a distinctive part of the Beatles' sound.
Yet because he sat at the back, bashing away at his drums while his bandmates shook their shaggy heads and harmonized, and because he wrote and sang the fewest (and mostly the slightest) songs, Ringo Starr has been regarded by many as the last and least of the Fab Four.
Mr.
Starr has been known to walk out on interviewers tactless enough to lean on this point, but these days he isn't letting it bother him.
Let's face it: having been a Beatle at all is still a reasonably good meal ticket.
Lately, in fact, he has been collaborating with Paul McCartney and George Harrison on "The Beatles Anthology," a vast audio-video project due in the fall, complete with two songs on which the former Beatles added tracks to working tapes recorded by John Lennon shortly before he was killed in 1980.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  FIRST FINGERPRINTING FOR CITY WELFARE
To Mayor Giuliani and other officials, a Social Security number and picture are not enough to prevent people from applying for welfare benefits under two or more names.
For the first time, despite opposition from civil libertarians, the city began using a computerized "finger imaging" system to thwart fraudulent claims.  [ B3. ]


BUSINESS DIGEST
Higher Earnings Spur Rally in Stock Market Stocks established another round of records, spurred by higher corporate earnings.
The Dow Jones industrial average closed up 46.69 points, to 4,727.29.
At one point, the Dow rose more than 50 points, setting off the New York Stock Exchange's circuit breakers for the eighth time this year.
Analysts said it was a wild day of trading as institutions placed five rounds of "buy" programs in about an hour, with much of the buying concentrated in technology issues.
The S.&amp; P. 500 index also set a record, rising 6.11 points, to 560.89.  [ Page D8. ]


Becoming His Own Man
Late in May, James Dimon learned that Smith Barney's bond department was still placing some big trading bets, despite his orders that it rein in risks.
Worse, the department wasn't earning much money, even with the market enjoying a spectacular spring rally.
So, after consulting with colleagues, Mr.
Dimon sent heads rolling.
As chief operating officer, he forced out John F. Lyness, the managing director in charge of bond trading, who left the firm on May 26.
Three top aides soon followed him out the door in what became known around the firm as "the Memorial Day massacre." Mr.
Lyness "hadn't done as well as he might have done," Mr.
Dimon said in a recent interview.
Mr.
Lyness did not respond to requests for comment.


Transactions
Baseball  American League
CHICAGO WHITE SOX -- Activated Mike LaValliere, catcher, from the 15-day disabled list.
Optioned Chris Tremie, catcher, to Nashville of the American Association.


Guilty Plea in Pyramid Scheme
A meat broker accused of masterminding a pyramid scheme that may have bilked investors of as much as $80 million pleaded guilty yesterday to three counts of mail fraud and one count of money laundering, The Associated Press reported.


Mark Twain Bancshares Inc.(MTWN,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Jun 300


Warner Cancels a Book After Cult Accusations
In the crossroads where publishing and public relations meet, a controversial author can be good news or a big, banging headache.
Warner Books has decided that Frederick P. Lenz, author of "Surfing the Himalayas: A Spiritual Adventure," a book it had been planning to publish this winter, is the latter, and has taken the rare step of dropping the book.
Laurence J. Kirshbaum, Warner's chief executive, said yesterday that the book was canceled because of "marketing differences with the author." But people in the publishing industry said Warner had become wary of the book after a magazine reporter called to tell the publisher that Mr.
Lenz had been described in news articles as a cult leader.


Student Loan Marketing Assn. (SLM,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Jun 30


Judge Nearing Decision on an Arrangement to Keep The Citadel All Male
A Federal judge appeared ready today to challenge the legitimacy of an 11th-hour agreement between South Carolina and a private women's college that would keep women out of The Citadel, a public, all-male military college here.
Judge C. Weston Houck of Federal District Court asked whether the South Carolina Attorney General, Charles M. Condon, had the authority to sign a contract with Converse College, a private women's college in Spartanburg that has agreed to develop a military-style training institute for women.
An appeals court ruling requires the judge to determine whether the Converse program is a suitable alternative for women who might want to enter The Citadel.


An Accord For Devils To Stay Seems Set
A deal to keep the Devils in New Jersey is virtually done, a lawyer for the team said yesterday.
"We have a final draft, and everyone is looking at it, making comments and discussing modifications," Alan Berman, a lawyer for the Devils' law firm, LeBoeuf, Lamb, Greene &amp; MacRae, said late yesterday.
"The bulk of the deal is done. I'm hopeful we can finalize it tomorrow."


De La Hoya Gives Back I.B.F. Title
OSCAR DE LA HOYA beat the International Boxing Federation to the punch yesterday.
The organization was getting ready to withdraw lightweight-championship recognition from De La Hoya for not fighting its No. 1 contender, MIGUEL JULIO of Colombia.
So, at a news conference in New York, De La Hoya relinquished the I.B.F. title.


Williams Shouldn't Honor Singapore Official
To the Editor:
Re "Honoring Repression" (column, July 10): William Safire suggests that Williams College not rescind its offer of an honorary degree to Goh Chok Tong, Prime Minister of Singapore and graduate of the college's Center for Developing Economics.
Mr.
Safire suggests that such an event has the potential to force Mr.
Goh to defend his "anti-freedom pitch" publicly.


President Defends a Place For Religion in the Schools
President Clinton declared today that the First Amendment "does not convert our schools into religion-free zones," and ordered the Government to distribute national guidelines explaining the wide degree of religious expression allowed in schools under current law.
"I am deeply troubled that so many Americans feel that their faith is threatened by the mechanisms that are designed to protect their faith," Mr.
Clinton said in a carefully worded speech aimed at outflanking Republican proposals for a constitutional amendment on school prayer.


Bob Ross, 52, Dies; Was Painter on TV
Bob Ross, the bushy-haired host of "Joy of Painting" on public television who parlayed the success of his program into an industry of art books and supplies, died on July 4.
He was 52.
The cause was cancer, said Walter J. Kowalski, the chief executive officer of Bob Ross Inc., in Sterling, Va.


New Option for Worried Parents: Drug Testing at Home
Once, the only way for parents to learn if their children used drugs was to ask, pry, or maybe spy.
But now, a Massachusetts company is giving parents another option: a drug test that begins in the home, with a snip of a child's hair.
At a midtown news conference yesterday, officials of the Psychemedics Corporation, a small drug-testing company, announced that they were starting a service that will allow parents to send samples of their sons' and daughters' hair to the company's lab -- and learn by mail whether the children are using marijuana, cocaine, heroin or other drugs.


Reducing the Risks For Older Drivers
I WENT for a drive the other day inside a small room at New York University.
My guide was William Schiff, a professor of applied psychology, and before I was done I managed to avoid a reckless school bus and make a safe left turn against oncoming traffic -- but I did hit Mr.
Schiff's daughter.
On the big television screen I was facing, she came out from between two cars in the shade, and I was slow putting my foot on the brake.
Her father was understanding.


Crossing Central Park South, 2 Women Are Killed by a Truck
Two pedestrians were killed yesterday after a laundry truck that delivers sheets and towels to mid-Manhattan hotels hit them as they crossed Central Park South at Seventh Avenue, the police said.
One victim was dead on arrival at New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center.
The second died later during surgery, the hospital said.
The police said the two women tried to dash across the street 20 feet outside the crosswalk as the truck turned the corner.
Witnesses said the two women were apparently trying to make it before the light changed.


Hiroshima Program
The 50th anniversary of the bombing of Hiroshima is to be commemorated tonight at 6 with a free concert at the Cathedral of St.
John the Divine, 1047 Amsterdam Avenue, at 112th Street, Morningside Heights.
Lukas Foss is to conduct the Rushmore Festival Orchestra; Carol Wincenc, flutist, Florence Quivar, mezzo-soprano, and Camellia Johnson, soprano, are to perform.
The program is to be narrated by Eli Wallach, Ellen Burstyn and Celeste Holm; other speakers are to include Geraldine A. Ferraro, the United States representative to the United Nations Human Rights Commission and former Congresswoman; Hiroshima's Mayor, Takashi Hiraoka; Shigeko Sasamori, a Hiroshima survivor, and Robert Jay Lifton, the psychiatrist and author.


Spanish Woman Battles Buddhists for Her Son, the Lama
In the brilliant sunshine and crisp air of the Alpujarra mountains in southern Spain, Maria Torres gazed over the terraced rooftops of stone houses stacked on the steep slope, the home of a small Buddhist community.
Miss Torres, 41, a travel agent who converted to Buddhism 20 years ago, said she was worrying about her son Osel, who is 10.
She is struggling with Tibetan monks, who believe the boy is a reincarnated lama, to gain more control over his upbringing.


Tale of Tuna Fish and the Men Who Love Them
GIANT BLUEFIN
By Douglas Whynott
242 pages. Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux. $21.
Only two decades ago, the bluefin tuna fish, or horse mackerel, was "worth five cents a pound and served as cat food," writes Douglas Whynott in "Giant Bluefin," an engaging report on tuna fishing in New England.
When tuna tournaments were held, he adds, the fish were hung up as giant trophies, then disposed of by being sunk or hauled off to a dump.


Hand Over Israeli Bases? No Way, Rabbis Tell Troops
In a ruling that could affect thousands of Orthodox Jews in the Israeli Army, a group of influential rabbis said today that soldiers must refuse orders to hand over army bases in the West Bank to the Palestine Liberation Organization.
Although it is far from clear how many soldiers would obey the rabbis, the religious ruling could cause the army difficulties when it begins to withdraw in the West Bank as part of plans to expand Palestinian self-rule.


Graf Investigated for Tax Evasion
STEFFI GRAF, the world's top-ranked women's player, is suspected of tax evasion and is being investigated by German authorities, officials said yesterday.
Her father and manager, PETER GRAF, is also under investigation, the Mannheim prosecutor PETER WECHSUNG said.
Ten prosecutors and tax investigators searched the Graf family compound in her hometown of Bruhl on May 23 and took away cartons of documents as evidence, Wechsung said.


Witnesses Barred
The defense in the trial of Sheik Omar Abdel Rahman, the Muslim cleric charged with directing a terror-bombing conspiracy in the New York area, suffered what it called a critical blow yesterday when the judge barred defense lawyers from calling several major witnesses.


New Hope for Burmese Democracy
The release of the political prisoner Daw Aung San Suu Kyi in Yangon, formerly Rangoon, is good news.
Mrs.
Aung San Suu Kyi, who won the Nobel Peace Prize in 1991, had been under house arrest for nearly six years.
The next test for the regime, which changed the name of the country from Burma to Myanmar, will be to follow Ms.
Aung San Suu Kyi's freedom with a return to some form of political pluralism and with other improvements in human rights.
Mrs.
Aung San Suu Kyi's National League for Democracy won elections under her leadership in 1990.
The military refused to recognize the results, imprisoning and intimidating many of the newly elected legislators.
Burmese expatriates say torture is still routinely used in prisons and by the military in its repression of ethnic minorities.


Starbucks Review Narrowed to Goodby
The Starbucks Coffee Company said yesterday that it had further narrowed a three-month review on its account to Goodby, Silverstein &amp; Partners in San Francisco, which will make a final presentation in the next two weeks.
The account, with billings estimated at $7 million, had been at the Evans Group in Seattle for the last five years until Starbucks and Evans agreed to part ways in April.


A Fierce Rivalry to House Olympic Teams
Tommy knew Leah, whose husband, Love, ran track in college where his coach was Mel, whose lawyer is Bill, who is married to Laryssa, who is originally from Ukraine.
That in a nutshell is how the Ukrainian Olympic team chose this small west Georgia city as its training base for the Summer Olympics next year.
It is the Southern version of networking, known here as "doin' bidness," and it has helped this city of 15,000 snatch a bit of the same spotlight that will be shining on its much larger neighbor Atlanta, 45 miles to the east.


Two Exchanges Plan a Move Across the Hudson
The Coffee, Sugar and Cocoa Exchange and the New York Cotton Exchange said yesterday that they intended to shift their trading operations to Jersey City, in a move that could transfer more than 5,000 jobs out of New York City.
The two commodities exchanges, which have signed a letter of intent with the state of New Jersey, said they planned to build a nine-story, 275,000-square-foot building adjacent to Jersey City's Exchange Place financial district, which they planned to occupy by the second quarter of 1998.


INSIDE
Suspension in Parolee Spree
New Jersey suspended a parole officer who had been supervising Darnell Collins before he killed seven people last month.
Officials said Mr.
Collins had told the officer he was having a drug problem.
Page B1.
Newark School Takeover
New Jersey took control of Newark Board of Education headquarters, dismissing top school executives and assuming responsibility for the day-to-day operations.
Page B6.
The Rabbis and the Soldiers
Some rabbis in Israel say that soldiers who yield West Bank bases to Palestinians thus violate Jewish law.
But if soldiers disobey orders, there will be chaos, critics say.
Page A3.
Two Big Banks to Merge
First Chicago and NBD Bancorp of Detroit have agreed to merge in a $5.3 billion stock deal, creating a Midwestern banking powerhouse with $120 billion in assets.
Page D1.
Algerian Breaks 1,500 Mark
Noureddine Morceli broke his own world record in the 1,500 meters in a meet at Nice, France, finishing in 3 minutes 27.37 seconds.
Page B13.


Technology Issues Lead Market to Another Mark
Stocks went into orbit yesterday, not only reaching record levels but also triggering the so-called circuit breaker designed to stabilize the market.
The New York Stock Exchange imposed its downtick rule at 3:11 P.M. to curb program trading, or stock-index arbitrage, which goes into effect when the Dow Jones industrial average rises more than 50 points.
It was the eighth time this year that the limits went into effect, the last occurring on May 31.


International Briefs; Czech Stake Increased
The Dutch supermarket chain Ahold N.V. said yesterday that it would double its presence in the Czech Republic by acquiring 72 percent of Ceska General Food.


Abbott Laboratories (ABT,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Jun 30


Tussaud's and a Movie Chain Are Negotiating on 42d St. Site
In the latest effort to revive the ghostly corridor of deteriorating buildings along Manhattan's famed 42d Street, city and state officials are negotiating with Madame Tussaud's, the renowned London wax museum, and AMC Entertainment, a movie theater chain, over plans to open new entertainment attractions in the city's old theater district.
Under the plan being discussed, the two companies together would take over the site of three adjacent old theaters between Seventh and Eighth Avenues, spending $150 million to create a 335,000-square-foot complex housing a high-tech wax museum and the city's largest movie theater, with a total of 25 screens.


Good Morning, Vietnam


A Roly-Poly Computer
AMONG the virtual bells and dizzying whistles at the PC Expo at the Jacob K. Javits Center last month, the Archistrat computers from Panda Project Inc. were a design standout.
The Boca Raton, Fla., company's new products include a "4s" server (the brains of a computer network), which Stanford W. Crane Jr., Panda Project's founder, said was powerful enough to drive 500 personal computers.
The "4b" workstation is intended for home or office use and is the first universal platform computer, meaning it is compatible with both I.B.M. and Macintosh systems and can be easily upgraded.
The "4s" is $10,400; a price for the "4b" has not been established.
Panda Archistrat won a trophy for booth design (shown above, with the "4b" workstation), which was designed by Janine and Jon James of the Moderns, a New York firm.


A new foundation carries on the causes of an executive remembered as a 'phenomenal mentor.'
THE companies that employed Thomas J. Mosser for close to 25 years are striving to assure that he will be remembered more for how he lived than for how he died.
Burson-Marsteller, the public relations agency, and its parent, Young &amp; Rubicam Inc., the advertising and marketing communications company, have established a foundation to honor Mr.
Mosser, who worked for Burson-Marsteller from 1970 until January 1994, when he joined Y.&amp; R.


On-Line Session
If the shuttle is launched today as scheduled, the commander, Terence Henricks, and the pilot, Kevin Kregel, will answer questions from the public via computer in a live interview tomorrow on @times, The Times's service on America Online.
The event is to be held from 3 to 4 P.M., Eastern time.
Software and information: (800) 548-5201.


CAR LIKE SIMPSON'S IS PUT AT SCENE
Prosecutors at the O. J. Simpson trial zeroed in today on the testimony of a defense witness who said he saw a white sport utility vehicle, possibly a Ford Bronco, leaving the crime scene around 10:40 P.M. the night Nicole Brown Simpson and Ronald L. Goldman were killed.
The witness said the driver had braked suddenly and then accelerated quickly as he rounded the corner, driving south.
But defense lawyers regularly reminded the jury that if the vehicle turned south, toward Wilshire Boulevard, rather than north toward Sunset Boulevard, it was traveling away from Mr.
Simpson's home, a five-minute drive from Mrs.
Simpson's condominium.


Once-Isolated Democrat Draws Crowds in Burma
For years, the house at 54 University Avenue in Yangon was a place so off-limits, so forbidden, that few Burmese dared to walk past the rusting metal gate, and none dared to stop.
To linger at the gate was to invite arrest by the plainclothed secret police who patrolled the street at all hours.
But today, the curb outside No. 54 was a place of pilgrimage and raucous celebration, drawing hundreds of the curious and the committed, all of them wanting to catch at least a glimpse of Daw Aung San Suu Kyi, the Burmese opposition leader.


3 of 4 Guilty of Assault in Officer's Beating in Bay Ridge
Three of four young men accused of beating an off-duty police sergeant in front of his apartment building in Bay Ridge, Brooklyn, in October were found guilty of first-degree assault yesterday.
The charge was less severe than the attempted murder charge the District Attorney's office had sought a conviction on.
A fourth defendant -- whom the sergeant, Louis Cosentino, had at first failed to identify properly in court -- was found not guilty of all charges.


Vietnam Is Said to Harass American Medical Aid Team
Members of a delegation of American scientists and doctors that recently visited Vietnam to assess health problems say that Vietnamese customs officials ransacked their belongings and confiscated many of the documents and tissue specimens they had come to collect.
The nine Americans, an official delegation from the National Institute of Environmental Health Science, arrived in Vietnam on June 20 for conferences and investigations aimed at assessing health problems shared by the two countries, including the possible effects of dioxin, a contaminant of the defoliant spray dropped over parts of the country during the Vietnam War.


No. 3 Bond-Rating Service Gives City an A-, and Giuliani Cheers
Four years ago, Moody's Investors Service disappointed City Hall by downgrading New York City's bonds.
On Monday, Standard &amp; Poor's did the same.
So yesterday, when the lesser-known Fitch Investors Service declared that it would not downgrade, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani treated the announcement as a bit of a triumph.
"This is really good news for the city," he said, after aides summoned reporters for what they were billing as a major announcement.


Economic Scene; A program that helps the working poor is in trouble.
IMAGINE a Government program that attacks poverty even as it coaxes single parents off welfare.
Imagine a program that imposes no costs on employers and does not require an army of bureaucrats to administer.
Well, stop imagining and start admiring the earned-income tax credit, which in the words of Gary Burtless, an economist at the Brookings Institution, sends a "powerful message that we value work -- even the work of those with pathetically low wages."


China Asks Clinton To Reaffirm Policy On Taiwan's Status
The Chinese Government said yesterday that President Clinton should reaffirm that Taiwan is part of China, and declare that Taiwan's President will not be allowed to make any more visits to the United States if Washington wants to begin thawing its frosty relations with Beijing.
A senior Chinese Foreign Ministry official cited a restoration of the status quo on Taiwan as it existed before Taiwan's President was allowed to visit the United States last month as a minimum requirement for another high-level meeting between the United States and China.


3 of 4 Guilty of Assault in Officer's Beating in Bay Ridge
Three of four young men accused of beating an off-duty police sergeant in front of his apartment building in Bay Ridge, Brooklyn, in October were found guilty of first-degree assault yesterday.
The charge was less severe than the attempted murder charge the District Attorney's office had sought a conviction on.
A fourth defendant -- whom the sergeant, Louis Cosentino, had at first failed to identify properly in court -- was found not guilty of all charges.


Rembrandt Would Savor Portrait on Bill
To the Editor:
Re "What Fits in Europe's Wallet?" (Business Day, July 11):


U.P.S. Cancels Some Mexican Services in a Setback to Trade Pact
The opening of Mexican markets to American business under the terms of the North American Free Trade Agreement faltered for the first time this week with the decision by United Parcel Service to cancel some of its ground services in Mexico.
U.P.S., the American package delivery giant, said Tuesday that it would stop its cross-border deliveries by ground transporation between the United States and Mexico as of July 31.
The company made the decision even though trade officials of the United States and Mexico have been trying to improve market conditions for U.P.S. in Mexico.


China Shows Evils of Intrusion Into Privacy
To the Editor:
Your June 25 front-page article on China's horrifying policy of forced abortions was informative.
By extension, it leads me to ponder the controversy on abortion in this country.


N.A.A.C.P. Audit Shows Lavish Spending, Members Say
A long-awaited audit of the troubled National Association for the Advancement of Colored People shows that "lavish" spending and shoddy management by some of the group's top officials helped create a $3.8 million debt, which has hobbled the organization for months, several board members said today.
Tens of thousands of dollars were spent on personal trips or expensive limousines, lap-top computers, sky pagers and other items that a cash-strapped organization might do without, the board members said.


Romanian Coach Keeps Up the Fight
Lavinia Milosovici, a 19-year-old acrobatic powerhouse, rises every morning from under a satin pink bedcover, glances at a poster of Michael Jackson hanging above her television and prepares for another seven hours in the well-worn gymnasium a few steps from her dormitory.
Milosovici, a two-time Olympic gold medalist in 1992 and one of Romania's big hopes for the Games in Atlanta, savors some of the Western frills allowed since the toppling of the Communists.
She keeps her prize money (minus 65 percent taxes), earns a salary and, now and then, relishes a croissant or some ice cream.


G.O.P. Goes Courting Another Eager Convert
As Capitol Hill courtships go, the wooing of a Democratic representative, Mike Parker of Mississippi, by the Republican Speaker, Newt Gingrich, has about it a quality of colonial-era bundling -- the two of them smiling separately in the same conservative hotbed, wondering at the possibilities across the frayed divider of party loyalty.
"With a little help, he'll go over," Representative W. J. (Billy) Tauzin of Louisiana said of Mr.
Parker, his friend and fellow member of the House's fervently conservative Democrat Coalition.
This is a restive minority within the crestfallen new minority party, whose 23 members have been increasingly open to the Speaker's Contract With America and his blandishments to switch parties and enroll with the new majority.


Horizon Healthcare (HHC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Corrections
A front-page chart last Thursday with an article about a move by New Jersey to take over the Newark schools incorrectly summarized the results of high school proficiency tests in New Jersey in the fall of 1994.
The percentage of 11th graders in Newark who passed all three tests, in reading, math and writing, was 25.2, not 47.7; for New Jersey it was 74.7, not 87.1.


ABC Issues Warning to Turner and Fox
ABC has told Turner Sports and Fox Sports to keep their hands off baseball until January.
In a July 7 letter, ABC warned Turner and Fox against trying to negotiate future TV rights with Major League Baseball because ABC has an exclusive negotiating period with baseball from Oct. 9 to Jan. 14.


Corrections
Two entries in the Business Travel column yesterday, about new services at airlines and hotels, included scrambled passages in some editions.
As a result, paragraphs from "The Hotel Scene" appeared in "Airline Update." Readers wishing corrected copies of the column may write to Production Quality Control, The New York Times, 229 West 43d Street, New York, N.Y. 10036, or telephone (212) 556-1992.


Smoltz's 2 Wild Pitches Help Pirates End Braves' Streak at 9
Pirates 2, Braves 1
John Smoltz's second wild pitch of the sixth inning led to both Pittsburgh runs scoring on the same play and the Pirates ended the Atlanta Braves' nine-game winning streak with a 2-1 victory yesterday at Pittsburgh.


Synovus Financial Corp.(SNV,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Jun 30


City National Corp.(CYN,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Jun 30


Pataki, Praising the Right, Asks It to Ease Up
Fresh from a bruising battle with the State Legislature, Gov.
George E. Pataki took advantage of a national platform today to praise the new agenda he has set for New York State and to depict himself as a foot soldier in what he called "the conservative revolution."
In last year's campaign and during this year's legislative session, Mr.
Pataki, a Republican, seemed more pragmatist than ideologue -- presumably because New York is a relatively liberal state, where Democrats outnumber Republicans.
But in a speech today to the Heritage Foundation, a conservative policy group, Mr.
Pataki embraced the conservative movement with unusual vigor.


Sidney Sulkin, Writer, 77
Sidney Sulkin, a writer and former editor at the Kiplinger publishing organization, died on June 29 at his home in Bethesda, Md.
He was 77 and also had a home in Harwich, Mass.
The cause was cancer, his family said.


International Briefs; Thomson Buys in Spain
The French state-owned military and electronics company Thomson-CSF, a unit of Thomson S.A., bought a 24.9 percent stake yesterday in the Spanish electronics company Indra for $25 million.
The deal reduces the stake in Indra of the Spanish state holding company Teneo to 63 percent.
Private shareholders, including Banco Bilbao Vizcaya, control the remaining 12 percent.


Finally, King Finds Peace on Fairway
Before the Hall of Fame, there was her Hill of Fame.
"Time me, Dad," Betsy King would tell her father, who doubled as town doctor and normally used his watch to take pulses.
"O.K.," he would say. "Mark, set, go."


Levi's Steals a Page From Letterman
Levi Strauss &amp; Company, in its largest single brand marketing effort ever, is trying to better David Letterman more than 50 times over by offering consumers "the top 501 reasons" to wear Levi's 501 jeans.
And for the first time, a Levi's campaign appearing in the United States will include work by the company's British agency.
The campaign, which runs through December, includes television commercials, print ads and outdoor advertising.
Like Mr.
Letterman's nightly top 10 lists, the reasons are numbered; "reason No. 032," for instance, is "You only have to wash them sometimes," while "reason No. 041" is "If crazed psycho killers are dragging you behind their van at high speeds, they probably won't rip."


Lewis Engman, 59, U.S. Official And Drug Industry Spokesman
Lewis A. Engman, a former senior Federal official and drug industry spokesman, died yesterday at Georgetown Hospital in Washington.
He was 59.
The cause was a stroke, said a spokesman for the Generic Pharmaceutical Industry Association, a Washington trade group that Mr.
Engman had headed since 1993.


Waco Inquiry Is Said to Use N.R.A. Experts
A Republican-led House committee conducting an inquiry into the raid on the Branch Davidian compound near Waco, Tex., brought experts hired by the National Rifle Association on its trip to Texas in June to examine remnants of weapons found at the site, the N.R.A. said today.
At the time, the staff members of the House Government Reform and Oversight Committee who visited Texas for the inspection on June 26 did not identify the experts as paid consultants to the rifle association.
The N.R.A. has been a fierce critic of the Government's actions in Waco, particularly of the Feb. 26, 1993, raid by agents of the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms.


Weyerhaeuser Co.(WY,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Jun 25


Aetna Adds $750 Million To Cover Cleanup Claims
The Aetna Life and Casualty Company, in a move to disperse the uncertainty caused by its large exposure to claims for environmental damages, said yesterday that it had added $750 million to its reserves to cover those claims.
Although the move will result in a second-quarter loss of several hundred million, it was praised by many analysts as a big step toward rejuvenating the big insurance company.
Aetna hopes that with the increase in its environmental reserves to $1.2 billion, it has set aside enough to pay for environmental claims and will no longer use its profits and capital to pay those claims bit by bit, year by year.


Madlock Arrested on Bad-Check Charge
The former All-Star and four-time batting champion BILL MADLOCK was arrested yesterday on a warrant charging him with passing bad checks, according to the police.
Madlock, 44, of Huntington, Conn., was arrested at La Guardia Airport as he stepped off an American Airlines plane from Dallas at 1:50 P.M., according to Capt.
FRANK TABERT of the Port Authority police.


Seeking China Deal, Bonn Shuns Rights Issue
Early this morning, German radio listeners heard Foreign Minister Klaus Kinkel say in an interview that human rights would not be the central issue raised during a visit by President Jiang Zemin of China.
A few hours later, they heard why.
Mr.
Jiang was visiting industrialists today in Stuttgart, where Mercedes-Benz cars are made.
A day before Audi, which also makes luxury cars, announced a proposal for a joint venture to build automobiles for the growing Chinese market.
German companies are also lining up for contracts potentially worth billions for subways and trains.


Accounts
QMS Inc., Mobile, Ala., a maker of computer printers, to Greenstone Roberts Advertising/Florida, Orlando, Fla., a unit of Greenstone Roberts Advertising, to handle its worldwide account, previously handled by various local agencies on a project basis.
The billings were estimated at $10 million.


Review/Fashion; There's Life in Couture's Old Guard Yet
Fashion shows are by definition projections of the future, and those who follow them feel eternally a spring or fall ahead of the world that is being clothed.
With so far-sighted an audience, there was a moment when those in their seats at the Givenchy show might have been distracted by the prospect of Givenchy yet to come, as the news circulated that John Galliano would take over the house for the next couture season.


Taking Control, State Ousts Newark's School Officials
State education officials took control of the Newark Board of Education's headquarters today, dismissing top school executives and assuming responsibility for the day-to-day operations of New Jersey's largest school district.
The culmination of the 10-year battle to control the troubled district came after the New Jersey Supreme Court voted to reject a request by the Newark school board to delay the dismissals and the takeover.


Keeping Mother's Trial in Hometown Could Be Crucial
The decision by Susan Smith's lawyer to keep her capital murder trial in her hometown might ultimately save her life, say legal experts and the people who have lived their lives in the same, small place.
As her lawyers and the state's prosecutor today continued the arduous process of picking a jury to hear the case, it was increasingly clear that it may be difficult to find 12 people in this close-knit community who will send her to die in the electric chair.


United Video Satellite Group Inc.(UVSGA,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Jun 30


Schulman (A.) (SHLM,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Hexcel to Combine With Ciba Composites Unit
The Hexcel Corporation, a leading maker of composite materials for aerospace and other uses, said today that it had agreed to combine its business with the composites division of Ciba-Geigy Ltd. of Switzerland, creating a company with approximately $600 million in annual revenues.
Under the terms of the deal, Ciba would acquire 49.9 percent of Hexcel's common stock in exchange for Ciba Composites.
Hexcel would also pay an estimated $80 million in cash and securities to Ciba to reflect Hexcel's debt and certain liabilities.


Total System Services Inc.(TSS,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Jun 30


Ryan's Family Steak Houses Inc.(RYAN,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Jun 28


Senate Rejects Exemption for a Meat Rule
The Senate narrowly refused today to exempt safeguards against contaminated meat from a bill imposing limits on Federal regulations dealing with health and the environment.
The vote, 51 to 49, came after a full day of debate on the Democratic amendment, which would let a new rule of meat inspections be imposed free of any possible challenge under the regulatory legislation.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.75
8.75
7.25
DISCOUNT RATE
5.25
5.25
3.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
5.75
5.75
4.22
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.36
5.37
4.39
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.29
5.31
4.81
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.08
6.11
7.38
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.54
6.58
7.67
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.45
7.48
8.48
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.05
6.07
6.50
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Lundquist Takes Over Football on TNT
VERNE LUNDQUIST will join Turner Sports full time and become TNT's National Football League announcer for the coming season, replacing GARY BENDER.
Lundquist was already TBS's lead National Basketball Association announcer.


Liberties; West Coast Story
Not since yuppies made the wrenching discovery back in 1985 that Brie actually could get too ripe, has the Upper West Side had such an identity crisis.
Wendy Wasserstein knew something was awry when she walked into a building on Central Park West the other day, looking for an apartment, and was proudly informed by the doorman: "You know who lives here? Steven Spielberg's screenwriter and Julia Roberts's agent."


A Move Intended to Attract Jobs
Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman announced changes yesterday that she said would turn New Jersey's "regulatory maze into a straight path for business," helping the state attract and keep jobs.


Media General Inc.(MEG.A,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Jun 25


Oscar Rules Change For Documentaries
Responding to widespread criticism that it has ignored the best work being done by documentary film makers, the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences has changed the procedures under which feature-length documentary films are nominated for Academy Awards.
The new procedures, which call for more judges to view the large number of entries, are a response to the hue and cry over the academy's decision earlier this year not to nominate "Hoop Dreams" in the best documentary category.
The oversight seemed inexplicable, since the film earned ecstatic reviews and was regarded by many critics as one of the best films of the year, documentary or dramatic.
At the Academy Awards, "Maya Lin: A Strong Clear Vision" was named best documentary feature.


Corrections
A brief report in the Book Notes column yesterday about the coming autobiography of a former Surgeon General misspelled her given name and misstated the publication schedule.
The author is Dr.
Joycelyn Elders; her book is due in the fall of 1996, not 1995.


Yankees Look Like All-Star Squad
Their starting pitcher kept them in the game early.
Their hitters provided him with more than enough runs.
Everything the Yankees did so poorly in the first half of the season they did right last night.
This looked a lot like the 1994 Yankees and the team they were supposed to be in 1995.


Boris Margo, Surrealist, 92, And Inventor
Boris Margo, an artist who was part of the Surrealist branch of the New York School, died on July 5 at Cape Cod Hospital in Hyannis, Mass.
He was 92 and for the last decade had spent his summers in Provincetown, Mass., and Venice, Fla.
The cause was respiratory complications after surgery, said his nephew Stanley Zimiles of Lido Beach, L.I.


At 68, Stanley Dancer Keeps Trotting
Stanley Dancer had been written off before, but not like this particular story.
"The late Stanley Dancer," a caption said.
"Before he passed away a few years ago," the story said.
After checking his pulse, Dancer shook his head and laughed.


G.O.P. Poster Is Called Threat to Lawmakers


Huntington Bankshares Inc.(HBAN,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Jun 30


Corrections
A front-page headline yesterday about a newly identified illness carried by deer ticks referred incorrectly in some copies to the organism that causes it.
As the article stated, it is a bacterium, not a virus.


Sports of The Times; The Start Of Something Special
WHEN Jason Isringhausen, 22 years old, walks out to the mound for the Mets in Wrigley Field next Monday night to pitch in his first major league game, a good portion of his hometown of Brighton, Ill., will be in the stands.
About 35 to 40 people will have made the five-hour drive north to Chicago for this auspicious, not to say amazin', occasion.
The Mets dream he is the second coming of Doc Gooden, a 6-foot-3-inch, 200-pound right-hander with a close-cropped haircut and a sizzling fastball who could create excitement for a team that seems to have had a sign like this over its gates in recent years: "Abandon Hope, All Ye Who Enter Here."


Parks Still Belong To the People
To the Editor:
Your July 9 news article describing how volunteers are rejuvenating Riverside Park on Manhattan's Upper West Side states that nearby residents are putting in this effort though the park "doesn't belong to them."


Onnie Lee Logan, 85, Midwife Whose 'Motherwit' Drew Praise
Onnie Lee Logan, the Alabama midwife who used what she called her God-given motherwit to deliver hundreds of babies before her 1989 autobiography made her a favorite in feminist circles, died on Tuesday at the Mobile Infirmary in Mobile, Ala.
By her own reckoning she was about 85.
When she was born "somewhere about 1910," she once noted, midwives in rural Alabama weren't overly scrupulous about filing birth records for the grandchildren of slaves.


Laidlaw Inc.(LDW.A,N) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Keep Emergency Rooms for Real Emergencies
To the Editor:
Your headline says "H.M.O.'s Refusing Emergency Claims, Hospitals Assert" (front page, July 9), but your article says "H.M.O.'s are increasingly denying claims for care provided in hospital emergency rooms." That confusion is the crux of the problem.
Much of the care provided in emergency rooms is not emergency care.


Preparing for a Strike


Report to Detail Errant Ways of Barings
The British Government will publish a report by the end of next week that is expected to catalogue a series of management failures at Barings P.L.C. that allowed a rogue trader to run up huge losses and cause the collapse of the venerable investment firm early this year.
The report, conducted by a group under the supervision of the Bank of England, is expected to criticize a widespread lack of controls by senior management at Barings over the activities of the trader, Nicholas W. Leeson.
Specifically, it is expected to raise questions about why senior managers did not act on clear warnings that something was amiss in the firm's Singapore futures trading operation, where Mr.
Leeson was employed.


U.S. Attorney Is Backed for a Federal Judgeship
Faith S. Hochberg, the United States Attorney for New Jersey, was recommended yesterday for the Federal bench.
The recommendation to name her a judge was sent to President Clinton by Senator Bill Bradley, who had also backed Ms.
Hochberg for her current job as the top law enforcement official in New Jersey.


International Briefs; Smith New Court In Acquisition Talks
Smith New Court P.L.C. said yesterday that it was holding talks with a "small number of parties" that could result in a takeover of one of the brokerage firm, one of Britain's largest remaining independent stockbrokers.
And this morning, The Financial Times reported that Merrill Lynch &amp; Company was in takeover negotiations with Smith New Court.
The paper said Merrill Lynch was aiming to conclude a deal within days.
Officials of Merrill Lynch could not be reached for comment last night.


Judge in Terror Trial Bars Several Defense Witnesses
The defense in the trial of Sheik Omar Abdel Rahman, the Muslim cleric charged with directing a terror-bombing conspiracy in the New York area, suffered what it called a critical blow yesterday when the judge barred defense lawyers from calling several major witnesses.
The judge, Michael B. Mukasey of Federal District Court in Manhattan, said the lawyers could not call experts on Islamic law.
The defense had hoped they would counter what it called the prosecution's distortion of Muslim concepts to incriminate Mr.
Abdel Rahman and his 10 co-defendants.


Bridge
Winning a first major regional title is a milestone in the life of any tournament player, and is usually followed by a long gap, sometimes an infinite one.
To win a second and third within the space of a week may be unique.
This feat has just been achieved by Dr.
Gerald Sosler, a vascular surgeon from Purchase, N.Y., who captured two Flight A Regional Knockout Team titles in Alexandria, Va., during the holiday weekend, and a third shortly afterward in Smithtown, L.I.
On the diagramed deal he held the South hand and climbed optimistically to six no-trump, as did the opposing team.
The alternative of six hearts depends in principle on a favorable heart split, which is against the odds.
Six no-trump, like six clubs, has a fair chance in the absence of a diamond lead, and opening leaders rarely attack dummy's first-bid suit.


Allies of Aristide Appear Big Winners in the Haitian Elections
Partial results from Haiti's elections on June 25 indicate that candidates from Lavalas, the party most closely allied to President Jean-Bertrand Aristide, were the overwhelming victors.
Competing for more than 2,000 offices, Lavalas candidates won 16 of 83 seats in the lower house and 5 of 18 in the upper house.
While most races will require runoffs in August, Lavalas candidates are far ahead in the majority of them.


President's Memorandum on Religious Expression in Schools
Following is President Clinton's memorandum to Attorney General Janet Reno and Secretary of Education Richard W. Riley about religious expression in public schools:
Religious freedom is perhaps the most precious of all American liberties -- called by many our "first freedom." Many of the first European settlers in North America sought refuge from religious persecution in their native countries.
Since that time, people of faith and religious institutions have played a central role in the history of this nation.
In the First Amendment, our Bill of Rights recognizes the twin pillars of religious liberty: the constitutional protection for the free exercise of religion, and the constitutional prohibition on the establishment of religion by the state.
Our nation's founders knew that religion helps to give our people the character without which a democracy can not survive.
Our founders also recognized the need for a space of freedom between government and the people -- that the government must not be permitted to coerce the conscience of any individual or group.


County Losing Official Hired To Guide It In Bankruptcy
William J. Popejoy, the business-minded chief executive of Orange County, resigned today, voicing discouragement with the political concerns that may have contributed to the defeat of a sales-tax measure he had backed to rescue the county from bankruptcy.
Mr.
Popejoy, 56, who had signed on earlier this year as a volunteer to help lead the county back to fiscal health, said in a statement that he could not accept restrictions imposed on him by the five-member Board of Supervisors after voters rejected the half-cent tax increase on June 27.


An Editorial Provokes A Debate on Intermarriage; Jewish Weekly Touches a Nerve in Connecticut
For nine years, Cheryl Krause has struggled to feel comfortable in the Jewish world of her husband and to provide a Jewish home for their two children.
Mrs.
Krause, a Presbyterian, has studied the Torah with a rabbi, played the role of a matzoh in a Passover play and prepared seders for her in-laws. ("Much tougher than Christmas dinner," she said.) It is a point of pride that her 4-year-old son, Seth, built a sand castle on the beach the other day and began to re-enact the Jews' escape from slavery in ancient Egypt, chanting, "Let my people go."


Comptroller Warns of Pitfalls in Budget
Financial gimmicks, last-minute spending and new tax cuts in the state budget will force significant shortfalls in the coming years, State Comptroller H. Carl McCall warned in a report released today appraising the new state budget.
Echoing concerns of other fiscal monitors, Mr.
McCall, a Democrat, lashed out especially hard at an overreliance on so-called one-shots, the one-time sources of revenue that he said made up $1.1 billion of the $33.1 billion spending plan.


Five Days of a Heat Wave


Serbs Start Moving Muslims Out of Captured Territory
Bosnian Serb forces seized the last United Nations stronghold in a "safe area" of eastern Bosnia today, along with as many as 40,000 civilian refugees, and swiftly began busing the women, children and elderly toward Bosnian Government territory.
In what has been a ritual of previous "ethnic cleansing" campaigns to rid territories of Muslim populations, the Bosnian Serbs separated the military-age men from the refugees and said they would be "screened for war crimes," a United Nations spokesman here said.


Crisp, Fresh, A Bit Japanese
IN the world of fashion designers who also design home collections, Todd Oldham has his flea market funk, Ralph Lauren his rooms of richly layered inherited wealth.
And now Jhane Barnes (right), a men's wear designer, has a collection for Bernhardt Furniture of Lenoir, N.C.
Ms.
Barnes is known for her intricately woven fabric designs for Knoll Textiles (her latest collection, Persia, above right, is $69 a yard).
They are available at the Knoll showroom at 105 Wooster Street (between Prince and Spring streets): (212) 343-4000.


Subsidizing the Farm Bureaucracy
Let's permit welfare recipients to form neighborhood committees and run their own welfare programs.
We'll make the committees elective, but only people in the neighborhood who receive or qualify for welfare checks will be able to vote for members.
Federal taxpayers will pick up the tab.
The committees and the bureaucrats who work for them will process all the claims and write all the checks.
If questions of fraud or abuse arise, we'll let committee members investigate their neighbors.


Test Scores Penalize Minority Student Athletes
To the Editor:
Proponents of the National Collegiate Athletic Association's Proposition 48, an initial athletic eligibility requirement that relies heavily on standardized test scores, point to a recent association study of graduation rates as proof of the effectiveness of the rule (editorial, July 7).


Diner's Journal
From Japan, Kaiseki
Early in the evening the 32 seats at Katana are filled mostly with Japanese, but as the new restaurant's SoHo neighbors begin to wander in, the crowd changes and becomes very young and very hip.
This is oddly dislocating, for this new venture by Brad Kelley (a partner in the restaurant Kelley &amp; Ping) is entirely traditional.
The intimate, understated room feels very much like a small restaurant in Kyoto where chefs turn out elegant tidbits.
The emphasis is on kaiseki, a formal cuisine associated with the tea ceremony.
While there is an a la carte menu, the waiters urge you to try one of the set dinners at $30 to $60.
These typically begin with a small salad or sashimi, progress to tempura, then grilled fish, vegetables, soup and dessert.


Merck's Drug for Bone Weakness Gets F.D.A. Backing
A new drug from Merck &amp; Company for treatment of osteoporosis, or bone deterioration in older people, was recommended yesterday for approval by the Food and Drug Administration.
Analysts said final approval of the drug, Fosamax, could come by the end of the year.
The favorable findings by two F.D.A. scientific advisory panels pushed up the prices of drug stocks on the New York Stock Exchange.
Separately, another F.D.A. panel recommended approval for sales without a prescription of a milder version of the ulcer treatment Zantac, which is the world's largest-selling drug.


Abroad at Home; Weakness As Policy
From time to time, over the years since 1945, international security experts have speculated on what the world would be like without American leadership.
Now they know.
The fall of Srebrenica to the Bosnian Serb aggressors is a signal event in world politics.
It is a devastating humiliation of the United Nations.
It calls into question the future of the North Atlantic alliance.
But most of all it points to the vacuum of leadership in the White House.


World News Briefs; Britain Begins a Test Of New War-Crimes Law
In the first test of a 1991 law giving them broad powers to prosecute suspected war criminals, the British authorities have arrested an 84-year-old man and charged him with killing four Jews in Nazi-occupied Byelorussia during World War II.
The man, Szymon Serafinowicz, is accused of committing the murders in 1941 and 1942, when, the authorities said, he was working as a local police official in what is now Belarus, an independent republic since the breakup of the Soviet Union.


In New Jersey, Nature in Abstract and a Prison Cell
Summer is the traditional down time for the art world, but New Jersey museums are offering some surprisingly intense shows.
They include a retrospective of visionary paintings by a reclusive American artist, a multimedia storefront installation on family ties by one of our most impressive Puerto Rican artists and an intergenerational homage to a firebrand political leader whom many people consider a martyr.
Montclair
Anyone lucky enough to have caught the "Spiritual in Art" exhibition in Los Angeles in 1987 may remember an odd, luminous semi-abstract painting by Agnes Pelton (1881-1961).
Titled "White Fire," it suggested stars or eyes glowing from beneath a thin stream of falling water.
It was the only work by Pelton in the show (there were six by her near-contemporary Georgia O'Keeffe), and few have been exhibited since.


COMPANY BRIEFS
HOSPITALITY FRANCHISE SYSTEMS INC., Parsippany, N.J., said it had signed a definitive agreement to buy Century 21 Real Estate Corp., Irvine, Calif., from the Metropolitan Life Insurance Company, New York.
Terms were not disclosed.
PANACO INC., an oil and gas company in Kansas City, Mo., announced it would acquire the Gulf of Mexico properties of Zapata Exploration Co., a unit of Zapata Corp., Houston.
Terms were not disclosed.


The Spoken Word
"DUEL ON THE HUDSON: THE ALEXANDER HAMILTON/AARON BURR DUEL," Museum of the City of New York, Fifth Avenue and 103d Street.
Stories about the famous duel and the events that led up to it, told by Lisa Lipkin.
Tomorrow at 2 P.M.
Free with museum admission: $5; $3 for children, students and the elderly; $8 for families.
Information: (212) 534-1672.
"THE VANDERBILTS AND THEIR NEIGHBORS," Franklin D. Roosevelt National Historic Site, Route 9, Hyde Park, N.Y.
A lecture, with film, presented by Victor Pennes, a National Park Ranger, on the south lawn (indoors if it rains).
Part of a series of talks given by rangers at the site.
Tomorrow at 7 P.M.
Free.
Information: (914) 229-7770 or (914) 229-2501.


Test Scores Penalize Minority Student Athletes; No National Exam
To the Editor:
Re your July 6 news article on a proposed national test for high school students: The intent is to create an educational system that would motivate students to study by having their academic future based on a national exam.
If a student is not preparing for higher education, there is little need to study in school since low grades and poor attendance could easily result in a high school or general equivalency diploma.


Sports of The Times; Devils' Pact Not Exactly A Done Deal
THE Devils' deal to stay in New Jersey appears to be more of a truce than a treaty.
Gary Bettman, the commissioner of the National Hockey League, opened yesterday's news conference by announcing that the Devils will remain in the Meadowlands for "at least the next 12 years," but by the time other voices had been heard and questioned, listeners weren't sure if the Stanley Cup champions would be here for more than 12 months.


Lenox Journal; Wharton Legacy? For Now, A Fight
Looking back from Paris in the 1930's, Edith Wharton wrote longingly of her life in the Berkshires shortly after the turn of the century.
The European-style estate she built here in 1902 had given her "country cares and joys," she wrote, "the companionship of a few dear friends, and the freedom from trivial obligations which was necessary if I was to go on with my writing."


The Panic And Perils Of Making Movies
"Living in Oblivion" was shown as part of this year's New Directors/ New Films series.
Following are excerpts from Janet Maslin's review, which appeared in The New York Times on March 17.
The film opens today in Manhattan.
"Living in Oblivion" is Tom DiCillo's wonderfully funny behind-the-scenes look at the perils of film making, no-budget style.
While he nominally presents the directing process as a series of hellish travails, Mr.
DiCillo captures such delicious mischief that his indictment becomes a valentine.


Hibernia Corp.(HIB,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Jun 30


2d Highest Budget Official In Connecticut Resigns
Just seven months after becoming the most prominent Democrat in a new Republican administration, Lorraine M. Aronson resigned today as the state's second-ranking budget official to take a high-level post at the University of Connecticut.
Ms.
Aronson was considered by many to be one of the state's most knowledgeable policy makers and is the first high ranking official to leave the service of Gov.
John G. Rowland.
Her departure from the Office of Policy and Management so soon may cast a shadow over the recently approved state budget.


Boy Held in Rape Is Suspect in 9 Robberies
A 15-year-old Brooklyn boy has been arrested and charged with the rape and robbery of a 20-year-old woman and two other armed robberies in central Brooklyn on Wednesday, and the police said they were investigating whether he was connected to seven other muggings in the area over the last few weeks.
The suspect, Pedro Castellano, of 929 Newkirk Avenue, was charged with rape, sodomy, robbery and criminal possession of a weapon, Officer Debra Kearns, a police spokeswoman, said yesterday.


Simon Geller, 75; Ran Radio Station All by Himself
Simon Geller, who operated a one-man classical music station in Gloucester, Mass., for a quarter-century and battled with the F.C.C. to keep it, died on Tuesday in a hospital in Rockville, Md.
He was 75 and lived in Rockville.
Mr.
Geller was born in Lowell, Mass.
After working in radio in New Jersey, he moved to Gloucester in 1964 because, he told a reporter, it was the biggest town on the East Coast without a radio station.
For the next 24 years he broadcast classical recordings on WVCA-FM, 13 hours a day, 7 days a week, offering brief descriptions of the music before playing a selection and soliciting money once every hour.
The radio's call letters stood for "Voice of Cape Ann," and the phrase became attached to Mr.
Geller himself.


Boat Capsizes In East River; 38 Are Saved
A 50-foot cruise boat capsized in the East River near midtown Manhattan last night, sending at least 38 passengers and crew members into the water, where they clung to the overturned boat or clambered into a life raft before being scooped up by the Coast Guard, the police and other rescuers.
By 1 A.M., the authorities said they believed that all the passengers aboard the boat, the Other Office, had been safely accounted for.
But eight United States Coast Guard and police boats were still searching the river, up to East 116th Street, where the pleasure craft had been towed after overturning near East 34th Street.


Keep in Mind
"JUST FOR FUN" CONCERT, a program for children with the musicians and recording artists Bill Harley, Dan Crow, Mr.
Al, Anna Moo and Dana, part of the Celebrate Brooklyn Performance Arts Festival.
Sunday at 3 P.M., at the Prospect Park Band Shell, Prospect Park West and Ninth Street, Brooklyn.
Free.
Information: (718) 855-7882.
OUTDOOR FAIR, with rides, games and food.
On Roosevelt Island, just across the street from the tram station.
Through July 21.
Hours: Mondays through Fridays, 5 P.M. to midnight; Saturdays, noon to midnight; Sundays, noon to 11 P.M.
Admission: $2 for adults and $1 for children under 10.
Rides: $1.30 to $2 each; Mondays through Thursdays, a $10 ticket is good for all rides, all day.
Round-trip tram fare, $2.80; $1.40 for the elderly.
Information: (212) 832-4540.


Commuters Try to Reserve Parking Space
While negotiators for the Metro-North Railroad and representatives of 17 unions bargained toward a strike deadline of 12:01 A.M. on Sunday, some commuters were preparing for the worst by trying to reserve parking space in Manhattan lots and garages.
Operators of several parking businesses said yesterday that they had received calls from motorists anticipating a walkout on the rail line, which carries some 100,000 passengers daily.
At the same time, Metro-North has issued contingency plans involving buses, subways, car pooling and related advice.


Price of School Cuts
Chancellor Ramon C. Cortines said that local school districts should be allowed to increase class size to 27 pupils from 25 and to shorten the school day in elementary schools.
Article, page B1.


Gingrich: Speaker, Author -- But King of the Jungle?
At the seventh hour, the Speaker came forth to protect the rhinoceros and the tiger and the elephant.
The Interior Department budget was being slashed through the day by multimillion-dollar bites in a long, often dreary session when a buzz suddenly shook the House floor.
Speaker Newt Gingrich had indeed emerged from the inner sanctum of leadership, where the budget-cutting plan was being kept on schedule, to make a rare floor appearance and speak up for some exotic animals, asking the members to spare one of the tinier budget items tagged for extinction.


Georgia-Pacific Corp.(GP,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Jun 30


In America; Renewing Black America
The clearest message to emerge from this week's N.A.A.C.P. convention in Minneapolis was that African-Americans will have to look elsewhere for the sophisticated leadership that is desperately needed to guide a besieged black population through increasingly harrowing times.
Myrlie Evers-Williams, the new chairwoman, is a decent and well-meaning person, but her organization is old and wounded and deeply in debt.
With the evil turn that American politics has taken, the outlook for much of black America is as precarious as that of a dinghy in a hurricane.
There is no time to wait for the N.A.A.C.P. to get its act together.


G.O.P. Pushes Query On Idaho Standoff
Republican lawmakers intensified their demands today for a Congressional investigation into the Federal Bureau of Investigation's 1992 standoff with a white separatist in Idaho after a veteran agent was suspended as part of the Justice Department's inquiry into whether important internal documents related to the siege were destroyed.
Senators Larry E. Craig of Idaho and Arlen Specter of Pennsylvania said that hearings on the Idaho incident should be held soon.
"We sit on a powder keg, with a lot of anxiety and anger welling up across the country as to excessive action by the Federal Government," said Mr.
Specter, a candidate for the Republican Presidential nomination.
He said Congress had been "derelict" in failing to hold such hearings.


Decision to Stay in New Jersey Has Players' Approval
From New Jersey to Minnesota to western Canada, Devils players were delighted yesterday to hear that the Stanley Cup championship banner will be raised in East Rutherford, N.J.
"This was obviously out of the players' hands, but I'm glad we're staying," said Jimmy Dowd, the center and only New Jersey native to ever play for the team.


Federal National Mortgage Assn. (FNM,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Jun 30


2 Indicted in Counselor's Death
It has been almost six months since Robert Heavey died after he was injured during a disturbance at the Morris County Youth Center, where he was a part-time counselor.
Mr.
Heavey was punched above the eye during a Jan. 3 melee.
He later slipped into a coma.
Two youths who were being held in the center on robbery charges at the time of the melee were indicted yesterday in Mr.
Heavey's death.
Kevin Harrington and Delfon Robins face life sentences.


Library Discovery Turns A Legend Into Reality
The story has assumed almost mythic proportions among law professors and students: how in 1957, the eminent Oxford legal scholar H. L. A. Hart threatened to withdraw his article on law and morality from the Harvard Law Review unless the editors stopped cutting swaths from it.
But the story was unproven.
Now, a doctoral student has found a letter and a response tucked away in the Harvard University Law School library that shows that the story was no myth.


Barnes Group Inc.(B,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Jun 30


R. E. Goldburg, 78, Connecticut Rabbi
Rabbi Robert E. Goldburg, the former spiritual leader of Congregation Mishkan Israel in Hamden, Conn., died on Tuesday at Mount Sinai Medical Center.
He was 78 and lived in Manhattan, where he moved from Hamden after retiring in 1982.
The cause was cancer, said Rabbi Herbert N. Brockman, who now heads Mishkan Israel, New England's oldest continuous synagogue.


High Proportion of AIDS Cases
The number of pediatric AIDS cases in Newark has risen from 59 to 135 over the last six years, while during the same period, the proportion of black children with the disease has increased from 76.2 percent to 83.7 percent, the Black Leadership Commission on AIDS reported yesterday.
Blacks constitute 55 percent of Newark's population, yet make up 84 percent of the people with AIDS.


Farm Boy Finding Romance in the Big City
The time-honored image of a farm boy, his head filled with romantic dreams, who moves to the big city to make them come true, may have lost much of its currency in the age of grunge rock.
But as long as there are cabaret singers like Phillip Officer, who opened a one-month engagement at Oak Room of the Algonquin Hotel (54 West 44th Street, Manhattan) on Tuesday evening, that image should remain more than a relic of a more innocent and optimistic time.
Most of the songs in Mr.
Officer's show, "Moonlight Serenade: Songs of a Summer Night," are connected to a picture the singer paints of himself as a youth growing up in a farm community in the middle of Missouri.
On hot summer nights, he says, he used to go outdoors and count the stars.


U.S. Says It Warned Wu About Earlier Trip to China
The State Department urged Harry Wu, the human rights advocate, not to travel to China last year after he was naturalized as an American citizen, warning that he might be arrested for his undercover research into Chinese forced labor camps, State Department officials said today.
In addition, J. Stapleton Roy, who recently left his post as the American Ambassador to Beijing, expressed concern that the name on Mr.
Wu's American passport, Peter H. Wu, could lead Chinese authorities into thinking that Mr.
Wu was trying to deceive the Chinese Government and that the United States could mistakenly be seen as a witting accomplice, the officials said.


Stock Market Drifts in Lackluster Trading
A day after hitting record levels, the stock market drifted yesterday in lackluster trading.
The three leading averages finished at new highs, but not by much.
On the other hand, declining issues exceeded advancing stocks on the New York Stock Exchange, 1,230 to 1,044.


Facing High-Tech Issues, New Patents Chief Is Reinventing a Staid Agency
If control of the rights to intellectual property, technological innovation and pure invention is to be a legal battleground of the 21st century, then Bruce Lehman might be called the United States' field general.
As the head of the Patent and Trademark Office, Mr.
Lehman realizes that most of the nation may not regard his obscure agency as pivotal to the success of American industry in a global, increasingly high-tech economy.
But he does, and he is determined to use his stewardship of that office to reshape patent laws that have prevailed since the Civil War.


First of America Bank Corp.(FOA,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Jun 30


Home Video
'Big' Vying With 'Beauty'
Video buyers respond to bargains, of course, but some movies on current best-seller lists illustrate how strongly consumers react when studios cut the bottom out of prices.


France Asks Allied Forces to Help Hold 'Safe Areas'
France called on the United States and Britain today to join in military operations to save other United Nations-designated "safe zones" in Bosnia from the fate of Srebrenica, which Bosnian Serb forces overran practically without a fight on Wednesday.
A statement from President Jacques Chirac's office said that if France's partners were not ready to commit their forces to protecting the besieged enclaves, France it would "draw all the consequences" and pull its 4,000 peacekeepers out of Bosnia.


Princeton Has a New Head Coach, Again
Princeton University yesterday signed LIZ FEELY, who turned around the Colgate program, to a four-year contract -- the second head coach the university has hired in less than a month.
After signing a contract on June 22, JULIE PLANK stepped down on June 30.
Three years ago, Feely, 31, inherited a Colgate team that had gone 5-22.
Colgate's 9-5 record last year was the best Patriot League record in the program's history.


Clemens Allows Rangers To Go Deep Four Times
Rangers 9, Red Sox 8
Texas built an eight-run lead on four homers off Roger Clemens, two by Ivan Rodriguez, then held off the Boston Red Sox, 9-8, last night at Fenway Park in a matchup of division leaders.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-10  FRANCE PRESSES U.S.
ON BOSNIA  France said it would pull its peacekeepers out of Bosnia unless the United States and Britain would commit their forces to save remaining "safe areas," after the Serbs overran one of them.
A1  REFUGEE TALES OF HORROR  Thousands of Bosnian Muslim refugees from the area overrun by the Bosnian Serbs arrived in another area protected by the United Nations telling stories of killings, rapes and other atrocities.
A1  U.S.
SCRAMBLES FOR SOLUTION  The Clinton Administration searched feverishly for a way to salvage to the United Nations peacekeeping effort, trying to avoid sending American troops to assist in a dangerous withdrawal.
A1  NEW THREAT FROM SERBS  Bosnian Serbs moved on a second United Nations "safe area," telling peacekeepers there that they should prepare to leave and saying they were going after a third United Nations enclave as well.
A8  BURMESE TRANSITION SEEN  The Burmese opposition leader just freed after six years of house arrest spoke in an interview of shared power in a transitional government, though making it clear she seeks a civilian democracy.
A6  FRAMING RUSSIAN HISTORY  A photographer who recorded the horrifying events of the Soviet empire, Russia's greatest combat photographer, is a survivor, but he has never profited from his work, and lives on a small pension.
A3  Thousands of civilians fled Sri Lanka fighting.
A6  An American died in the running of the bulls in Spain.
A2  South Korea said many more are missing in its store collapse.
A3  Paris Journal: But in the summer, it is not so nice.
A4  National A12-20  VOTE TO DROP ARTS MONEY  House Republican leaders agreed to cut off all Federal money to the National Endowment for the Arts within two years, a year earlier than they had planned.
A1  VOTING RIGHTS STILL UNCLEAR  The Supreme Court has issued dozens of decisions on the Voting Rights Act.
Yet the law of voting rights remains part of the Court's unfinished business.
A1  A NEW TYPE OF MATTER  By chilling a cloud of atoms, scientists have created a type of matter that had eluded experimenters ever since its potential existence was postulated by Albert Einstein.
A1  A SETBACK FOR SIMPSON  Judge Lance Ito barred lawyers from O.J.
Simpson from advancing their theory that Nicole Brown Simpson and Ronald L. Goldman were killed by drug dealers.
A12  MUCH WRANGLING IN CAPITAL  While Washington's new financial control board discussed future budgets, the city's Mayor and a leading House Republican argued over the current budget.
A12  SHUTTLE DEPLOYS SATELLITE  The space shuttle Discovery began its belated mission to deploy a communications satellite, five weeks after a delay caused by birds.
A15  PERIL SEEN IN BLOOD SUPPLY  A report said new steps were needed to prevent the spread of dangerous infectious agents because the ability of blood banks and public health systems to detect unknown microbes was weak.
A15  PUSH FOR H.I.V.
TESTING  Leaders of the House Commerce Committee said they had agreed to draft legislation to require testing of newborns for H.I.V. unless their mothers were tested.
A15  BASE CLOSINGS APPROVED  The President gave a grudging go-ahead to closing or consolidating 105 military bases.
A16  NICOTINE STEPS ARE BACKED  The White House indicated that it generally supports a proposal by the Food and Drug Administration to declare nicotine a drug.
A18  HEALTH BILL INTRODUCED  Two Senators introduced the first major bipartisan health legislation of this Congress.
A18  A TURN IN SUSAN SMITH TRIAL  David Smith, who is expected to be the prosecution's most compelling witness in murder trial of his former wife for killing their sons, may now be compromised.
A20  Lenox Journal: A Berkshires duel over Edith Wharton's home.
A12  The full N.A.A.C.P. audit listed mangled accounting practices.
A20  Law A21  Facing high-tech issues, new patents chief reinvents a staid agency.
Metro Digest B1  BOAT PASSENGERS RESCUED  A 50-foot cruise boat capsized on the East River near midtown Manhattan last night, sending at least 38 passengers into the water, the authorities said.
As of 11 P.M., the authorities believed that all had been safely accounted for.
A1  Business Digest D1  Weekend C1-26  For Children C23  Theater: "I Was Looking at the Ceiling." C1  "Lust." C2  Film: "The Indian in the Cupboard." C3  "Grosse Fatigue." C6  Music: Barry White at the Paramount.
C3  Phillip Officer.
C2  Dance: Mark Morris.
C5  Restaurants C22  Art: Outside New York, from photography to sculpture.
C16  Inside Art C24  Books: "The Inarticulate Society," by Tom Shachtman.
C26  Television: TV Weekend D17  Home Video D17  Sports B6-12  Baseball: Yanks rip Twins.
B7  Mets' Jones wins.
B9  Yanks drop coach.
B9  Columns: Anderson on Devils.
B7  Berkow on Strawberry.
B9  Football: Big $ for Graham.
B7  Howard adjusts to Jets.
B10  Golf: A miracle putt.
B7  Hockey: Devils staying.
B7  Sports People: B6  Obituaries A22-23  Simon Geller, radio station operator.A23  Editorials/Op-Ed A24-25  Editorials  Bosnia's human emergency.
Guns of Waco and Ruby Ridge.
Squatters' rights vs. city rights.
Letters  Bob Herbert: Renewing black America.
Anthony Lewis: Weakness as policy.
Kenneth A. Cook: Subsidizing the farm bureaucracy.
E.
L.
Doctorow: From here to death row.
Chronicle B4  Crossword C26


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.75
8.75
7.25
DISCOUNT RATE
5.25
5.25
3.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
5.75
5.74
4.22
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.37
5.36
4.27
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.29
5.29
4.66
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.08
6.08
7.22
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.55
6.54
7.53
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.45
7.45
8.30
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.05
6.05
6.44
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


METRO DIGEST
CRUISE BOAT CAPSIZES IN THE EAST RIVER
A 50-foot cruise boat capsized on the East River near midtown Manhattan last night, sending at least 38 passengers into the water, the authorities said.
As of 11 P.M., the authorities believed that all the passengers aboard the boat had been safely accounted for.  [ Page A1. ] NEW YORK CITY  DOCTOR FACES MURDER CHARGE
Fearing that he could lose his medical license, a Queens doctor intentionally misled paramedics who arrived at his office two years ago to treat a 33-year-old woman who bled to death after an abortion, prosecutors said as they began their murder case against the doctor.  [ B3 ] WOMAN IS RAPED ON THE UPPER EAST SIDE
A rapist forced his way into an Upper East Side penthouse apartment and attacked a 24-year-old woman on Wednesday night, the police said.  [ B3. ] POVERTY RATE IS HIGHEST IN 16 YEARS
Nearly 3 of every 10 New Yorkers live in poverty, more than at any time in the past 16 years, according to an analysis by an advocacy group using Census Bureau data.  [ B3. ] THE CRIME DROP SEEMS TO BE OLD NEWS
A news conference by Mayor Giuliani and Police Commissioner William J. Bratton to officially announce a drop in crime was dominated by other issues, including a testy encounter between Mr.
Bratton and some Bronx residents on Tuesday and persistent reports of continuing tensions between him and the Mayor.  [ B3. ] MEETING MAY DECIDE NEWSPAPER'S FATE
Amid efforts by newspaper executives to shape a business argument for keeping New York Newsday alive, the new chief executive of the corporate owner, the Times Mirror Company, visited the paper for the first time.  [ B4. ]
A City Council hearing erupted into a debate on the nature of bigotry.  [ B2. ] REGION  RAIL WORKERS IN A CORNER
With Sunday's deadline for a strike against the Metro-North Railroad looming, the railroad's workers appear to have their backs against a wall of inflexible management demands and the threat of a harsh political backlash if they strike.  [ News analysis, B4. ]
Some commuters are trying to reserve parking space in Manhattan.  [ B4. ] MOVE BY EXCHANGES MAKES DEEP RIPPLES
The plans announced earlier this week by two of the oldest commodities exchanges in Manhattan to move to Jersey City would cost New York 5,000 jobs, but for both sides of the Hudson, the implications go much further.  [ B5. ] BUDGET OFFICIAL RESIGNS IN HARTFORD
Less than a year after becoming the most prominent Democrat in a new Republican administration, Lorraine M. Aronson resigned as Connecticut's second-ranking budget official to take a university post.  [ B5. ] DEVILS PLAN TO STAY PUT NEXT SEASON
The New Jersey Devils agreed to play at Byrne Meadowlands Arena next season and for 11 more if a new lease with promises of new revenues from luxury suites and advertising is approved in September.  [ SportsFriday, B7. ] Chronicle B4  Our Towns by Evelyn Nieves B5


Democrat Won't Rule Out Sharing Power in Myanmar
Daw Aung San Suu Kyi, the newly freed opposition leader, said today that she did not rule out a transitional government in which the Burmese military shared political power with civilians, insisting that she had a "soft spot" for the military even though it held her under house arrest for nearly six years.
Choosing her words carefully in an attempt to convince the military of her willingness to compromise, Mrs.
Aung San Suu Kyi (pronounced awng sahn su chee) made clear in an interview that her goal remained a civilian-run democratic government in Myanmar, formerly Burma, but that in the meantime she might be open to a power-sharing arrangement with her former jailers.


Williams Encourages Airing of Controversy
To the Editor:
Re William Safire's July 10 column on Williams College's plans to confer an honorary degree on Prime Minister Goh Chok Tong of Singapore:


After Years of Losses, OTB Posts a $4.6 Million Profit
After years of losses caused by inflated payrolls, antiquated technology and unappealing betting parlors, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani announced yesterday that his management team had started to turn the Offtrack Betting Corporation around.
OTB officials reported a net profit of $4.6 million for the fiscal year that ended June 30, a significant improvement over the $7.4 million loss the operation suffered the year before.


Trimble Navigation Ltd.(TRMB,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Jun 30


Sloop Damaged in Fire


Mercantile Bancorp (MTL,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Jun 30


Full Speed Ahead


Colts Give Emtman an Ultimatum
The Indianapolis Colts yesterday gave defensive lineman STEVE EMTMAN an ultimatum -- renegotiate or be released.
The Colts said they can't afford his $3 million contract.
BILL TOBIN, director of operations, said the Colts will give Emtman, the No. 1 pick in the 1992 who has been seriously injured each of his first three seasons, an unconditional release today if no deal is struck. (AP)


Nashville Still Seeks Team
At least for now, the agreement between the Devils and the New Jersey Sports and Exposition Authority puts an end to speculation that the Devils would decamp next season for Nashville, which had been luring the team with a promise of a new state-of-the-art arena and sweeteners such as a $20 million relocation bonus.
Mayor Philip Bredesen of Nashville said: "I'm not going to tell you I don't want the Stanley Cup champions playing here, but I'm more convinced than ever that we will have a team in a couple of years."


Nomination Starts Debate On Bigotry
A City Council hearing on the reappointment of a controversial Bronx minister to the police Civilian Complaint Review Board erupted into a raucous debate on the nature of bigotry yesterday.
Council members angrily argued over which forms of prejudice were worse.
The debate was sparked by remarks critical of homosexuality that the minister, the Rev.
Ruben Diaz, has made.


Argentina Is Tough Test For U.S.
Hoping to show that its conquest of the United States Cup last month was not simply a fluke, the United States national team will try to secure a spot in the quarterfinals of the America Cup Friday night when it takes on the tournament favorite, Argentina, in the final match of the first round.
The United States team, which began the tournament strongly with a 2-1 victory over Chile last Saturday, lost to Bolivia, 1-0, on Tuesday after making silly mistakes and failing to recover from a weak start.


Simpson Judge Bars Use Of Drug-Killing Theory
Judge Lance A. Ito today barred O. J. Simpson's lawyers from advancing their theory, which he called "highly speculative," that Nicole Brown Simpson and Ronald L. Goldman were killed by drug dealers whose real target was Faye Resnick, Mrs.
Simpson's friend and, for a time, an admitted cocaine user.
Under a 1986 ruling by the California Supreme Court, evidence that a third party killed someone cannot be used without "direct or circumstantial evidence" tying that person to the crime.
In curbing the upcoming testimony of Christian Reichardt, a Beverly Hills chiropractor and Ms.
Resnick's former fiance, Judge Ito said the defense had furnished no such evidence.


The Lens of the Beholder: 60 Years of Photographing the Soviet Empire
It would be hard to find anyone who has seen more of this cruel century than Yevgeny Khaldei.
Born with the Russian Revolution in 1917, he was shot the next year during a pogrom against the Jews in his Ukrainian village when a bullet passed through his mother and lodged in his chest.
She died; so did her mother and the three friends sitting with them at the kitchen table.
The boy's father, beaten beyond recognition, died two months later.


Briles-Hinton Takes the Lead And Sets Mark
A mountain was over their shoulders, a deer was in front of the 12th tee and a 16-year-old invaded the leader board.
The 50th United States Women's Open met the wilderness today, and the results were minor gusts, a severe rough, sloping greens and, out of the blue, a course record score of 66.
Jill Briles-Hinton, who sneaked her miniature schnauzers into her hotel room, played miniature golf here, too.
Her putting on the Broadmoor Resort's East course was deadeye, and her crawling "miracle" uphill birdie putt on the 18th hole landed her a four-under-par 66 and the first-round lead.


Deklalb Genetics Corp.(SEEDB,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


F.C.C. Proposes Dual Use For One Part of Airwaves
The Federal Communications Commission proposed rules today that would allow new global satellite communications systems to share a part of the airwaves with a technology for transmitting dozens of television channels over microwave frequencies.
The new rules would essentially settle a dispute between businesses that want the same segment of the radio spectrum for two different technologies: a fleet of small satellites that would provide voice and video services anywhere in the world, and a new "wireless cable" technology that could be a potential rival to existing cable television and local telephone services.


Hudson Valley Crop: Portraits and di Suvero
In the Hudson Valley this summer is a range of art, from Minimalist sculptures at Bard College to contemporary Mexican photographs in Purchase to a rambunctious show of portraits at the Hudson River Museum.
This is also the summer that the sculptor Mark di Suvero was back at the Storm King Art Center in Mountainville.
Mountainville
It seems that Mark di Suvero's sculptures are everywhere lately.
A half-dozen of them are parked along the Grand Canal in Venice, their jutting steel beams neatly echoing the masts of boats in the lagoon.
Mr. di Suvero's work filled the Gagosian Gallery in SoHo this spring.
And now at the STORM KING ART CENTER , which has had a long and productive relationship with him, Mr. di Suvero has a major exhibition of small, medium and large works from the last dozen or so years, most of them since his 1985 show at Storm King.


Producer Prices Fell In June
The nation's producers received slightly lower prices for finished goods in June, the second consecutive month with no inflation at the last stage before the goods reach consumers, Labor Department figures showed today.
Economists said this latest report of price stability, which was somewhat better than expected, reinforced the decision by the Federal Reserve last week to ease monetary policy to insure against the economic slowdown's degenerating into recession.
And it suggests that there is more leeway now for the Fed to cut rates further in the months ahead.


Long Way From Home And Long Off the Tee
She has a cartoon character on her golf bag, a high school prom in her future and her name on a leader board.
Grace Park is golf's latest prodigy, at 16, and she drives off the tee better than she drives a car.
At today's United States Women's Open, she picked on women twice her age.
She dropped in an eagle putt, shot a one-under 69 and considered it all a tuneup for next month's junior championships.


Central Fidelity Banks Inc.(CFBS,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Jun 30


The Speaker Meets Generation X


A Rainbow Coalition In 'Ceiling'
SOMETHING usually fizzles when a classical composer tries to tame the wild beasts of pop.
Once domesticated, they lose their spirit.
An academic self-consciousness and reserve mute their colors and compromise their spontaneity.
They become obedient, well-behaved pets that can safely be let loose in a concert hall without upsetting (or exciting) anybody.
John Adams's music for "I Was Looking at the Ceiling and Then I Saw the Sky," a dramatic suite of 22 songs at the John Jay Theater, is the latest example.
Although the score ranges across the musical galaxy, its uneasy blend of Minimalism with pop, gospel, blues and jazz is too cerebral and cautious to catch fire.
Mr.
Adams shows that he can write a coherent pop melody, but his music, scored for voices and an eight-member pop-jazz ensemble, has little in common with the tough, embattled sounds and attitudes of contemporary pop.
Instead of Pearl Jam, Tupac Shakur or TLC, think of a more intricate but anemic 90's update of "Hair."


Test Scores Penalize Minority Student Athletes; Dump the S.A.T
To the Editor:
Re "Higher Standards for College Sports" (editorial, July 7):


Union Camp Corp.(UCC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Jun 30


Invitation To Strike:
With the deadline for a strike against the Metro-North Railroad looming, the railroad's workers appear to have their backs against a wall of inflexible management demands and the threat of a harsh political backlash if they walk off their jobs.
The last-minute negotiating differs from that of most labor confrontations.
The specter of a Metro-North strike, which would create a steamy midsummer ordeal for more than 100,000 commuters in Westchester and Rockland counties and southwestern Connecticut, is being raised as much by management as by the railroad's unions.


Last Chance
Here is a sampling of shows and exhibitions that are to close soon:  Closing This Weekend "BUTTONS ON BROADWAY," Ambassador Theater, 219 West 49th Street, Manhattan.
Red Buttons in a one-man show.
Through Sunday.
Performances: Today and tomorrow at 8 P.M.; Sunday at 3 P.M.
Tickets: $25 to $50.
Information: (212) 239-6200.


On Long Island, a Mix of Styles and Subjects
Long Island's stock of summer exhibitions should improve in about 48 hours.
On Sunday, the Parrish Art Museum in Southampton opens "Face Value: American Portraits," an examination of the last 100 years of portraiture, with more than 75 works by artists ranging from William Merritt Chase to Lyle Ashton Harris.
In the meantime, the island's art pickings are a little slimmer than in years past, though highly diverse in both form and subject.
Roslyn Harbor
The most densely packed of the shows is, hands down, "La Belle Epoque" at the NASSAU COUNTY MUSEUM OF ART .
This multimedia presentation takes what might be called the cornucopia approach to exhibition planning.
It is an unfocused if intermittently rewarding celebration of French art and design from 1870 to 1914, an era of tremendous wealth, opulence and innovation, when both the haute bourgeoisie and the demi-monde emerged as distinct and occasionally overlapping spheres.


Threat, and Resolve to Spend, In Debate on Capital's Finances
Hardly a day passes that somewhere in the nation's capital local officials are not wrangling over the city's financial crisis.
But today was unusual for the number of people involved.
While the city's new financial control board discussed future budgets at its first public hearing, Mayor Marion S. Barry Jr. and a leading House Republican, James T. Walsh of Syracuse, argued over the current budget, with Mr.
Walsh suggesting that Mr.
Barry could face Federal prosecution for overspending.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Producer Prices Down, Easing Inflation Fear
The producer price index fell one-tenth of 1 percent for finished goods in June, the second consecutive month with no inflation at the last stage before goods reach consumers.


In Connecticut, a Collector's Eclecticism
Throughout Connecticut this summer, whether along the coast, in the cities or in rural retreats, the range of significant summer shows is impressive.
New Haven
As usual, a highlight of a Connecticut art tour is New Haven.
There the YALE CENTER FOR BRITISH ART has no special exhibitions this summer, but its tremendous collection of Turners, Constables and works by other masters is worth a trip in itself.


Smith Trial Stalls on Questions About Book Deal
The man who is expected to be the prosecution's most compelling witness in the capital murder trial of Susan Smith may now be compromised, by a matter of money.
David Smith, the father of the two boys who were drowned in October by his estranged wife, must furnish Mrs.
Smith's lawyers information on how much money he has collected because of the killings, through a book advance and other means, the presiding judge said today.


Breeders' Cup Preview at Laurel
Eight of the nation's snappiest sprinters were entered yesterday in the summer's richest sprint, tomorrow's $300,000 De Francis Memorial Dash at Laurel race track in Maryland, a race that will cast a long shadow toward the Breeders' Cup Sprint in November.
They do not include Soviet Problem, who is injured, or Cherokee Run, last year's sprint champion, who is coming back from an injury.
But they do include several of the sprinters likely to compete when the Breeders' Cup is run at Belmont Park on Oct. 28, notably Lite the Fuse, who has raced so far only in New York, and Commanche Trail, the onetime "rabbit" of the star-filled barn of D. Wayne Lukas.


W.T. O'Donnell, 72, Executive Who Guided Expansion at Bally
William T. O'Donnell, who engineered the rise of the Bally Manufacturing Corporation from a manufacturer of pinball games into the world's largest producer of slot machines, died on Tuesday at his home in Palm Desert, Calif.
He was 72.
The cause was cancer, said his daughter Jane.


Hilton Hotels (HLT,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Jun 30


It Was 92 Yesterday; Today, It'll Be Hot


Seles Lawyer Appeals Parche Sentence
The lawyer for MONICA SELES has appealed the lenient sentence given to the man who stabbed Seles in 1993 and halted the career of tennis' top-ranked player.
In his trial in October 1993 and his retrial last April, GUNTER PARCHE, 41, was convicted of causing grievous bodily harm and given a suspended two-year sentence both times.
GERHARD STRATE, Seles's lawyer, has appealed the verdict and the sentence, court officials in Hamburg, Germany, said yesterday.
The lawyer said Parche should have been tried and convicted on attempted manslaughter charges. (AP)


First to Vote in '96
To the Editor:
"New Hampshire, First Again" (Week in Review, July 9) gives the impression that the people of New Hampshire will be first to vote in the 1996 Presidential selection process.


Audit Faults N.A.A.C.P. on Accounting
The full audit of 28 top officers of the National Association for the Advancement for Colored People is as thick as the Manhattan telephone book and lists a series of mangled accounting practices.
The specter of the audit's findings has haunted the organization since last year and has slowed its struggle for civil rights and its efforts to erase a $3.8 million debt.


UJB Financial Corp.(UJB,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Jun 30


CHRONICLE
What's a little divorce between friends?
After 17 years of marriage, PALOMA PICASSO, a daughter of Pablo Picasso, and her husband, RAFAEL LOPEZ-SANCHEZ, an Argentine businessman, announced yesterday that they had begun divorce proceedings, Agence France-Presse reported.
The couple, who live in London and have no children, have been separated since January.
In a statement issued yesterday, Ms.
Picasso said that she and her "future former husband" remained "joined by tight bonds of friendship and trust." The statement also said they would remain equal partners in all their business activities, which include leather goods and fashion accessories.
"We remain the best friends in the world," she emphasized.


MGIC Investment Corp.(MTG,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Jun 30


Shuttle Blasts Off, Leaving Woodpecker Threat Behind
The space shuttle Discovery today began its belated mission to deploy a new data communications satellite, five weeks after it was forced to stand down by pesky woodpeckers.
The Discovery and its crew of three men and two women bolted from a launching pad into a bright Florida sun at 9:41 A.M. after a 55-second delay because of concerns about a radio receiver on the shuttle's fuel tank.
When it was determined that the device was working properly, the countdown continued.


Gored by Bull, U.S. Tourist Dies at Fiesta In Pamplona
An American tourist was killed today at the running of the bulls in Pamplona when he was knocked down by one bull, then gored by another.
The tourist, Matthew Peter Tassio, 22, of Glen Ellyn, Ill., a Chicago suburb, was the first person to die at Pamplona's San Fermin festival in 15 years.


Stratacom Inc.(STRM,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to July 1


Bosnian Serbs Open Drive On a 2d U.N. 'Safe Area'
Bosnian Serb commanders began their move on a second United Nations "safe area" today, opening artillery fire on Ukrainian troops while continuing to forcibly remove thousands of refugees from Srebrenica, the protected zone they captured earlier this week.
The United Nations reported that the 79 Ukrainian soldiers stationed in the Zepa pocket came under Bosnian Serb artillery fire, and the Serbian commanders told the Ukranians they should prepare to leave.


Controversy Jump-Starts Yanks Again
The bats once again came alive.
The pitching was strong for the second night in a row.
There was controversy in the clubhouse.
There was even some late-inning excitement at Yankee Stadium.
This was more like the Yankees we have come to know, if not always love.
So what if it is only two games into the second half of the season?
Two consecutive victories to open a 13-game homestand just might be something that the Yankees can build upon.


Sprint's European Deal Is Cleared by the U.S.
The Justice Department today approved a bid by the French and German telephone companies to acquire 20 percent of the Sprint Corporation, the nation's third-largest long-distance telephone carrier, and for the three companies to form a global telecommunications partnership.
The approval removes the biggest remaining uncertainty for the $3.5 billion deal, and sets the stage for a broad new rivalry with similar alliances formed by AT&amp;T Corporation and MCI Communications.


Sherwin-Williams Co.(SHW,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Jun 30


Acclaim Entertainment Inc.(AKLM,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Graham to Get Two-Year Deal With Giants
Giants quarterback Kent Graham is among the best backups in the game and could probably start for a number of teams.
The Giants have always thought highly of him.
They must, because the team is prepared to sign Graham to a contract that could make him one of the highest-paid backups in the National Football League.
According to several people familiar with the situation, Graham will soon sign a two-year deal that will pay him an average of $1.1 million a year, barring any last-minute snags.
That puts him behind, in financial terms, only two other backups -- Chicago's Steve Walsh and Miami's Bernie Kosar.


Perils of a Big Name, And Worse, a Big Head
Short, bald and grumpy, Michel Blanc looks like an unlikely candidate for suffering the pitfalls of fame.
But in "Grosse Fatigue," his enjoyably spiteful comedy about celebrity, Mr.
Blanc nonetheless places himself at the center of a flashbulb-popping maelstrom.
With an outlook just Woody Allen-ish enough to register the proper chagrin, Mr.
Blanc (best known to American audiences for his roles in "Menage" and "Monsieur Hire") casts a chilly eye upon the absurdities of stardom.
And if you've ever wondered how Gerard Depardieu manages to make so many films, Mr.
Blanc has an interesting answer.
It has to do with look-alikes.
In a convoluted plot that sometimes hamstrings "Gross Fatigue," which opened on Wednesday, Mr.
Blanc, playing himself, finds a doppelganger is out to ruin him.
The double is as sleazy as the real Mr.
Blanc is self-importantly solemn.
And while the real Mr.
Blanc languishes at home in suitable movie-star fashion (he's first seen in a silk dressing gown and slippers), the faker makes hay.


Other Issues Overshadow Announcement of Drop in Crime Rate
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani and Police Commissioner William J. Bratton met with reporters yesterday to announce officially the steepest drop in crime in New York City history.
But with the news of the 31 percent drop in murder and the 22 percent drop in robbery in the first half of the year already out since the weekend, the event was dominated by other issues -- including a testy encounter between the Police Commissioner and some Bronx residents on Tuesday and persistent reports of continuing tensions between the Mayor and Mr.
Bratton.
Mr.
Bratton lectured reporters, saying that their speculation about his relationship with Mr.
Giuliani hurt the city.


A Restoration Comedy With Sex Set to Music
Nothing is funnier than sex, if you can avoid being scorched.
That's one of the assumptions of William Wycherley's Restoration comedy "The Country Wife," whose central character, Horner, poses as a castrato, the better to seduce his friends' wives and lovers.
In "Lust," a musical adaptation of the play at the John Houseman Theater that is as blunt as its title, sex is depicted as flailing, farcical burlesque.
The dialogue rains double-entendres.
Parted legs fly out from behind closed curtains.
And copulating couples give a cartoonishly lascivious spin to their quasi-operatic duets.


Godtfred K. Christiansen, 75; Covered the World With Lego
Godtfred Kirk Christiansen, a Danish executive who made Lego plastic building-brick sets into children's favorites in many countries, died yesterday at his house in Billund, Denmark.
He was 75.
He had been in ill health for a number of years, said David M. Lafrennie, a spokesman for Lego Systems Inc. in Enfield, Conn., a unit of the Lego business empire, which is based in Billund.


Atmel Corp.(ATML,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Jun 30


House Panel to Draft Bill Requiring AIDS Tests of Newborns
Despite heavy opposition from medical groups and advocates for people with AIDS, leaders of the House Commerce Committee said today that they had agreed to draft bipartisan legislation that would require newborns to be tested for the virus that causes AIDS unless their mothers had been tested in pregnancy.
The agreement, announced during a committee vote on Federal AIDS financing, heightens the chance that Congress will approve a bill requiring states for the first time to conduct tests on some newborns for the virus, H.I.V.
The Federal Government would finance the testing.


Burr-Brown Corp.(BBRC,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to July 1


Dexter Corp.(DEX,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Jun 30


13-Year-Old Pleads Not Guilty
A 13-year-old boy pleaded not guilty in Family Court yesterday to strangling a 3-year-old girl who would not stop crying.
Carmen Messano, the Hudson County Prosecutor, said it appeared that the girl, Chantel Cuffee, was sleeping in the boy's room Tuesday night, when the strangling occurred, because the teen-ager's older sister was her baby sitter.


First Fidelity Bancorp (FFB,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Jun 30


Bomb Scare at Bank
The authorities are searching for a man who used a bomb scare to rob the Provident Savings Bank in Green Brook earlier this week and who also may have tried to rob the Acme Check Cashing Service in Edison.


Bowe-Morrison at Garden Canceled
The return of big-time boxing to Madison Square Garden was put on hold yesterday, as a potential heavyweight fight between RIDDICK BOWE and TOMMY MORRISON was canceled.


Potlatch Corp.(PCH,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Jun 30


Sid Fernandez Signs With Phillies
The Philadelphia Phillies yesterday signed the veteran left-hander SID FERNANDEZ to step into their starting rotation.
He will join the Phillies in Montreal tomorrow and might start Sunday.
Phils manager JIM FREGOSI said Fernandez was ready to pitch -- and hit.
"Sid said he wants to come back to the National League," he told The Pottstown Mercury.
"He likes to swing the bat."


MBNA Corp.(KRB,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Jun 30


Paris Journal; A Breath of Fresh Air? Don't Stroll by the Seine
It has been one of France's best-kept secrets but the painful truth is out: Paris, the capital of food, fashion and fragrance, a civilized island in a deteriorating world, has joined the ranks of the polluted cities.
Pollution-monitoring equipment around the city has been showing high ozone readings for two weeks now.
But today, all of Paris heard a shocking warning when the Environment Ministry told residents for the first time ever "not to use their cars except in absolute emergencies."


2 Groups of Physicists Produce Matter That Einstein Postulated
By chilling a cloud of atoms to a temperature barely above absolute zero, scientists at a Colorado laboratory have at last created a bizarre type of matter that had eluded experimenters ever since its potential existence was postulated by Albert Einstein 70 years ago.
The creation of this Bose-Einstein condensate -- named for Einstein and the Indian theorist Satyendra Nath Bose -- was hailed yesterday as the basis of a new field of research expected to explain some fundamental mysteries of atomic physics.


Yanks Drop Connors As Coach
With the Yankees struggling to reach .500 and with only two and a half months left in the season, it was only a matter of time before something changed.
Yesterday, the first head rolled, and though the players were not very happy about it, the manager appeared to endorse it.
A month ago in Detroit, Buck Showalter had gone to the wall to save the jobs of two of his coaches -- Brian Butterfield and Rick Down.
Yesterday, when the Yankees announced that pitching coach Billy Connors was being reassigned, Showalter hardly resisted the move.


Schools and Transit Get Taken for a Ride
To the Editor:
Re "Fair Funding for New York City Schools" (editorial, July 8): Who will come to the rescue of schoolchildren shortchanged by unfair state school aid formulas?
You're right to urge Gov.
George E. Pataki and the State Legislature to "jump out ahead of the courts," which will be considering a pending lawsuit to the formulas over the next several years.
But the sad reality is that the budget just adopted by the Legislature made education funding even less fair for city students.


U.S. Spells Out Antitrust Inquiry Into Microsoft
The Justice Department said today that the Microsoft Corporation might well be violating antitrust laws by including software for its new on-line network in Windows 95, its much-anticipated operating system for personal computers.
The legal brief filed today by the department stops short of charging Microsoft with any legal violations, but it provides the most solid indication yet that the Government may try to force changes in Microsoft's new program.
The brief was submitted by the Government in defense of its demand for more information from the giant software company.


Detailing Price of Cuts, Cortines Proposes Larger Class Sizes
In the first specific outline of how city budget cuts could affect classrooms next fall, Chancellor Ramon C. Cortines said yesterday that community school districts should be allowed to increase class size from 25 to 27 pupils and to shorten the school day in the city's elementary schools.
He also said districts should have the option of eliminating aides now required in all kindergartens and to increase the size of bilingual classes to 20 students, from the current 15.


Rookie's Debut Is Radio Only
Mets fans itching to watch Jason Isringhausen's pitching debut Monday night in Chicago against the Cubs will have to be satisfied with the radio call.
Rather than airing on WWOR-TV/Channel 9 or SportsChannel, the Mets' TV homes, the game is being telecast by ABC.
All 13 games that night (including the White Sox-Yankees) are in ABC's realm, and it will beam each of them to their areas of natural interest.


Raytheon Co.(RTN,N) reports earnings for Qtr to July 2


Some Songs of the Endlessly Renewed Seduction
Barry White says the sweetest things.
"You're my everything." "I'll take good care of you." "I've never felt like this." "Forever and ever, going to see you through." He says them in a deep baritone croon or a deeper bass recitation, like someone pouring massage oil on troubled waters.
For the audience on Wednesday night at the Paramount -- mostly nuzzling couples and groups of women -- it was the soothing, virile sound of an endlessly renewed seduction.
At the Paramount, where Mr.
White is to perform tonight and tomorrow, he set out to charm the audience with come-ons customized for New York.
He recalled appearing in the same room when it was the Felt Forum; he thanked New York for being the first city to make "Love's Theme" by his Love Unlimited Orchestra a No. 1 song in 1973.


Muslims Tell of Atrocities in Bosnian Town
Thousands of stunned Muslim refugees streamed into this town in northern Bosnia today, telling of bodies left hanging from trees and littering the street after the Bosnian Serb conquest of the "safe area" of Srebrenica.
Busloads of refugees, many with just the clothes on their backs, continued to arrive late into the night.
They camped under a full moon on mosquito-infested fields near the Tuzla airport, trying to come to grips with their sudden losses.


'Sting' on Internet Leads to a Child Sex Case
In a case involving child pornography, the Internet and a self-appointed enforcer whom one critical defense lawyer calls an "electronic vigilante," a Nevada man is facing prison for crossing state lines with the intention of having sex with a 14-year-old girl he had met on a popular computer network.
The 14-year-old was really a private investigator in Milwaukee who, Federal prosecutors say, had set up the ruse because she was upset with the amount of sex-related material she had found on the Internet.


Guilty Plea in Tape Copying
A man who mass-produced bootlegged videotapes of hit movies like "Jurassic Park," "The Lion King" and "The Flintstones" in the basement of a home in Nutley pleaded guilty in Federal District Court yesterday to felony copy infringement.
The authorities said Nedal Yousef Rasheed made more than 1,000 illegal videotapes a day and earned more than $5,000 a month selling them on the streets of Newark and New York.
He agreed to turn in the tapes along with the 52 videocassette recorders he used to make the illegal copies.
TERRY PRISTIN


Developer and Creditor Bid for Olympia &amp; York U.S.A.
A leading real estate developer and the largest creditor of Olympia &amp; York U.S.A. made an unsolicited bid yesterday to gain control of the troubled real estate concern, whose 14-million-square-foot portfolio includes a number of prime Manhattan properties, including the World Financial Center.
The offer to recapitalize and reorganize Olympia &amp; York U.S.A. was made by a group that includes an affiliate of Tishman Speyer Properties Inc. and Apollo Real Estate Investment Fund L.P., which is controlled by the financier Leon Black.


He's a Prisoner, the Least of His Worries
Jon Voight, a fine actor whose film credits include acclaimed performances in "Midnight Cowboy," "Coming Home" and "Runaway Train," could use a good movie at this stage of his career.
"Convict Cowboy," Sunday's Showtime "original movie" out of MGM, isn't it.
Looking lean and tough, Mr.
Voight plays Ry Weston, a lifer at the Brownwood State Prison in Montana.
Once a star in professional rodeo, Ry killed a man in a drunken brawl.
Now keeping mostly to himself, he runs the prison's profitable ranch and, keeping the warden (Ben Gazzara) especially happy, he is the reigning champion of the prison rodeo circuit.


OTB Posts Profit
After years of losses caused by inflated payrolls, antiquated technology and unappealing betting parlors, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani announced yesterday that his management team had started to turn the Offtrack Betting Corporation around.


For Once, All Falls In Place For Mets
One game cannot erase the miserable first half of the season the Mets endured.
But if they are to earn some respect before the summer is over, they have to start somewhere.
Maybe last night was that start.
Everything that had been so elusive seemed to come easily against the Colorado Rockies at Shea Stadium.
The Mets got quality pitching from starter Bobby Jones, who ended a personal four-game losing streak, and added clutch hitting, great defense and a couple of lucky breaks to beat the National League West leaders, 4-2, in the first game of a four-game series.


Live, With the King of 40,000 Parties
"EVERYBODY knows me," Herb Sherry was saying.
"It happens everywhere I go. I'm playing tennis. I'm introduced to this guy. I say my name's Herb Sherry. He says: 'Herb Sherry, the band leader?' "
He was having lunch at the local Hilton, his summer home.
But you would not call it a vacation.
At 71, after 40 years of leading the Herb Sherry Orchestras, the man cannot stop working.
On a day when the sun can melt the sidewalk, he is dressed in a silk dress shirt and trousers.
He is holed up in an office in the hotel's executive suite, drumming up deals.
"You want a band? What do you need?"


Inside Art
Expensive in Tokyo
Ever since the Museum of Contemporary Art in Tokyo opened four months ago, it has been trying to get as much attention as, say, the Georges Pompidou Center in Paris or the Tate Gallery of Modern Art in London, which has already had a flurry of publicity even though it is not scheduled to open until 2000.
Unfortunately, most of the attention has been critical.
The city-run institution is Tokyo's first contemporary-art museum, and the cost has been astronomical.
Its six-story, 330,000-square-foot building, designed by Takahito Yanagisawa, a local architect, cost $481 million.
And its location, about 40 minutes by car from downtown Tokyo, is too out of the way, experts say, to attract many visitors.


Enron Oil &amp; Gas Co. (EOG,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Jun 30


Bloch Pleads Not Guilty
The syndicated financial radio talk-show host Sonny Bloch pleaded not guilty yesterday to tax fraud and perjury charges.
Mr.
Bloch, 58, was represented by a Federal defender at a one-minute appearance in Manhattan before a Federal magistrate.
On May 25, a judge froze the assets of Mr.
Bloch and his wife.


Bill Takes On Health Issue In Small Steps
Senators Nancy Landon Kassebaum and Edward M. Kennedy today introduced the first major bipartisan health legislation of this Congress, a bill designed to require insurance companies to cover people with existing medical problems and to enable workers to keep insurance when they leave their jobs.
Senator Kassebaum, the Kansas Republican who heads the Labor and Human Resources Committee, said in an interview that she expected the panel to approve the bill before Congress goes on vacation in August, and that she hoped for floor action this fall.


Green Tree Financial Corp.(GNT,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Jun 30


INSIDE
Nicotine Limits Backed
The White House indicated that it generally supported a proposal, made Wednesday by the Food and Drug Administration, to declare nicotine a drug, and regulate cigarette sales to minors.
Page A18.
OTB Posts a Profit
After years of multimillion-dollar losses, Offtrack Betting showed a $4.6 million profit.
Page B1.
Devils Will Stay, for Now
The Devils agreed to play at the Meadowlands for at least next season while they try to wrap up details of a 12-year lease with the New Jersey sports authority.
The deadline for agreement is Sept. 15.
Page B7.


Harley-Davidson Inc.(HDI,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Jun 25


Art in Greener Pastures, Outside New York
WASN'T it Henry James who wrote about the special pleasure of visiting museums outside the big city?
The surroundings are agreeable, the distractions fewer.
There is the possibility of discovery.
James was talking about Paris, but the same applies to New York.
This summer the discoveries are out there in places like Montclair, N.J., and Yonkers.
Agnes Pelton's art is in Montclair.
An American original whose paint ings were on view at the Armory Show in 1913, Pelton died in the early 1960's.
Her luminous and intense canvases went their own way while most American art went in a different direction, so Pelton remained largely unknown and almost never seen in New York.
She is one discovery to be made.


Times Co. Expects An Increase in Profit
The New York Times Company, citing cost cutting and higher circulation and advertising prices, said yesterday that it expected to report second-quarter earnings of 43 cents to 47 cents a share.
The range of earnings exceeded the expectations of many Wall Street analysts and would be at least 34 percent higher than last year's second-quarter profit of 32 cents a share.


Death Penalty May Be Sought, Second Bombing Suspect Is Told
A lawyer for Terry L. Nichols said today that Federal prosecutors had sent him a formal notice that the Government might seek the death penalty for Mr.
Nichols on charges that he helped bomb the Federal Building here.
The United States Attorney here, Patrick M. Ryan, said in the notification that he was seeking any information that might mitigate against a death sentence, said the lawyer, Michael E. Tigar.
Justice Department procedures require such an inquiry.


Monument Intact, From Mark Morris
"L'Allegro, il Penseroso ed il Moderato," the life-affirming communal celebration that Mark Morris choreographed to Handel's oratorio of the same name, had its New York premiere at the Brooklyn Academy of Music in 1989.
At that time, one year after it was first produced in Brussels, the work was clearly the best that Mr.
Morris had created.
The same is true today, a conclusion that does no disservice to the choreographer but validates the rightness of his magnificent enterprise.
Mr.
Morris came of age artistically with this piece.
To borrow a line from the poems by Milton in the Handel score, he found "the hidden soul of harmony" and realized a work of lasting high seriousness.


Upper East Side Residents Find That When a Rape Occurs, Numbers Mean Little
A lot of people walk in and out of the apartment building at 12 East 86th Street.
On Wednesday evening, among the tenants returning home from work, the patients visiting the ground-floor medical offices and the delivery men, there was a rapist.
He forced his way into a 17th-floor penthouse overlooking the Central Park reservoir and attacked a 24-year-old woman at knifepoint, raping her and robbing her of $400, the police said.


French Film Series
"La Totale!," a 1991 film by the French director Claude Zidi, will open the series Oui Comedie: Comedy Is Culture Too, tonight at 7 at the Joseph Papp Public Theater, 425 Lafayette Street, at Astor Place, East Village.
The series, which runs through July 27, features eight films from 1978 to 1991.
"Les Bronzes" (1978), by Patrice Leconte, is also being shown tonight, at 9.
All films are in French with English subtitles.
Admission is $7.50 a screening.
Schedule and other information: (212) 260-2400.


Dr. George G. Glenner, 67, Dies; Researched Alzheimer's Disease
Dr.
George G. Glenner, a leading researcher into the molecular structure of the protein amyloid and its relation to Alzheimer's disease, died on Wednesday at his home in San Diego.
He was 67.
The cause was systemic senile amyloidosis, said the Medical School of the University of California at San Diego, where Dr.
Glenner was a senior scientist.
Systemic senile amyloidosis is a rare disease caused by the protein amyloid, a form of which is also linked to Alzheimer's disease.


Crestar Financial Corp.(CF,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Jun 30


CHRONICLE
NINIA BAEHR and GENORA DANCEL are two women who believe they will be married in a legal ceremony one of these days, if a case pending before a Hawaii court goes their way.
The couple, both 35 and legal residents of Hawaii, are now living in Baltimore, where Ms.
Dancel is a premed student at Johns Hopkins University.
Tomorrow, they will be the guests of honor at the Lambda Legal Defense and Education Fund's 17th annual celebration in Fire Island, L.I.
The organization has joined their case as co-counsel.
More than 600 people are expected to attend the event, which includes moonrise parties at homes in Fire Island Pines and Cherry Grove.


'On Stage, and Off'
The "On Stage, and Off" column will resume with the new theater season in September.


Proposal on Tobacco Gets Some White House Backing
The White House indicated today that it generally supported a landmark proposal by the Food and Drug Administration that nicotine in tobacco products be declared a drug and therefore subject to the agency's regulation.
The proposal, which the F.D.A. has asked the White House to review, was disclosed by Federal officials on Wednesday.
It would upend the Government's longstanding position that tobacco is exempt from health regulation, and could open the way, at least in theory, to broad controls over cigarette production and sales, although the drug agency has confined itself for now to modest proposals on the politically surer ground of limiting young people's access.


Levi Strauss Associates Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to May 28


Unicom Corp.(UCM,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Jun 30


Executive's Visit May Decide Fate of New York Newsday
Another New York City tabloid is fighting for its life.
But this time there are no eccentric millionaires, no newsroom rebellions, no angry strikers outside the newspaper doors.
The paper, New York Newsday, has always been more sedate than its rowdier tabloid rivals, The New York Post and The Daily News.
So it seems fitting that, instead of the public brawl the other papers stage whenever they are in danger, this newspaper crisis is being played out in more somber settings: in executive sessions in board rooms and at quiet lunches.


Corrections
An article in Business Day on Monday about the rise and fall of the typewriter misspelled the first name of a chain of secretarial schools that still requires that speed-typing classes begin on an electric typewriter.
It is Katharine Gibbs.


No Slow Motion in the Tour
Nobody, least of all the Tour de France organizers, expected a speedy stage today after two tiring days of climbing in the Alps.
The official guide to the Tour -- known in French as le road book, go figure -- predicted the fastest time of 38 kilometers (23.6 miles) an hour over the 199 kilometers (123.6 miles) from the Alpine village of Bourg d'Oisans to the grimy city of St.
Etienne.
The slowest predicted time was 34 k.p.h. (21 miles per hour).


Bosnia's Human Emergency
Forty thousand men, women and children, their safety supposedly guaranteed by the United Nations Security Council, are now desperate, helpless victims of the latest Bosnian Serb offensive and the fall of Srebrenica.
Most of the women and children, along with the elderly, have been bused west to government territory.
The men, ominously, have been rounded up to be "screened for war crimes." Given the region's history of ethnic cleansing and torture camps, these captives, predominantly Muslims, must be considered in grave danger.
Arriving refugees report seeing many corpses in Srebrenica's streets.


It May Be Near Wall Street, But Not Shouting Distance
Since the days of sailing ships and mercantile princes, lower Manhattan has retained its position as the place where trade deals get done.
Companies may rise and fall, but the exchanges go on and on.
That historic link may now be challenged, with the plans announced on Wednesday by two of the oldest commodities exchanges to move to Jersey City.
The departure would cost New York 5,000 jobs, but for both sides of the Hudson, the implications go much further.


No Headline
"I saw neighbors dead, and it made me crazy. The first night the Serbs were in the town, we heard screaming in the streets until morning. They took women away and did bad things to them, and killed men the way you slaughter cattle." HAKA NUKIC, 67, describing the conquest of Srebrenica.  [ A8:2. ]


Kent Electronics Corp.(KNT,N) reports earnings for Qtr to July 1


When the Pen Is Truly Mighty
Cal Ripken Jr., less than two months from breaking Lou Gehrig's streak of 2,130 consecutive games, is famous for his endurance on the baseball field.
For a less celebrated example of his stamina, consider the more than 10,000 autographs he will sign this year.
The vast majority will not be the old-fashioned face-to-face kind.
Rather, Ripken signs balls by the boxload, hundreds at a time, in his hotel room or at home, to be sold at a big profit.
A trained observer from the merchandising company makes sure there is a comfortable chair or practical table.
He lays out the proper pen.
Then, as with all athletes, he hovers, quickly checking every signature to insure that the autograph is in the "sweet spot" (where the stitching arcs together), that the ink is clear and even and that it dries properly.


Enron Corp.(ENE,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Jun 30


Newspapers to Merge
The Home News of East Brunswick will merge with the News Tribune of Woodbridge to form one newspaper serving the central New Jersey market, parent companies of the two papers announced yesterday.
New Jersey Press Inc., which also owns The Asbury Park Press, acquired the News Tribune from the Bergen Record Corporation, owner of The Record in Hackensack.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball American League  CLEVELAND INDIANS -- Sent Jason Grimsley, pitcher, outright to Buffalo of the American Association.
Recalled Alan Embree, pitcher, from Buffalo.


High Marks on Environment
State Senator Gordon A. MacInnes, Democrat of Denville, was the only member of the Legislature to be awarded a perfect score on environmental and consumer issues by the New Jersey Public Interest Research Group Citizen Lobby, the organization announced yesterday.
In the Assembly, the highest scorers were Robert G. Smith, Democrat of Piscataway (88 percent), and Maureen Ogden, Republican of Millburn (77 percent), while Senator William E. Schluter (75 percent), Republican of Pennington, scored next-highest in the Senate.


Restaurants
There really are people who are perfect for the new Match Uptown.
Unfortunately, it took me a long time to find one.
That's a drawback when dining at a restaurant that is as much about ambiance as it is about food.
The moment you call the restaurant, you get the sense that you are in for more than dinner.
What other restaurant gives you a "confirmation number" when you reserve a table?
Then you arrive to discover red velvet ropes across the door and a man with a clipboard checking names on the sidewalk.
"We have a sort of bar scene," he will tell you, "that interferes with the diners. So we try to keep it down."


Altera Corp.(ALTR,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Jun 30





On Voting Rights, Court Faces a Tangled Web
Thirty years after President Lyndon B. Johnson signed the Voting Rights Act, in a highly symbolic ceremony in the room in the Capitol where Abraham Lincoln signed the Emancipation Proclamation, the Supreme Court has issued dozens of decisions interpreting this fundamental civil rights law.
Yet the law of voting rights remains, to a surprising and unsettling degree, part of the Court's unfinished business.
That was the unspoken message of the final day of the Court's term late last month, a day on which the Justices issued an important but inconclusive decision in a Georgia redistricting case and then left for the summer with an abundance of unanswered questions still on the table about the meaning, enforcement and even constitutionality of the Voting Rights Act.


Magic Furniture and a Tiny Friend
The best reason for children to see "The Indian in the Cupboard" is illustrated by the film itself.
It features a scene in which fighting breaks out between the title American Indian and his teeny little cowboy counterpart after they happen to glimpse a violent western movie on television.
We hardly needed further proof that viewers, especially young ones, are influenced by what they see.
So here's a nice film that has nothing to do with greed, comic books or world domination.
Children should be charmed by its fantasy world, and parents will be reasonably entertained.
Based on one of a series of books by Lynne Reid Banks, "The Indian in the Cupboard" is the latest children's story to have its English setting transposed to a blander America on screen.
But the real charm of this tale has nothing to do with its backdrop and everything to do with the magic around which the story revolves.
A boy named Omri is given both a plastic American Indian and a little cupboard for his birthday.
He discovers, to his amazement, that the cupboard can bring the Indian to life.
Off goes Omri into the world of secret adventure that children love and grown-ups rarely understand.


Suspended Parole Officer Talks of Compassion's Role
A New Jersey parole officer under suspension for his supervision of Darnell Collins, the parolee who went on a killing spree last month, talked yesterday about balancing punishment and compassion when handling convicts and ex-convicts.
State officials talking about the same subject spoke mostly about punishment.
The parole officer, John Goodman, spoke for about 15 minutes at his home in Pleasantville a day after being suspended for neglect of duty in supervising Mr.
Collins, who the authorities say killed seven people in New Jersey and New York last month before being shot to death by the police in Nutley, N.J.


Amsco International Inc.(ASZ,N) reports earnings for Qtr to July 2


For U.S. Business, a Hard Road to Vietnam
Like a great triumphal gateway, two newly painted, giant Coca-Cola bottles greet visitors in bold Vietnamese on either side of the four-lane highway from the airport: "Coke welcomes you to Hanoi."
There is no Coca-Cola bottling plant in the country yet -- it is on the verge of opening -- but the message is clear: American companies are here and, like the new red paint on the Coke sign, are hurrying to catch up with other foreign companies, which have been here many years.


Report Urges New Steps to Protect Blood Supply
New steps are needed to prevent the disastrous spread of another dangerous infectious agent like H.I.V. because the ability of the nation's blood banking and public health systems to identify and guard against unknown microbes is weak, according to a report prepared for the Federal Government.
During the early years of the AIDS epidemic, the nation's public health system did not perform as well as it could have to prevent spread of the virus through transfusions of blood and blood products, said the report, by the Institute of Medicine of the National Academy of Sciences, issued yesterday.


Japan Buys More U.S. Auto Parts
Japanese automobile manufacturers bought $19.86 billion of American-made parts and materials in the fiscal year that ended on March 31, an industry trade group said this morning.
The figure surpassed a voluntary goal of $19 billion set during President George Bush's visit to Japan in 1992, but fell substantially short of the auto industry's target for importing American parts into Japan.
Imports totaled $3.23 billion, compared with a target of $4 billion, according to the Ministry of International Trade and Industry.


When Medical Journals Release Findings
To the Editor:
Re "Medical Breakthroughs, on Line" (Op-Ed, July 7) by Miriam Shuchman and Michael S. Wilkes: The charge that medical journals prevent important research findings from reaching the public rapidly is flawed by contradictory reasoning and inaccuracy.


Ellis Island Succeeds As Park Restoration
To the Editor:
Re "Parks in Peril" (editorial, July 4): We agree that the national parks are in need of support and expanded avenues of revenue.
However, we take exception to your statement that "many of the park system's 22,000 historic buildings, as any visitor to Ellis Island can confirm, are simply falling apart."


Clinton Is Scrambling to Find Way to Help U.N. in Bosnia
With its Bosnia policy under fresh assault in Europe and in Congress, the Administration searched feverishly today for ways to salvage as much of the disintegrating United Nations peacekeeping effort as possible, partly for humanitarian reasons but in large measure to avoid sending American troops to assist in a dangerous withdrawal of the peacekeeping forces.
President Clinton, whose aides and whose own instincts have told him from the start that it would be political poison to get involved in combat in the Balkans, was once again faced with difficult decisions about how much the United States would contribute to a last-ditch effort to avoid or at least delay the ultimate humiliation of complete United Nations withdrawal.


ACCORD IN HOUSE WOULD KILL FUNDS FOR ARTS BY 1997
Faced with a freshman-led mutiny, House Republican leaders agreed today to cut off all Federal funding to the National Endowment for the Arts within two years -- a year earlier than they had planned and five years ahead of the Senate's schedule.
The House, mired in a daylong debate over a bill appropriating $11.96 billion for the Interior Department for 1996, did not reach a similar agreement to shorten the life of the National Endowment for the Humanities.
But two amendments wending through the House and toward likely approval would set in law the 1997 deadline for both the arts and humanities agencies.


Smith (A.O.) Corp.(AOS,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Jun 30


Sanders Now a Part of Air Marino
Wide receiver RICKY SANDERS, the nine-year pro who played for Atlanta last season, signed a two-year deal with the Miami Dolphins yesterday.
Sanders joins RANDAL HILL and the former Washington Redskin GARY CLARK as free agent receivers signed by the Dolphins since last season.
IRVING FRYAR and O. J. McDUFFIE are Miami's top returning receivers.
Sanders is eager to team with quarterback DAN MARINO.
"I can hardly sleep at night getting ready to catch balls from this guy," Sanders said. (AP)


Louisiana-Pacific Corp.(LPX,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Jun 30


More Powerful Work Station From Digital
The Digital Equipment Corporation will announce a new computer work station today that is twice as powerful as its nearest competitors, according to company executives and analysts.
The new Alphastation 600 features Digital's Alpha microprocessor, which has been leading the industry in performance since it was introduced in 1992.


RESULTS PLUS
GOLF  Freeman Has Share of Lead in Virginia
Robin Freeman, who worked as a club pro for five years because he wasn't ready for the PGA Tour, shot a six-under-par 65 yesterday to take a share of the first-round lead in the Anheuser-Busch Golf Classic at Williamsburg, Va.
Dudley Hart and Richard Zokol also turned in 65's on the River Course of Kingsmill Golf Club, one shot better than Kirk Triplett, Jim Carter and the former U.C.L.A. teammates Scott McCarron and Duffy Waldorf.
Larry Rinker made a hole-in-one with a 4-iron on the 195-yard 13th, but bogeyed two of the next three holes and shot 72.
Mark McCumber, trying to become the first three-time winner of this event, struggled to a 74. (AP)


Devils and New Jersey Call Truce and Strike Deal
The Devils agreed yesterday to play at Byrne Meadowlands Arena at least through next season and for 11 more after that if a renegotiated lease with promises of new revenues from luxury suites and advertising is approved in September.
If the deal is not completed by Sept. 15, the New Jersey Sports and Exposition Authority would reactivate its request in State Superior Court in Hackensack for a temporary restraining order to keep the team from terminating its current lease.
Both sides suspended their legal skirmish in court yesterday.


Illinova (ILN,N) reports earnings for 12mo to Jun 30


Squatters' Rights vs. City Rights
A group of rundown tenements on Manhattan's Lower East Side lived in by squatters for years may well have benefited from their occupation.
The squatters have fixed up the city-owned buildings with their own money and sweat, securing them from drug users and criminals.
Now the buildings are a vicious battleground.
New York City is trying to clear the property and sell it to a community group committed to renovating the buildings for low-income families and returning them to the tax rolls.
The squatters are resisting, on the streets and in the courts.
The city has acted slowly and clumsily, but it is pursuing the right objective and deserves a chance to proceed with the renovation project.


Midas Is Looking For a New Agency
The Midas International Corporation has begun a review on its national account, with billings estimated at $23 million.
The Chicago office of Wells Rich Greene BDDP, which has handled the account for the last 25 years, declined an invitation to participate and resigned.
"We are in a rapidly changing advertising and marketing environment, which demands marketing strategies that reach beyond traditional advertising," E. Christian Schoenleb, vice president for marketing at Midas in Chicago, a unit of the Whitman Corporation, said yesterday.
The review was unrelated to the recent departures of three top Wells Rich executives, he added.
Midas will continue its relationships with 14 regional agencies on the local dealer portion of the account; Wells Rich had handled both the national and local portions until they were separated in 1993.


The Guns of Waco and Ruby Ridge
There is little doubt that the Federal Government contributed heavily to two of the biggest law enforcement fiascoes in recent memory.
One was the disastrous 1993 Federal raid on the Branch Davidian compound at Waco, Tex.
The other was the tragic 1992 encounter between the F.B.I. and a band of white separatists at Ruby Ridge, Idaho.
It is now equally clear that official investigations into both incidents are themselves flawed.
Those in charge of these inquiries must move decisively to prevent any further erosion of credibility.
The House of Representatives will begin hearings next week into the Waco raid.
It has come to light that in the course of preparing for the hearings, Republican committee staff members enlisted weapons experts hired by the National Rifle Association to inspect a Davidian weapons arsenal held by the Texas Rangers.
The N.R.A. has little use for the F.B.I. or the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms, both involved in the Waco raid, and has tried for months to divert attention from the proliferation of firearms in private hands to the alleged misdeeds of Federal agents.
This misguided alliance with N.R.A.
"experts" has tainted the objectivity of the House investigation and must be terminated.


Market Place; Archer-Daniels-Midland stock is off, but some see a buy.
SHARES of Archer-Daniels-Midland have been pummeled in the last week after disclosures about an unusually broad and aggressive criminal antitrust investigation of the giant grain and soybean processor.
And many analysts have been warning of more trouble ahead for the stock.
"We suspect the stock could touch $11 or $12 before this is all over," said Bonnie Wittenburg in a bulletin issued on Tuesday from Dain Bosworth, the Minneapolis investment firm where she follows the company.


Corrections
A theater review on Wednesday about "The Tempest" at the Delacorte Theater in Central Park omitted the name of one composer of the score.
He is Carlos Valdez.
The review also misspelled the surname of the other composer.
He is Dan Moses Schreier.


Howard Learning The Ropes As a Jet
In 1993 and 1994, Erik Howard and Mike Fox played side by side as the Giants' starting defensive tackles.
Howard was a one-time Pro Bowl nose tackle.
Fox was a journeyman.
This year, when both became unrestricted free agents, a stunning event changed their football lives.
In March, with the National Football League's signing period for free agents only three days old, the Carolina Panthers signed Fox to a five-year contract worth $9 million, double what most football people thought he would command.


Remembering Hiroshima


Corrections
An article yesterday about the history of the United Nations-designated "safe areas" in Bosnia misstated the date of a request by Secretary General Boutros Boutros-Ghali for additional troops to protect them.
It was June 1993, soon after the "safe areas" were established, not June 1995.


Wachovia Corp.(WB,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Jun 30


What to Do When Only Villains Speak Well?
THE INARTICULATE SOCIETY Eloquence and Culture in America
By Tom Shachtman
296 pages.
The Free Press. $25.
It's no secret that articulate speech -- never mind old-fashioned eloquence and reasoned debate -- is in increasingly short supply.
Insults, complaints and psychobabble fill the airwaves, as television and radio talk shows spread a new gospel of hyperbole and anger.
Movies like "Dumb and Dumber" celebrate stupidity and bad taste, even as television shows like "Beavis and Butt-head" vigorously work to raise those qualities to new levels.
While politicians specialize in the art of the spin and the sound bite, lawyers and scientists speak in more and more specialized jargon and political correctness czars try to edit what remains of public expression.


Fed's No. 2 Is Said to Be Dissatisfied
Raising a delicate political question, Alan S. Blinder, the vice chairman of the Federal Reserve, has been expressing dissatisfaction with his job to Administration officials, leading the White House to begin looking for a possible successor when his term ends in January, officials said today.
Mr.
Blinder has long been interested in becoming chairman of the Federal Reserve.
But the Administration has been strongly leaning toward reappointing Alan Greenspan -- who is popular among Republicans in the Senate whose approval is needed for the job.
Mr.
Greenspan's four-year term ends in March.


King World Productions Inc.(KWP,N) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Trial of a Queens Doctor In Botched Abortion Starts
Fearing that he could lose his medical license, a Queens doctor intentionally misled paramedics who arrived at his office two years ago to treat a 33-year-old woman who bled to death after an abortion, prosecutors said yesterday as they began their murder case against the doctor.
Barry A. Schwartz, the chief assistant district attorney of Queens, said in his opening statement to the jury that Dr.
David Benjamin told paramedics that the woman, Guadalupe Negron, had suffered a heart attack when in fact she had bled to death while the doctor was in a separate room performing another abortion.


For Children
'Thrashathon!'
Brooklyn Bridge Anchorage  Cadman Plaza West  Brooklyn Heights  (212) 206-6674  Recommended for all ages  Tomorrow through Sept. 9
Richard and Sanford Lopez, 26-year-old twins, are street skaters who travel at night from New Jersey, where they live, to New York to work on their "verts" and other tricky moves.


Alice V. Keliher, 92, Authority On Childhood Education, Dies
Alice V. Keliher, whose experiences as a lightly trained teacher of ill-prepared first graders led her to become a renowned expert on early childhood education and a champion of giving children unreserved respect and affection, died on Tuesday at the Tucson Medical Center in Arizona.
She was 92.
A longtime professor of education at New York University, Miss Keliher cherished her unofficial title as the "grandmother of day care."


Coltec Industries Inc.(COT,N) reports earnings for Qtr to July 2


Nearly Vandalproof Hydrants; Trying Again to Beat Those Trying to Beat Heat
It has long been one of the defining symbols of summer in New York City: the open fire hydrant, gushing needed relief from the fierce heat and humidity that seems to invade the five boroughs every July.
The city, which has long sought to plug the flood of millions of gallons of water down the drain, has tried unsuccessfully to close the hydrants with valves, harnesses and shields.
But now, with water an increasingly precious commodity, officials are hoping that a new locking device will make open hydrants a vanishing urban artifact, going the way of Ebbets Field and stickball.


Poverty Rate Is the Highest In 16 Years, A Report Says
Nearly 3 out of every 10 New Yorkers live in poverty, more than at any time during the last 16 years, according to a new analysis by an advocacy group using data from the Census Bureau.
The analysis, by the Community Service Society of New York, found that 1.9 million New York City residents -- more than 27 percent -- had incomes in 1993 that fell below Federal poverty standards.
The figure has fluctuated since the group began keeping statistics in 1979, but has risen steadily since the city's economic boom began tapering off during the late 1980's.


Earl Coleman, 69, Jazz-Ballad Singer
Earl Coleman, a jazz singer who recorded with Charlie Parker, Sonny Rollins and Shirley Scott among others, died on Wednesday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 69.
He suffered cardiac arrest, said Mike Abene, a pianist who often accompanied him.
He did not give further details.


Rabbi Won't Face Charge of Bribery
Bribery charges against an Orthodox rabbi in Lakewood, N.J., and two other men were dismissed yesterday in New Jersey Superior Court.


With consumers surfing around TV commercials at home, some companies take the ads on the road.
AS more consumers "zap" television commercials, advertisers have hit on another strategy to get their messages across: if consumers won't watch commercials at home, why not take the commercials on the road to presumably zap-proof venues?
That idea, part of a strategy known as "place based advertising," went through a rocky period a few years ago.
But now, media giants like Turner Broadcasting System, the Blockbuster Entertainment unit of Viacom Inc. and Capital Cities/ ABC, as well as upstarts like the College Television Network, are beaming programming and commercials into hundreds of new venues once thought unsuitable for television advertising.


Fox Plans 'Budgie' Cartoons in a Deal With Duchess of York
The Fox Broadcasting Company announced today that it had negotiated a deal for a new cartoon series for preschool children with a somewhat unlikely partner: the Duchess of York.
Beginning in the fall, Fox will broadcast episodes of an animated series based on "Budgie, the Little Helicopter," a character created by the Duchess in a series of children's books she started writing in 1989.


Decrying Base-Closing Plan as an 'Outrage,' the President Gives a Grudging Go-Ahead
President Clinton gave a grudging go-ahead today to closing or consolidating 105 military bases.
The shutdowns, a consequence of the end of the cold war, are expected to save billions of Federal dollars but put tens of thousands of people out of work.
Furiously pounding the lectern in a Rose Garden talk with reporters, the President called an independent commission's recommendations to close two large Air Force depots in California and Texas "an outrage" that ignored the economic pain it inflicted.
He said his political enemies had made "a calculated, deliberate attempt" to turn his efforts to preserve jobs at those bases "into a political thing, and to obscure the real economic impact."


Sports of The Times; Strawberry Attempts To Do It Over Again
UNDER the provisions of house, or, rather, hotel arrest, Darryl Strawberry, the newest Columbus Clipper, who arrived Wednesday from the Class A Tampa Yankees, must adhere to a strict routine, mandated by the Federal court and administered with the cooperation of another prodigious entity, George M. Steinbrenner.
One of the few things Strawberry is allowed by law to do outside of his hotel room is swing at a baseball.
And last night he got his first chance since his modified incarceration to do so on the Class AAA level, batting third as the designated hitter for the Clippers against Pawtucket at Cooper Stadium and lining a single to center off a former Mets teammate, Wally Whitehurst, in his first at-bat.
By game's end, a 9-3 Clippers victory, Strawberry had added a prodigious three-run homer off the right-field scoreboard against Mike Harley while going 2 for 4 amid a smattering of boos transformed into cheers.


Delicate Matters of Balance
The instruments, even the hall, must match if Baroque performance is to go well these days.
And indeed, Catherine Mackintosh, Maggie Cole and the Frick Collection's small, rounded space fit together as well as they possibly could.
Miss Mackintosh played the Baroque violin and briefly the viola d'amore on Wednesday.
Miss Cole was the harpsichordist.
The hall, overflowing with listeners, resonated at just about the right rate.
Other balances are less easy to manage.
How generous, for example, is a composer to one part relative to another?
How seductive are the personalities of the performers?
Here were Wednesday's mismatches.
In most of this program, especially in the three Bach duo sonatas, the harpsichord overwhelmed.
Charles Noblet's mordant C-major Sonata was originally advertised, we were told, as keyboard music with violin obbligato; much of the Bach could have shared the same description.


U.N. Chief Keeps Promise To Visit War-Torn Africa
For the last several days, as the news from Bosnia has grown more grim, Secretary General Boutros Boutros-Ghali has kept his promise to visit three African countries tormented by civil wars that have killed more than a million people and scattered hundreds of thousands of refugees.
Insisting that he has "excellent communications" with New York, Geneva and Zagreb, Mr.
Boutros-Ghali seems intent on demonstrating that a crisis in Europe should not automatically take precedence over all others.


Slippery Going On the Trapeze
The hot weather made life high above the circus crowds even more treacherous than usual.
George Marinof, a trapeze artist, said he suffered his worst-ever case of sweaty hands during a Milwaukee circus performance on Thursday.
He and his wife, Louisa, slipped, but he was able to catch her in time.


Reflecting on Vietnam Ties, Many Agree That It's Time
A generation ago, when the Vietnam War was driving a wedge through America, Marco Scolari, a union concrete worker and World War II veteran, could scarcely bring himself to speak to any man who had avoided military service.
Back then, it seemed that passions over Vietnam might never cool, on either side.
But when President Clinton extended diplomatic recognition to Vietnam on Tuesday, a move that once would surely have ignited a firestorm, the response across the nation, in interviews with dozens of Americans, was measured, and mostly favorable.


Blues Add Courtnall to Shopping Cart
The St.
Louis Blues continued their July spending spree yesterday, signing the unrestricted free agent left wing GEOFF COURTNALL to a three-year, $6.6 million deal.
Earlier in the week, the Blues signed two other unrestricted free agents, goalie GRANT FUHR and right wing BRIAN NOONAN.
On draft day last Saturday, they signed Buffalo center DALE HAWERCHUK.


Reporting on U.N. Offers Skewed Picture
To the Editor:
Re "Sinister? U.N.'s Simply in the Dark" (Week in Review, July 9): Your statement that the United Nations' "most efficient employees are the short-order cooks in the cafeteria" is an inaccurate and uncalled-for insult to the hard-working staff of the United Nations. (In fact, these cooks are not United Nations employees; they work for a contractor.)


Vaughn Bruises Eye in Fight
Mo Vaughn, the major leagues' home run and r.b.i. leader, sustained a bruised left eye when he was assaulted at a nightclub early this morning, the Boston Red Sox said.
He missed his first game of the year tonight against Texas.
The incident occurred as Vaughn was defending a woman friend at the club after Thursday night's 9-8 loss to the Rangers, Red Sox Manager Kevin Kennedy said.


Graf Investigated Over German Taxes
Lawyers for the Wimbledon champion, STEFFI GRAF, said yesterday that investigators were ignorant of her tax situation, and the world's top-ranked woman player said she trusted her father's management of her financial affairs.
Graf, and her father, PETER GRAF, are suspected of tax evasion, German newspapers reported this week.
Authorities confirm that investigators searched the Graf family villa in Bruhl on May 23 and seized documents.


New Zealand Seeks Causes of Suicides by Young
From a distance, at least, a teen-ager raised in New Zealand would seem to be growing up in paradise.
The country is affluent and peaceful, blessed with a natural beauty that leaves poets grasping for comparisons to the glories both of the English countryside and of the rugged Scandinavian coastlines.
New Zealand should offer its young people the sort of life that most teen-agers elswhere can only dream of.


Rutgers Pays Top Dollar for New Coach
Rutgers University yesterday hired C. Vivian Stringer as its new women's basketball coach, paying her more than the men's basketball and football coaches and making her perhaps the highest-paid coach in her field.
Stringer, who compiled a 269-84 record at the University of Iowa the last 12 seasons, signed a multiyear contract that will pay her a base salary of $150,000 a year, which could grow considerably based on benefits and incentive clauses.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.75
8.75
7.25
DISCOUNT RATE
5.25
5.25
3.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
5.69
5.75
4.22
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.41
5.37
4.25
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.35
5.29
4.68
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.15
6.08
7.23
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.60
6.55
7.54
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.48
7.45
8.30
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.08
6.05
6.41
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Decade-Old New York Newsday To Cease Publishing Tomorrow
New York Newsday, a suburban newspaper's bold experiment in breaking into the largest and most competitive city market with a new type of tabloid, will publish its last issue tomorrow, its publishers said yesterday.
The paper, which emerged in the economic boom of the mid-1980's, was the victim of corporate pressures for profits and of a newspaper market that changed sharply over the last decade, as the paper struggled to build a readership from a new middle class in the city, particularly Brooklyn and Queens.


RESULTS PLUS
GOLF  Colbert Sets Record
The sweltering heat didn't slow down Jim Colbert yesterday as he shot a nine-under-par 63, a tournament and course record, to take a four-stroke lead halfway through the Senior Players Championship in Dearborn, Mich.
Colbert, who won this senior major in 1993, chipped in for an eagle on the par-5 17th and was at 11-under 133 for 36 holes, with Lee Trevino and J. C. Snead tied for second on a day when temperatures topped 100.
Trevino shot a 67, while Snead had a 68 at the 6,876-yard TPC of Michigan.
The course's designer, Jack Nicklaus and Bob Murphy, the Senior PGA Tour money leader, were in a group tied at 139. (AP)
GALLAGHER TAKES LEAD: Jim Gallagher Jr., one of the rising stars on the PGA Tour, moved to the top of leader board yesterday after two rounds of the Anheuser-Busch Golf Classic in Williamsburg, Va.
Gallagher shot a six-under-par 65, matching the best score of the first two rounds, to reach the midpoint of the $1.1 million event at 8-under 134.
Blaine McCallister's 67 and Jim Carter's 69 left them one stroke off the lead. (AP)


Reporting on U.S. Officers Skewed Picture
To the Editor:
"Mismanagement and Waste Erode U.N.'s Best Intentions" (front page, June 23) incorrectly criticized the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions and its chairman.
At meetings on June 30 and July 7 representatives of the European Union, Group of 77, Australia, Canada, China, Lesotho, Tunisia and Mexico expressed dismay at the article.
ADRIEN TEIRLINCK  Chairman, Fifth Committee General Assembly, United Nations New York, July 10, 1995


California Lottery And Equifax Settle
Equifax Inc. said today that it had settled a lawsuit with the California State Lottery, clearing the way for the company to resume work under a contract that could bring Equifax as much as $150 million over the life of the 66-month contract.
In April 1993 the lottery sued the Equifax subsidiary High Integrity Systems Inc. contending that the company had missed several deadlines for setting up lottery equipment and that the final delivered system was incomplete.


Heat Wave's Effects Will Linger on Farms
Livestock is no longer dropping dead in droves, but farmers in the Midwest expect to be suffering the effects of this week's heat wave for weeks to come.
"The real loss to the economy comes from the millions of animals that didn't put on weight, not the few thousand that died," said Lee M. Reeve, who operates a cattle feed lot in Garden City, Kan.


State Seeks Casino Offers With Hefty Guarantees
Taking an important step toward opening a casino in Bridgeport, Gov.
John G. Rowland issued a formal call today for proposals from developers that required guarantees to the state of hundreds of millions of dollars in revenue.
The request for proposals represents the latest round in a three-year-old campaign by civic and political leaders in Bridgeport to win state approval for a gambling and entertainment complex to revive their ailing city.
And again there is one central question: Will any prospective developer be able to guarantee that it can cover the money that the Mashantucket Pequot Indians would stop paying the state if they were stripped of their monopoly on casino gambling?


Godtfred K. Christiansen, 75; Covered the World With Lego
Godtfred Kirk Christiansen, a Danish executive who made Lego plastic building-block sets into children's favorites in many countries around the world, died on Thursday in his house in Billund, Denmark.
He was 75.
He had been in ill health for a number of years, said David M. Lafrennie, a spokesman for Lego Systems Inc. in Enfield, Conn., a unit of the Lego business empire, which is based in Billund.


13-Year-Old Pleads Not Guilty
A 13-year-old boy pleaded not guilty in Family Court yesterday to strangling a 3-year-old girl who would not stop crying.
Carmen Messano, the Hudson County Prosecutor, said it appeared that the girl, Chantel Cuffee, was sleeping in the boy's room Tuesday night, when the strangling occurred, because the teen-ager's older sister was her baby sitter.


Technology Issues Move Up As Some Other Sectors Slip
Technology stocks held up yesterday as many other widely followed issues posted losses.
The Nasdaq composite index, laden with technology issues, ended higher, while the Dow Jones industrial average and the Standard &amp; Poor's 500-stock index declined.
"The technology sector came back from early weakness," said Ricky Harrington, senior vice president of Interstate/Johnson Lane, a securities firm in Charlotte, N.C.
"And most of those issues have yet to report their earnings."


High Proportion of AIDS Cases
The number of pediatric AIDS cases in Newark has risen from 59 to 135 over the last six years, while during the same period, the proportion of black children with the disease has increased from 76.2 percent to 83.7 percent, the Black Leadership Commission on AIDS reported yesterday.
Blacks constitute 55 percent of Newark's population, yet make up 84 percent of the people with AIDS.


Juice Wars: The Squeeze Is On; Snapple Looks Back to See Coke and Pepsi Gaining
The cola wars were hot, but the juice wars are hotter.
Two of the biggest players in the exploding market for juices are the big rivals from the cola wars: Coke and Pepsi.
Though they miscalculated the depth of America's thirst for "new age" juice drinks pioneered by the Snapple Beverage Corporation, they are now catching up with Snapple and quirky innovators like Arizona.


Grant for Homeless Projects
About $26.7 million in Federal grants to move the homeless from city streets to decent housing and improve job training and mental health services were announced yesterday at the Federal Department of Housing and Urban Development's offices here.
The grants, earmarked for homeless projects of 13 organizations and municipalities, include $7.5 million to the city of Paterson, $6 million to the state's Department of Community Affairs offices in Jersey City, $3.7 million to the Y.M.C.A. of Passaic-Clifton and $3 million to the Douglass-Harrison Housing Corporation in Newark.


All Aboard for Cataclysm And Just Forget the Bar Car
With his hard-boiled squint, several Supermen's worth of slicked-back hair and a voice that rarely rises above a craggy whisper, Steven Seagal is an action-hero to gratify the wildest middle-aged male fantasies of indestructibility.
In "Under Siege 2: Dark Territory," the sequel to his runaway hit of three years ago, the actor's invincible alter ego, Casey Ryback, returns to do battle with Travis Dane, a monstrous computer nerd portrayed with a grinning, glassy-eyed relish by Eric Bogosian.
Most of the action takes place on the Grand Continental train, as it speeds from Denver to Los Angeles.
Early in the film, which opened yesterday, Dane and a band of mercenaries hijack the train and turn it into a computer command center.
From there they seize control of a United States satellite armed with a particle destroyer that Dane, a former Government scientist, invented before he was fired.


Talks on Beach Party Restraints
Facing criticism over the police shutdown of streets and diversion of cars last Sunday during the annual Greekfest beach party by thousands of black fraternity members, the Mayor and police officials are scheduling more meetings with civil rights organizations.
Mayor Kenneth E. Pringle said the police were motivated only by traffic and crowd control concerns when they turned away nonresidents, but some black organizations are calling it racial discrimination.
"There are two sets of interests here that are hard to reconcile. There is some resentment on both sides," the Mayor said yesterday.


The Little Operetta Trying to Be an Opera
By 1885, when Johann Strauss Jr., then 60, composed "Der Zigeunerbaron" ("The Gypsy Baron"), he was completely bored with his enormous popularity as the "Waltz King." For 15 years he had been turning out operettas.
And though he had one solid hit, "Die Fledermaus," most of his stage works had short-lived success.
He usually wound up lifting the waltz tunes and recycling them for use by the family dance band.
But "The Gypsy Baron" was Strauss's attempt to write a work with more musical depth.
Though still indisputably an operetta, with its spoken dialogue, frothy waltzes and a comic story of a dispossessed Hungarian landowner's son who hopes to reclaim his land from a band of Gypsies, Strauss pushed this operetta in the direction of opera.


Journal; Such Stuff as Dreams
The moon hanging right over the stage wasn't quite full.
Not everything can be perfect.
But for a vision of ecstasy in New York City, it would be hard to top the scene in Central Park last Sunday night as 1,900 people watched "The Tempest."
The tickets were free.
The performance transformed an urban patch of green into an island paradise, carpeted in sand and bewitched by apparitions.
And there was Patrick Stewart as Prospero: as the old magician finally gave up his powers at evening's end, the actor pointedly spoke the final verses of Shakespeare's valedictory play without a microphone.
Mr.
Stewart's metallic baritone, nurtured at England's Royal Shakespeare Company and known to Americans from "Star Trek: The Next Generation," carried effortlessly -- even though the house is as large as any Broadway barn, with an acoustically worthless canopy of stars for a roof.


U.S. Weighs a Response To French Call on Bosnia
President Clinton's senior national security advisers huddled for more than two hours today but failed to produce a response to the French challenge to the United States and Britain to increase their involvement in the faltering United Nations peacekeeping effort in Bosnia.
Instead, despite a growing Bosnian Serb offensive, Mr.
Clinton ordered Gen.
John Shalikashvili, Chairman of the the Joint Chiefs of Staff, to attend a meeting of defense ministers in London on Sunday to listen to the French explain their proposal in more detail and to search for an allied policy.


Frustrated Croats Are Openly Preparing a Major Assault on a Serbian Enclave
As the United Nations peacekeeping mission in Bosnia reels from fresh attacks by rebel Serbs, the Government of Croatia is planning to open a major new front in the Balkan war.
Increasingly frustrated at the failure of diplomacy to recover the large chunk of their country that has been occupied by Serbian rebels since 1991, Croatian leaders are urgently preparing a major attack on the Serbian enclave.


County Clerk Convicted in Graft
Michael S. Keating, the Camden County Clerk, was convicted yesterday of taking $173,000 in bribes over 15 years from two printers of election ballots.
Mr.
Keating, 55, faces a minimum of seven years in prison when he is sentenced in September.
JOE SHARKEY


Heat and Rare Wetness Add Up to Misery
Heat waves come and go at this time of year, but the one now engulfing the Northeast after tormenting the country's midsection all week stands out in one respect: Seldom are temperatures this high accompanied by such high humidity.
"It's just an unbelievably juicy air mass," said Colin Marquis, a meteorologist at the Pennsylvania State University Weather Communications Group.
"The humidity is as high as we've ever seen in a very warm summer air mass this far north of the Gulf of Mexico for many, many years."


Observer; You in There, Bob?
Bob Dole was on television the other night doing his darnedest not to look like Bob Dole.
You could see, though, that it wasn't easy.
Under attack, he is afflicted with an instinct for the crushing rebuttal.
This night he was having a hard time keeping his thermostat low.
Having been anointed "front-runner" for the Republican nomination, Dole is everybody's target for destruction.
The media will need to get rid of him by next winter in order to spin their entertaining horse-race tale of upsets, crippled front-runners, new faces, all the usual hocus-pocus.


Intuit Signs 19 Deals for Home-Banking Software
Intuit Inc. announced yesterday that 19 financial institutions, including many of the nation's largest banks, credit card companies and brokerage firms, would use its popular Quicken software for home banking services beginning this fall.
The move signals the company's intent to compete aggressively with the Microsoft Corporation after the collapse in May of plans for the two companies to merge.


CHRONICLE
Earth is starting to feel a lot more normal for Dr.
NORMAN E. THAGARD, the American astronaut who returned a week ago from Russia's Mir space station after spending 115 days in orbit, a United States record.
He is still a little weak and has to stop to catch his breath occasionally, but he has regained some of the 30 pounds he lost in space, The Associated Press reported yesterday.


Mexican Bailout Defended Amid G.O.P. Criticism
Top Treasury officials today defended the American-led bailout of Mexico last winter as a success, but Congressional Republicans criticized the Administration for lending more money to Mexico this summer.
Treasury Secretary Robert E. Rubin and Lawrence H. Summers, the Under Secretary of the Treasury for International Affairs, told the Senate Banking Committee that the Treasury's $20 billion line of credit was essential in preventing a financial crisis in Mexico and elsewhere in Latin America that would have threatened economic growth and national security in the United States.


Outside Counsel May Yet Look at Gingrich
The House ethics committee may yet seek an outside counsel to help it look into complaints against Speaker Newt Gingrich, the committee's chairwoman says.
In an interview on Thursday, the chairwoman, Representative Nancy L. Johnson, Republican of Connecticut, also said the committee's decision not to hold a formal preliminary inquiry on Mr.
Gingrich by creating a subcommittee of investigation, a step its rules apparently require, had been made out of concern for efficiency and consensus.


Rail Talks Incite Debate On Strike Law
Negotiations between the Metro-North Railroad and 17 of its unions intensified yesterday, but officials on both sides of the dispute said they were far from a contract settlement.
The unions are threatening to strike as early as 12:01 tomorrow morning.
As negotiations continued, a political skirmish broke out between Gov.
George E. Pataki, who has used the threat of a Metro-North strike to call for a change in Federal labor law, and Representative Nita M. Lowey of Westchester County, who accused the Governor of holding Metro-North commuters hostage to a Congressional debate.


Bridge
One of the most entertaining bridge books published in recent years is "The Kings' Tales," by Phillip and Robert King.
It is available for $19.50 including mailing from The Bridge World, 39 West 94th Street, New York 10025.
Each of the 30 tales is a plausible parody of a well-known writer.
Some are bridge specialists, like Matthew Granovetter, Mike Lawrence, Victor Mollo, Skid Simon and Terence Reese.
More widely known victims are Ambrose Bierce, Raymond Chandler, Noel Coward, Arthur Conan Doyle, Kenneth Grahame, Ernest Hemingway, Henry James, Damon Runyon and P. G. Wodehouse.


For Refugees, Grief; For Diplomats, Talk
Propelled by the continuing Serb drive across eastern Bosnia, thousands of terrorized Muslims overwhelmed ill-prepared aid workers in Tuzla.
They camped in open fields, begging food and water and wailing over the fates of men taken away by Bosnian Serb forces.


Transactions
Baseball  American League BALTIMORE ORIOLES -- Activated Ben McDonald, pitcher, from the 15-day disabled list.
Sent Joe Borowski, pitcher, to Rochester of the International League.
CLEVELAND INDIANS -- Released Bud Black, pitcher.
Called up Albie Lopez, pitcher, from Buffalo of the American Association.
MILWAUKEE BREWERS -- Placed Joe Oliver, catcher, on the 15-day disabled list.
SEATTLE MARINERS -- Signed Norm Charlton, pitcher.
National League ST.
LOUIS CARDINALS -- Placed Mike Morgan, pitcher, on the 15-day disabled list.
Activated Donovan Osborne, pitcher, from the 15-day disabled list.


Torrid Heat, Intensifying, Grips Region
The scourge of heat that killed at least 15 people and thousands of cattle in the Midwest descended upon the New York area yesterday, bringing a high-misery combination of near-record temperatures in the mid-90's and the heavy wetness of a tropical rain forest.
The regionwide steam bath was expected to intensify today.
Because warmer air has a greater capacity for moisture, today's high humidity levels will represent the highest moisture content detected at these latitudes in recent years, meteorologists said.
Conditions will begin to ease on Sunday.


More French Fireworks For Jalabert's Victory
Laurent Jalabert lived the dream of every French bicycle racer in the Tour de France today, winning the daily stage on Bastille Day as the national holiday was celebrated with parades, dances, fireworks and enormous crowds at the sides of the road.
Here in Mende, deep in the heartland and no doubt across the country, people cheered and hugged each other in the joy of being French and seeing a Frenchman win on Bastille Day for the first time in six years.


Vaughn Bruises Eye in Fight
Mo Vaughn, the major leagues' home run and r.b.i. leader, sustained a bruised left eye when he was assaulted at a nightclub early this morning, the Boston Red Sox said.
He missed his first game of the year tonight against Texas.
The incident occurred as Vaughn was defending a woman friend at the club after Thursday night's 9-8 loss to the Rangers, Red Sox Manager Kevin Kennedy said.


Royals Put Wandering Lind on Waivers
The Kansas City Royals yesterday asked waivers on their wandering second baseman, JOSE LIND.
Lind, the 1992 Gold Glove winner for the Pittsburgh Pirates, hasn't played since June 2 when he left the Royals without notifying team officials.
He said wants to play again, preferably in Kansas City, but Manager BOB BOONE and other team officials have consistently said they don't want him back.
"I like it here a lot," Lind said from his suburban Kansas City, Mo., home.
"But it didn't work out. Hopefully, somebody will take me."


Mitchell Reported Returning to Japan
KEVIN MITCHELL will return to Japan next week after a controversial two-month hiatus, according to a news report in Tokyo.
Mitchell, a former National League most valuable player and the highest-paid player ever in Japan at about $4 million a year, left the Fukuoka Daiei Hawks for the United States in May for treatment of a knee injury.
Hawks officials had disputed the seriousness of the injury. (AP)


Violence Grows Against Ranchers
To the Editor:
Jeff DeBonis, in his July 7 Op-Ed article, suggests that recent violence against Federal office buildings in the West is the work of local officials and Western commodity producers.
His comments focus on cattle ranching.


Ames Spy Case Was 'Terrible Exception,' Clinton Says


CHRONICLE
GEORGE BUSH and his wife, BARBARA, will travel to Japan in mid-September to address the Women's Federation for World Peace.
The federation was founded by the Rev.
Sun Myung Moon, the founder of the Unification Church, and his wife, Hak Ja Han Moon.
According to The Washington Times, the conservative daily newspaper started by Mr.
Moon, the federation "is dedicated to broadening the understanding of cultures as a means of promoting world peace."


After Years Of Fighting Big Losses, A Retreat
When New York Newsday's final issue rolls off the press tomorrow, it will have lasted 10 years, 3 months and 1 day.
Begun with expectations that it would outlive at least one of its competitors, it will be survived by the same three newspapers that it squared off against on Day 1: The Daily News, The New York Post and The New York Times.
For most of its life, New York Newsday was the scrappy fourth newspaper in a city that many analysts said could support only two: The Times and one of the tabloids.


Can Alternative Medicine Heal? Trials Will Tell
To the Editor:
Robert L. Park, in "The Danger of Voodoo Science" (Op-Ed, July 9), may be right that Western scientific methods are underappreciated.
But he weakens his argument with invidious critiques of alternative viewpoints and practices, calling them "nincompoopery" and "foolishness."


After Blunt Notice, Newsroom Is in Shock at a Wake for Itself
"I don't know what to say," said Murray Kempton, surely for the only time in his decades of newspapering.
"I'm at a loss for words."
The Pulitzer prize-winning columnist, whose baroque sentences have adorned a succession of the city's newspapers, dazzling and delighting, looked sadly around the newsroom of New York Newsday, where stunned reporters, editors and photographers were trying to console one another over the brief, blunt announcement that the owners were folding the scrappy paper.


Retired Police Chief Is Killed in a Cemetery Holdup
A retired police chief from Hanover, N.J., was shot to death yesterday in a Newark cemetery while trying to help an elderly friend who had been set upon by robbers, the police said..
The victim, John Deventer, 65, who retired only last fall from the department he had headed for 14 years, had driven two friends to Fairmount Cemetery on Central Avenue, where the shooting occurred about 11:15 A.M.


President Is Said to Endorse Most of Affirmative Action
President Clinton briefed leaders of civil rights groups today on his five-month review of affirmative action programs, and people who attended the meeting predicted that Mr.
Clinton would vigorously defend most such programs in a speech next week.
But Administration officials said Mr.
Clinton might suggest changes in some purchasing programs that reserve Federal contracts for companies owned by blacks or women.
Under a proposal being considered by the President, they said, eligibility for such programs could be expanded to include businesses that locate in poor areas, even if the companies were owned by whites.


County Clerk Convicted in Graft
Michael S. Keating, the Camden County Clerk, was convicted yesterday of taking $173,000 in bribes over 15 years from two printers of election ballots.
Mr.
Keating, 55, faces a minimum of seven years in prison when he is sentenced in September.
JOE SHARKEY


Echoes of the Big Bang; The Bomb Imposed Its Own Peace
Just before dawn on July 16, 1945 50 years ago tomorrow -- the first atomic bomb exploded on a tower in the high desert north of Alamogordo, N.M., at a place code-named Trinity.
"A new thing had just been born," said the physicist I. I. Rabi, who was there, "a new control." Released nuclear energy, Dr.
Rabi thought, was a new power "which man had acquired over nature," but he also believed that it would result in a "new understanding of man."
In the long run, the new power demonstrated at Trinity changed the conditions that had made it possible to shed the blood of nations in world wars.


A Quiet Evening River Cruise Became a Terrifying Adventure
The printed invitations promised a relaxing river cruise, a quiet night on the water under the city's shimmering lights.
And it began just that way.
At about 6:30 P.M.
Thursday, 33 guests from the midtown law firm of Fish &amp; Neave climbed aboard the Other Office, a 46 1/2-foot cabin cruiser, at the North Cove Marina in Battery Park City in lower Manhattan.
On the boat, a caterer had laid out a six-foot hero sandwich, potato salad, cole slaw and drinks.
There was a magician on board and a portrait artist.


Talks on Beach Party Restraints
Facing criticism over the police shutdown of streets and diversion of cars last Sunday during the annual Greekfest beach party by thousands of black fraternity members, the Mayor and police officials are scheduling more meetings with civil rights organizations.
Mayor Kenneth E. Pringle said the police were motivated only by traffic and crowd control concerns when they turned away nonresidents, but some black organizations are calling it racial discrimination.
"There are two sets of interests here that are hard to reconcile. There is some resentment on both sides," the Mayor said yesterday.


Indian Music and Dance
A program of Indian music and dance is to be presented by Ananda Shankar and his company tomorrow at 5 P.M. at Colden Center, Queens College, Kissena Boulevard and the Long Island Expressway, Flushing.
Mr.
Shankar is the son of Uday and Amala Shankar, the dancers, and the nephew of Ravi Shankar, the sitarist.
The program, which features the dance-drama "Mrignayani," is being produced by the Bengali Association of North America and the Nav Nirmaan Foundation, which helps South Asians living in the United States.


School Plan Faulted  Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani said yesterday that the Board of Education had to work harder to cut its bureaucracy and look for volunteer help before increasing class size or shortening school days. The Mayor lashed out at a plan from Schools Chancellor Ramon C. Cortines that local districts be given authority to reduce the school week to 26 hours from 27 1/2 and to increase the size of some classes to 27 from 25.     Article, page 25.


Grant for Homeless Projects
About $26.7 million in Federal grants to move the homeless from city streets to decent housing and improve job training and mental health services were announced yesterday at the Federal Department of Housing and Urban Development's offices here.
The grants, earmarked for homeless projects of 13 organizations and municipalities, include $7.5 million to the city of Paterson, $6 million to the state's Department of Community Affairs offices in Jersey City, $3.7 million to the Y.M.C.A. of Passaic-Clifton and $3 million to the Douglass-Harrison Housing Corporation in Newark.


Ringo Starr's Fans Look Back and Sing
As the popular rock music of decades past turns into nostalgia, its vision, passion and ability to inspire change often wear away.
What's left are just songs, stripped of meaning but full of familiarity.
On Thursday night at Radio City Music Hall, the former Beatles drummer Ringo Starr gathered a mixed bag of rockers from the 1960's and 70's to perform together as Ringo Starr and His All-Starr Band.
The concert was fun, with each member of the band belting out one of his former hits in round-robin style.
Mr.
Starr turned "Yellow Submarine" into a sing-along; the guitarist Randy Bachman of Bachman-Turner Overdrive turned "Takin' Care of Business" into a sing-along, and the former Grand Funk Railroad guitarist Mark Farner turned "The Loco-Motion" into a sing-along.


Data Suggest Turnaround For Economy
Fresh Government figures today lent strong support to the notion that the slow economy of recent months is heading for better times, not a recession.
Fears of recession ebbed as the Commerce Department reported that consumers spent less warily this spring than had been thought.
Retail sales were up an estimated seven-tenths of 1 percent in June on top of a gain of nine-tenths of 1 percent in May, which was originally reported as a rise of just two-tenths.


2 Indicted in Counselor's Death
It has been almost six months since Robert Heavey died after he was injured during a disturbance at the Morris County Youth Center, where he was a part-time counselor.
Mr.
Heavey was punched above the eye during a Jan. 3 melee.
He later slipped into a coma.
Two youths who were being held in the center on robbery charges at the time of the melee were indicted yesterday in Mr.
Heavey's death.
Kevin Harrington and Delfon Robins face life sentences.


Parolee Is Arrested for a Rape In Upper East Side Apartment
A 24-year-old Manhattan man paroled less than a month ago from a Federal penitentiary was arrested yesterday at his mother's apartment on the Lower East Side and accused of raping a young woman Wednesday night in her penthouse apartment off Fifth Avenue.
The suspect was identified by the police as Raymond Clyde of 286 South Street, who was released on June 30 from a prison in Lewisburg, Pa., where he was serving concurrent four-and-a-half-year Federal and state sentences for robbery and the sale of heroin.


Newspapers to Merge
The Home News of East Brunswick will merge with the News Tribune of Woodbridge to form one newspaper serving the central New Jersey market, parent companies of the two papers announced yesterday.
New Jersey Press Inc., which also owns The Asbury Park Press, acquired the News Tribune from the Bergen Record Corporation, owner of The Record in Hackensack.


Buchanan Challenges Gramm to Debate
Raw Presidential politics intruded on the Republican Party's hopes for a harmonious summer meeting here today as Patrick J. Buchanan challenged Senator Phil Gramm of Texas to a televised debate over who is the true conservative seeking the party's nomination.
That prompted a third contender, Senator Richard G. Lugar of Indiana, to jump into the crossfire, presenting himself as the voice of civility and warning that such rivalries are no way to attract voters.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 2-5  BOSNIAN SERBS MOVE ON ZEPA  Ignoring international condemnation and Western threats of retaliation, Bosnian Serb forces began an attack on the Muslim enclave of Zepa in eastern Bosnia. 1  Terrorized Bosnian Muslims overwhelmed aid workers in Tuzla. 4


Editors' Note
An article on July 10, in the "Fine Print" series about legislation, described the drafting of a law on taxing Americans who become citizens of other countries.
The proposed law allows an American who takes the citizenship of a spouse's or parent's native country to apply for an exemption to the expatriates' tax.


Don't 'Throw Until You Die'
Two decades after Commodore Matthew Perry forced Japan out of isolation in 1854, the Japanese started playing baseball.
This year Hideo Nomo, the 26-year-old imported pitching star of the Los Angeles Dodgers, has emerged to remind Americans that Japan's longstanding baseball pretensions must be taken seriously.
By instantly becoming one of the best pitchers in the National League, Nomo has enlivened and internationalized the game in a sullen year.
The secret of his success may be instructive.
When he was pitching for the Kintetsu Buffaloes, a team based in Osaka and owned by a railroad company, Nomo led his league in strikeouts and victories.
But his team was rarely on television and he played in relative obscurity.
The only real fame he gained stemmed from his decision to quit and join the Dodgers.
Denounced then as an ingrate and a traitor, Nomo is today a bigger hero in Japan than he would have been had he remained.
Some are claiming that his performance shows the superiority of Japanese baseball techniques.


No Headline
"It's time to let it go and move on. We shouldn't be paralyzed by our past." -- JOHN ADAMS, an auto sales manager in Joliet, Ill., on recognizing Vietnam.  [ 1:4. ]


SERB FORCES SHELL U.N. PEACEKEEPERS AT 2d 'SAFE' AREA
Ignoring international condemnation and Western threats of retaliation, Bosnian Serb forces began an attack on another Muslim enclave in eastern Bosnia today, hours after they completed the "ethnic cleansing" of a nearby Muslim area overrun on Wednesday.
The new attack's target was the town of Zepa, which has an estimated 10,000 to 20,000 Muslim residents and 79 Ukrainian peacekeepers who were deployed to protect its status as a "safe area."


Chaos Looms as Rwandans Refuse to Go Home
A year after an exodus of a million Rwandans flooded the plains around Goma, more than 720,000 Hutu refugees remain in camps in the area, many of them afraid to return, others rearming and preparing for a military offensive against the Tutsi-led Government in Rwanda.
The refugees here are Hutu who fled the advancing Tutsi rebel army that took control of Rwanda last year.
They include tens of thousands of soldiers, militiamen, civil servants and farmers who took part in the killing of at least 500,000 Tutsi and a small number of moderate Hutu politicians.


Sweat Equity
Whine, whine, whine.
Why do New Yorkers complain so much about the heat?
As dwellers in the temperate zone, they must -- all but the most recent arrivals -- be accustomed by now to the fact that some days in winter will be excruciatingly cold and some days in summer will be stifling.
And while we cannot claim scientific certainty for this, we are under the firm impression that the heat causes more consternation than the cold.
Why is this?
We cannot say for sure, but we can offer a hypothesis.
Men are at a greater disadvantage in the heat, due to their dress requirements, and men are bigger whiners.
For most of the year they are spoiled, comfortwise.
They do not have to deal with silly shoes that make them walk funny, trousers without pockets, hair spray or pantyhose.
Their business uniform normally makes sense.


New Spokeswoman for Whitman
Shaking up her communications staff 18 months into her administration, Governor Whitman named a new press secretary: Becky Taylor, until yesterday the public affairs director for Attonrey General Deborah T. Poritz.
Rita Manno, a former reporter who joined the Whitman staff at the start of the Governor's term in 1994, was asked to step aside and has not yet decided whether to accept other posts offered to her, aides said.
Ms.
Taylor's new job pays $84,500, the same as her old one.


Louise Reinhardt Smith, 91, Patron of the Modern, Is Dead
Louise Reinhardt Smith, a discerning collector of modern art and a prized supporter of the Museum of Modern Art since 1957, died on Thursday at her home in Manhattan.
She was 91.
Ms.
Smith was one of the last of the strong-willed and independent-minded collectors whose activity was indispensable to the Museum of Modern Art at a time when there was still much new ground to be broken for its core collections.


Giants Sign Running Back
The Giants have signed another draft pick, running back Charles Way, according to his agent, Sean Holley.
Though the Giants have not officially announced the signing, the addition of Way, a sixth-round pick, means the team has signed two of its nine picks and should have most if not all of them signed by the end of next week -- just in time for the beginning of training camp on July 23.


Federal Chill Is Felt By Those in the Arts
For some time now, arts groups around the country have been bracing for big cuts in Federal spending on the arts.
But few were prepared for Thursday's move by Republicans in the House of Representatives to shut down the national arts and humanities endowments altogether within the next two years.
While the outcome of the House's actions remains unclear -- the proposals must first pass the entire House and then the Senate -- the mere fact that the abolition of the endowments had come to a vote jolted many arts groups into grappling with the unthinkable: life without Federal money.


Corrections
An article in Business Day on Thursday about the appointment of Karen L. Katen as president of the United States pharmaceutical unit of Pfizer Inc. misspelled the surname of another top woman executive in the pharmaceutical industry, the vice president and general counsel of Eli Lilly &amp; Company.
She is Rebecca O. Goss, not Gross.


Revivim Journal; Bedouins' Fate: No Room for Tents in the Desert
Ali Lawaji could not have looked more late 20th century as he drove along the desert sands, dropping a hand from the wheel to answer his cellular phone and talk about how his children need a computer to help them in their studies.
But Mr.
Lawaji's soul is as old as the history of the Negev, where he was born 32 years ago.
He is a goatherd -- "a profession," he says, "that you can't walk away from."


Guilty Plea in Tape Copying
A man who mass-produced bootlegged videotapes of hit movies like "Jurassic Park," "The Lion King" and "The Flintstones" in the basement of a home in Nutley pleaded guilty in Federal District Court yesterday to felony copy infringement.
The authorities said Nedal Yousef Rasheed made more than 1,000 illegal videotapes a day and earned more than $5,000 a month selling them on the streets of Newark and New York.
He agreed to turn in the tapes along with the 52 videocassette recorders he used to make the illegal copies.
TERRY PRISTIN


INSIDE
Ailing Yeltsin Cancels Trip
Aides to President Boris N. Yeltsin said he had canceled a trip to Norway and other engagements, leading to questions on his health.
Page 3.
Aboard the Capsized Cruiser
It was supposed to be a relaxing cruise for 30 law-firm employees.
Instead, they ended up clinging to life vests in the East River.
Page 23.


Bomb Scare at Bank
The authorities are searching for a man who used a bomb scare to rob the Provident Savings Bank in Green Brook earlier this week and who also may have tried to rob the Acme Check Cashing Service in Edison.


Shore Revelers Under 21, Beware
Quaffing a cold one to beat the heat at the seashore is not a good idea if you are under 21, Attorney General Poritz warned yesterday in a visit to the Boardwalk.
She said the State Police and agents from the Alcoholic Beverage Control and her office are cracking down on under-age drinking during the summer, with a special emphasis on Shore areas.


Musician's Avant-Garde Soul
Last year Warner Brothers Records did something surprising: they recorded and released "Ancient Ritual," by Sonny Simmons, a West Coast avant-garde alto saxophonist.
Mr.
Simmons was somewhat obscure even at the height of his fame in the 1960's, and the album seemed an odd choice given the prevailing emphasis on classicism in the jazz.
Until one heard the album.
Mr.
Simmons, who has not performed in New York since 1968, is a blues musician, and his playing on the album exemplifies the best sort of avant-garde soul.
He is performing through tomorrow night at Iridium, and at his first set on Tuesday night it was clear that he was a formidable player, a product of a blues culture that no longer really exists.


Can Alternative Medicine Heal? Trials Will Tell; Endangered Habitats
To the Editor:
When Congress enacted the Endangered Species Act in 1973, it established a national commitment to preserve the nation's rarest biological resources.
With reauthorization of the act expected soon, the life science community is increasingly concerned that short-term gains to individuals will overshadow long-term benefits for society.


For Elderly and the Outcast, There's No Place Like This Home
RITA ROSS is sitting pretty.
In fact, the 74-year-old woman, who has spent her whole life within three blocks of her West 35th Street apartment, thinks everything has improved greatly since the mental patients and the homeless people moved into the tenement she had clung to since she became a bride during World War II.
"This isn't Hell's Kitchen anymore, it's God's little acre," she said as her parakeets sang from their cages and her three pugs skittered at her feet.


Hitchcock Is a Work In Progress For Yanks
The Yankees ostensibly brought in a new pitching coach, Nardi Contreras, to work with their young starters.
Coach Contreras, meet Sterling Hitchcock.
Hitchcock (3-6) lasted two batters into the fifth inning last night at Yankee Stadium, squandering a couple of early leads in the process.
Relievers Scott Bankhead and Dave Pavlas did not fare much better.
And after opening the second half of the season with a pair of impressive victories, the Yankees reverted to their form before the All-Star break, losing, 11-4, to the Minnesota Twins.


State to Retain Bond Rating
A leading bond-rating agency flashed approval of Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman's recently passed $16 billion budget yesterday.
Standard &amp; Poor's said that New Jersey will retain its double-A plus bond rating, the second-highest grade it gives, The Associated Press reported.
The agency said it believed the budget, bolstered by the $500 million state surplus, can withstand potential cuts in Federal aid, the posibility that Governor Whitman's revenue projections are too high and a dip in revenue from he income tax cut.
Bond ratings help determine interest rates on state borrowing.


Old Football Injuries and Arthritis Hobbled Simpson, Doctor Testifies
A doctor who examined O. J. Simpson twice in the days after Nicole Brown Simpson and Ronald L. Goldman were killed testified today that although Mr.
Simpson had the "physique of Tarzan," a "whole array of the typical post-N.F.L. injury syndromes" and two kinds of arthritis left him slow of foot, even hobbling.
Dr.
Robert Huizenga testified that Mr.
Simpson, ravaged by disease and battered by being "banged against the turf" as a football player for too many years, was unable to walk properly and barely able to jog, let alone run as a fleeing murderer with a plane to catch might have had to do.
Dr.
Huizenga described Mr.
Simpson, 48, as a man whose damaged right ankle made him limp, whose left knee needed to be replaced and who could neither move forward nor laterally with ease.


Tactics Used Against Squatters Anger Neighbors and Stores
Art Guerra, a painter, supports his art with the business he runs on the Lower East Side, Guerra Paint, a supply store frequented by other artists and interior decorators.
But for the last several weeks, business has been seriously down, he said -- and not because of a market slowdown, rising costs or any of the other ordinary economic hazards.
It is Mr.
Guerra's misfortune to have his store at 510 East 13th Street, between Avenue A and Avenue B, a block that has been cordoned off by the police since late May, when, in quasi-military fashion, the city evicted squatters living in two tenement buildings.
Since then, officers have been stopping drivers and sometimes pedestrians, asking them their business on the block and encouraging mere passers-by to go elsewhere.


Blacks See Opening in A.F.L.-C.I.O. Leadership Fight
Black labor leaders, who have protested for years that the A.F.L.-C.I.O. has ignored their concerns, now see in the struggle for the presidency of the union federation a rare opportunity to demand a much greater voice for blacks in the nation's labor movement.
The black leaders have drawn up 11 demands, most calling for more blacks in the A.F.L.-C.I.O.'s hierarchy and the hierarchies of its individual unions.
The two candidates vying for president of the federation have promised to bring more "diversity" to the labor movement.
But so far neither has explained in any detail how he would do this.


Jets' Anderson Relishes His Starting Designation
Two years ago, the Jets made a draft-day deal for Johnny Johnson that brought them good news and bad news.
The good news was that Johnson proved a hard-working running back who could carry 20 times a game.
The bad news was that he became nicked up, the Jets did not do well and he became discouraged.


Prosecutor of Susan Smith Offers a Small Compromise
As the jury selection process dragged on today, the prosecutor in the Susan Smith murder trial said he would be willing to let the presiding judge determine her fate if she pleaded guilty to drowning her two sons.
But that deal would offer Mrs.
Smith only a 50-50 chance of avoiding the electric chair, legal experts said, and she would have much better odds of escaping the death penalty if she took her chances with a jury of 12.


A 20-Hit Outburst? Who Are These Mets?
It's time for someone to launch an investigation.
Call the F.B.I.
Call the National Guard.
Heck, call Steven Seagal.
Somebody has kidnapped the Mets.
Those couldn't have been the real Mets that pounded out a season-high 20 hits and scored nine runs in the first two innings en route to a 13-4 whipping of the West Division-leading Colorado Rockies last night at sweltering Shea Stadium.


Billion-Dollar Bet on New Casino
Casino industry giants Mirage Resorts and Circus Circus laid down a billion dollars yesterday on a new 4,000-room casino hotel complex.
The project, on a 178-acre site in the marina district, will consist of twin 31-story hotel towers and a 115,000-square-foot-casino, said the chairman of Mirage, Steve Wynn, who sold the Golden Nugget casino here in 1987 and vowed never to return because of what he considered overzealous regulation.
Mr.
Wynn said restrictions lured him back, The Associated Press reported.
Ground breaking for the project - which is to generate 14,000 jobs - could come early next year.


Rosi Is Hit With a Two-Year Suspension
The World Boxing Organization superwelterweight champion, GIANFRANCO ROSI of Italy, was banned yesterday for two years for doping, but pledged to battle to overturn the ruling.
"I'll accept this verdict in the same way I have accepted my defeats in the ring," said Rosi.
"But my battle goes on. My lawyers will continue to act because justice must triumph." The Italian Boxing Federation imposed the mandatory two-year ban after Rosi, 37, tested positive for banned amphetamines after a title victory over Verno Phillips of the United States, in May.
An Italian federation judge, MARIO MENDICINI, accepted Rosi's defense that he and his doctors did not realize that a medicine he was taking for injuries contained the substances. (Reuters)


Columbia-Presbyterian Strives for Quality Care
To the Editor:
As a physician who has practiced at the Columbia-Presbyterian Medical Center for 15 years, I was concerned by the narrow focus of your article on Presbyterian Hospital's desire to merge with another medical center (front page, July 8).


Missing in Cyprus
To the Editor:
Re "War's Dark Secret, Kept Alive by Women in Black" (news article, July 4): It is not surprising that the fate of missing persons in Cyprus has not been ascertained when the Turkish Government not only chose not to be represented in the United Nations Committee on Missing Persons, but also refuses to cooperate with it.


And Then He Kissed Her . . . Gross!; Tresses Curled and Outfits Modeled, Girls Go Where the Boys Are
Gymnastics class is usually a busy time for the girls in Tamarack and Strongheart.
There are girls flipping over the uneven bars, girls leaping over the vault.
But on a recent Friday, the class ground to a halt as the girls gathered around Jill Hertzberg, the group leader for campers going into seventh and eighth grades, to discuss the first social of the summer with the boys camp across the lake.
Ashley Wunderlich, who has been going to Raquette Lake since she was 9, trained her pale blue eyes on Ms.
Hertzberg, soaking up every word.


B-2, After 14 Years, Is Still Failing Basic Tests
The $44 billion B-2 bomber has radar that cannot distinguish a raincloud from a mountainside, has not passed most of its basic tests and may not be nearly as stealthy as advertised, according to a draft report by the General Accounting Office, the independent auditing agency of Congress.
The draft report began circulating today in the Pentagon and on Capitol Hill as Congress considered proposals for additional financing to build new B-2's.
It was provided to The New York Times by a Government official skeptical of the bomber's capabilities who sought to bring into the debate the report's examples of the B-2's inability to pass performance hurdles.


Business Digest
Treasury Bonds Fall On Solid Retail Sales  Treasury prices ended lower after a Government report showed surprising strength in consumer spending, shaking the market's view of a slowing economy.
The report cast doubt on the prospects for another cut in short-term interest rates.
The price of the 30-year Treasury bond fell, pushing its yield up to 6.60 percent, from 6.55 percent on Thursday.  [ 40. ]


Terrorized Human Tide Overwhelms Relief Camp
Terrorized Muslims by the tens of thousands overwhelmed aid workers in an ill-prepared emergency camp here today, part of a swelling human tide propelled by the continuing Bosnian Serb drive across eastern Bosnia.
The refugees from the ostensibly protected, now conquered enclave of Srebrenica spent the day camped in open fields under a blistering sun, begging food, water and medicine from aid workers who had little and wailing over the fates of husbands, sons, fathers and brothers taken away by Bosnian Serb forces.


Mayor Balks On Increase In Class Size
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani said yesterday that the Board of Education had to work harder at cutting its bureaucracy and should look for volunteer help before permitting a rise in class sizes or shortening the school day.
In his weekly radio program, the Mayor lashed out at suggestions made by Schools Chancellor Ramon C. Cortines on Thursday that the 32 local school districts be given the authority to reduce the school week to 26 hours from 27 1/2 and to increase the size of first-, second- and third-grade classes to 27 from 25.


High Marks on Environment
State Senator Gordon A. MacInnes, Democrat of Denville, was the only member of the Legislature to be awarded a perfect score on environmental and consumer issues by the New Jersey Public Interest Research Group Citizen Lobby, the organization announced yesterday.
In the Assembly, the highest scorers were Robert G. Smith, Democrat of Piscataway (88 percent), and Maureen Ogden, Republican of Millburn (77 percent), while Senator William E. Schluter (75 percent), Republican of Pennington, scored next-highest in the Senate.


Shore Revelers Under 21, Beware
Quaffing a cold one to beat the heat at the seashore is not a good idea if you are under 21, Attorney General Poritz warned yesterday in a visit to the Boardwalk.
She said the State Police and agents from the Alcoholic Beverage Control and her office are cracking down on under-age drinking during the summer, with a special emphasis on Shore areas.


Thomas G. Aylesworth, 67, Writer of More Than 100 Books
Thomas Gibbons Aylesworth, the author of more than 100 books written mostly for children and young adults, died on Thursday at his home in Stamford, Conn.
He was 67.
The cause was a heart attack, said Hana Umlauf Lane, a family friend and the editor of some of his books.


McVeigh Is Told to Give Writing Sample
Timothy J. McVeigh, the former Army sergeant accused of blowing up the Federal Building here, has been ordered to appear before a grand jury on Tuesday to give samples of his handwriting, his lawyer said today.
The lawyer, Stephen Jones, said no decision had been made on whether Mr.
McVeigh would provide the samples when he was brought before the grand jury.
But Mr.
Jones said that he might argue that to do so would be self-incriminating.


Corrections
A corporate symbol in Business Day yesterday, in a picture grouping with an article about growing sales of mass-autographed sports merchandise, was published in error.
It was the logo of Major League Baseball Properties Inc., not that of the Major League Baseball Players Association; the Players Association, not Major League Baseball, receives a $2.50 licensing fee on the sale of each autographed ball.


State to Retain Bond Rating
A leading bond-rating agency flashed approval of Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman's recently passed $16 billion budget yesterday.
Standard &amp; Poor's said that New Jersey will retain its double-A plus bond rating, the second-highest grade it gives, The Associated Press reported.
The agency said it believed the budget, bolstered by the $500 million state surplus, can withstand potential cuts in Federal aid, the posibility that Governor Whitman's revenue projections are too high and a dip in revenue from he income tax cut.
Bond ratings help determine interest rates on state borrowing.


Dance Team: 1 Spunky, 1 Stubborn, Both Artists
Marge and Gower Champion epitomized the all-American dance team in their Hollywood musicals and television appearances in the 1950's.
Their courtships on film showed them as healthy and unneurotic, often as a stage couple.
Total pros and good sports, they could hold their own when Jack Benny popped up in tights to learn ballet from them in a hilarious television skit.
The choreography and dancing of the Champions as individuals and as a husband and wife partnership (Mr. Champion died in 1980) were, however, more complex than this well-scrubbed image would have it.
Their wider ambitions and versatility were captured on Thursday when Marge Champion wittily discussed the couple's careers in the latest program of the series Capturing Choreography: Masters of Dance and Film.


Corrections
An article in Business Day on Monday about the growing use of filmless electronic cameras misspelled the surname of a photographer with The Associated Press who uses one.
He is David Longstreath.


New Spokeswoman for Whitman
Shaking up her communications staff 18 months into her administration, Governor Whitman named a new press secretary: Becky Taylor, until yesterday the public affairs director for Attonrey General Deborah T. Poritz.
Rita Manno, a former reporter who joined the Whitman staff at the start of the Governor's term in 1994, was asked to step aside and has not yet decided whether to accept other posts offered to her, aides said.
Ms.
Taylor's new job pays $84,500, the same as her old one.


Maggie Keswick, 53, Expert on Chinese Gardens
Maggie Keswick, a Scots-born connoisseur of China and its sensuous, mysterious gardens, died on July 8 in London.
She was 53 and had homes in London, Santa Monica, Calif., and Wellfleet, Mass.
The cause was breast cancer, said John Taylor Williams of Palmer &amp; Dodge, the family's legal counsel in Boston.


Speculation Rises About the State of Yeltsin's Health
Aides to President Boris N. Yeltsin, who was hospitalized on Tuesday with acute chest pain, said today that he had canceled a trip to Norway and all engagements until Monday, July 24, prompting renewed speculation about the state of his health.
It was a sharp change from the announcements of the last few days, which said that Mr.
Yeltsin's health was improving, and that he was in charge, at work and keeping control of the nuclear button.
Depending on the specific diagnosis and the serious of his condition, the doctors may be urging him to rest, and they may be acting cautiously.


Subway Saviors
New York City's Transit Authority did a remarkable job cleaning up the mess caused by a huge water main break near Times Square last Sunday.
A crew of close to 1,000 transit workers had the trains running on the West Side IRT line by the beginning of Monday morning's rush hour -- barely 24 hours after the tracks were completely submerged in water and electric circuits were covered in muck.
In a city whose citizens are often frustrated by the minor annoyances of everyday urban life, this was a welcome reminder that New York is capable of doing the big things well.
Mayor Rudolph Giuliani applauded the efforts of everyone involved, singling out the leadership of Joseph Hoffman, the agency's vice president in charge of subways.
The plaudits were well deserved.


Mr. Arafat's Governance
Yasir Arafat as tough-minded political boss cracking down on Palestinian terrorists seems an incongruous image, but that roughly describes the latest step in his shift from Israel's enemy to its partner in peace.
The chairman of the Palestine Liberation Organization is now embarked on the administration of Gaza and Jericho, and he has made progress in establishing civil authority.
Mr.
Arafat's techniques leave much to be desired.
The hard-fisted repression and the lawless traditions of his guerrilla movement have led to serious human rights abuses.
Amnesty International and others have complained about secret detention and trials, abuse of suspects and unfair procedures.
Mr.
Arafat has certainly lost much of his romantic appeal to disaffected Palestinian youth.


Corrections
An article on Sunday about Republican efforts to reduce Federal spending omitted part of the House Appropriations Committee's budget proposal for the National Endowment for the Arts.
When an allotment for matching grants is included, the proposed budget is $99.5 million, or $62.9 million less than was allotted in 1995; the proposed budget is not $82.2 million.


Free Programs And Favorite Agencies Fall In Budget Cuts
"Woooh, woooh, we do not want to know about it," scolded a derisive Democrat in ghostly tones as the House Republican majority leadership found itself uncomfortably arguing, amid a long day of bare-knuckled budget cutting, against the cost-free use of volunteer bird-watchers in a nature census.
"Something in the sky," the Democrat, Harold L. Volkmer of Missouri, continued his needle, pointing upward in mock alarm as the Republicans glared in discomfort.
"No, it is not Superman. It might be a bird. We do not know, we do not want to know. Weird. Weird."


AIDS Test Involving Baboon Is Approved
An advisory panel to the Food and Drug Administration unanimously recommended today that one AIDS patient be allowed to receive an experimental bone marrow transplant from a baboon.
Baboons are naturally resistant to H.I.V.-1, the virus that is causing the overwhelming majority of AIDS cases in the world.
The goal of the experiment is to determine whether uninfected baboon cells will join the H.I.V.-infected human marrow to restore the body's immune function.


DIRECTOR OF F.B.I. DEMOTES DEPUTY
F.B.I.
Director Louis J. Freeh today demoted the bureau's Deputy Director, Larry A. Potts, citing the turmoil created by an internal investigation into the destruction of documents relating to the conduct of Mr.
Potts and other senior F.B.I. officials in a deadly 1992 standoff with a white separatist in Idaho.
Mr.
Freeh had promoted Mr.
Potts to the bureau's No. 2 job in May.
As deputy, Mr.
Potts was the F.B.I.'s chief operating officer, wielding authority over hundreds of criminal investigations, and had been in command of the investigation of the bombing last April of the Federal Building in Oklahoma City.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK NEWSDAY TO STOP PUBLISHING New York Newsday, a bold experiment by a suburban newspaper to break into the largest and most competitive city market with a new type of tabloid, will publish its last issue tomorrow, its publishers said.
The paper, which emerged in the economic boom of the mid-1980's, was the victim of corporate pressures for profits and a market that changed sharply over the last decade.  [ Page 1. ] When its final issue rolls off the press, New York Newsday will have lasted 10 years, 3 months and 1 day.
Begun with expectations that it would outlive at least one of its competitors, it will be survived by the same three newspapers that it squared off against on Day 1: The Daily News, The New York Post and The New York Times.  [ 26. ]


Gingrich on Drug Dealers
Speaker Newt Gingrich today proposed a referendum on "very Draconian, very real steps" to punish international drug traffickers.
In brief remarks that were part of a speech to the Republican National Committee meeting here, Mr.
Gingrich asserted that anyone who is responsible for shipping narcotics into the country should be put to death: "You import commercial quantities of drugs in the United States for the purpose of destroying our children, we will kill you."


Senator Threatens Fight on Floor to Press Demand for Public Hearing on Packwood
Senator Barbara Boxer, the California Democrat who has led the crusade for public hearings into accusations of sexual and official misconduct against Senator Bob Packwood, threatened today to force a floor vote on the matter unless the Ethics Committee votes within one week to hold such hearings.
Her threat follows one from Senator Mitch McConnell, chairman of the Ethics Committee, in the escalating partisan feud over the Packwood case.
Mr.
McConnell, Republican of Kentucky, told the committee earlier this week that if Mrs.
Boxer kept pushing for public hearings on Mr.
Packwood, a Republican, then he would order hearings into Senator Edward M. Kennedy, a Democrat, and Chappaquiddick.


Strike Cripples Newspapers


Those Few Cents Give Us Clout in the World
To the Editor:
John R. Kasich, House Budget Committee chairman, argues that the Overseas Private Investment Corporation should be eliminated from the Federal budget (Op-Ed, July 9).


Seles, Seeding Uncertain, Enters U.S. Open
MONICA SELES yesterday entered the United States Open, her first Grand Slam event since she was stabbed in the back in 1993.
"We couldn't be happier," PAGE CROSLAND, director of communications for the United States Tennis Association, said.
"We were anticipating it. We've been waiting for her and we're delighted."
It has not been determined whether Seles will be seeded, whether she will have a ranking that would put her in the main draw, or whether she will be granted a wild card for the tournament, which begins Aug. 28 at Flushing Meadows.


Beliefs; Why the liberal agenda might one day include the battle over euthanasia and assisted suicide.
Are euthanasia and assisted suicide about to become part of the liberal agenda?
That question is raised by the case of George Delury, a Manhattan man charged with second-degree manslaughter after he willingly acknowledged helping his wife, who was incapacitated mentally and physically from multiple sclerosis, kill herself.
Until now, most big battles over euthanasia or assisted suicide have occurred on the West Coast in court cases and in referendums at the polls, or in Michigan where Dr.
Jack Kevorkian has made himself a kind of composite of the Lone Ranger and the Grim Reaper.
Despite national media attention, euthanasia and assisted suicide have not been plotted on the ideological grid.


10-Year Extension for Cincinnati's Coach
BOB HUGGINS, who passed up a possible National Basketball Association coaching job with Miami to remain at the University of Cincinnati, has signed a 10-year contract extension.
The extension grants Huggins more than $700,000 annually in salary and incentives and includes an annuity, The Cincinnati Enquirer reported yesterday.
In six years, Huggins's teams at Cincinnati are 138-58.
The Bearcats have gone to the National Collegiate Athletic Association tournament each of the last four years.
In 14 years as a head coach, Huggins is 306-130. (AP)


Why I Don't Need Toll Booth Operators
To the Editor:
As I whizzed up the New Jersey Turnpike the other morning on the way to work, my sympathy for the striking toll booth attendants was tempered by my delight at driving from Exit 14 to Exit 16E in seven minutes.
It's a trip that I typically allot a half-hour for.
And it often ends up longer due to the gridlock at the ticket booths during rush hour.


United States Gives Up Nothing In a Stunning Soccer Victory
In a stunning upset at the America Cup tournament, the United States national team achieved one of its biggest international victories tonight by crushing Argentina, 3-0, and advancing to the quarterfinal round.
The triumph was the first for the United States against Argentina and enriched the chances that the interim American coach, Steve Sampson, widely expected to be replaced in favor of an international coach with more experience, will get the job full time.


Billion-Dollar Bet on New Casino
Casino industry giants Mirage Resorts and Circus Circus laid down a billion dollars yesterday on a new 4,000-room casino hotel complex.
The project, on a 178-acre site in the marina district, will consist of twin 31-story hotel towers and a 115,000-square-foot-casino, said the chairman of Mirage, Steve Wynn, who sold the Golden Nugget casino here in 1987 and vowed never to return because of what he considered overzealous regulation.
Mr.
Wynn said restrictions lured him back, The Associated Press reported.
Ground breaking for the project - which is to generate 14,000 jobs - could come early next year.


When Machines, Not Humans, Are the Kings of a Concert
Ever since the advent of machines and computers, humans have been wrestling with the problem of how much technology they should allow to impinge on their daily lives.
To avoid a Frankenstein situation -- that of a powerful, self-operating invention run amok -- society has embraced a future that incorporates the Internet and interactive technology.
These are innovations that derive their use solely from interplay with humans as opposed to autonomous machines that operate or make decisions on their own, a more fear-provoking alternative because these independent computers rob human beings of their specialness and make clear the possibility that they can be replaced by devices more intelligent and industrious than themselves.


Devils Say the Escape Clause Is Essential
The owner of the Devils said yesterday that a provision in the tentative lease agreement reached Thursday that would trigger an escape clause if the Yankees moved to New Jersey was essential to his business future.
"I've got the Rangers across the river and if I had the Yankees here, I'd be decimated," the owner, John McMullen, said.


Prosecutor of Susan Smith Offers a Small Compromise
As the jury selection process dragged on today, the prosecutor in the Susan Smith murder trial said he would be willing to let the presiding judge determine her fate if she pleaded guilty to drowning her two sons.
But that deal would offer Mrs.
Smith only a 50-50 chance of avoiding the electric chair, legal experts said, and she would have much better odds of escaping the death penalty if she took her chances with a jury of 12.


COMPANY BRIEFS
CACI INTERNATIONAL INC., Arlington, Va., an information systems producer, signed a letter of intent to buy the closely held Automated Sciences Group for $5.3 million in cash, payable over three years.
GENELABS TECHNOLOGIES INC., Redwood City, Calif., formed a joint pharmaceutical venture under which the Government of Taiwan will invest about $12 million for a 35 percent stake in Genelabs' unit there.


Morris Chase, 90, Welfare Official and Advocate for the Homeless
Morris Chase, a former welfare official who supervised New York City's efforts to deal with the homeless in the 1960's, took his life in San Francisco on Wednesday.
He was 90.
His daughter, Alice Kaufman, said her father, who had cancer, drowned in San Francisco Bay after leaving a note and wading into the water off the Embarcadero.


Can Alternative Medicine Heal? Trials Will Tell; Smithsonian Science
To the Editor:
My family and I visited the Smithsonian Institution's new exhibition on "Science in American Life" at the National Museum of American History and found none of the "voodoo science" described by Robert L. Park (Op-Ed, July 9).
But let me say I was a member of the exhibition's advisory committee.


Murder of Bronx Teacher Leaves Police Puzzled
At first the shooting death of Barbara Eastmond, a remedial reading teacher at Public School 14 in Throgs Neck, appeared to be the result of a botched robbery.
She left her family's liquor store in Harlem late Wednesday and headed home to the Williamsbridge section of the Bronx.
She stopped there to pick up her dog and then set out to park the car.
She rented a driveway around the corner because it was difficult to find parking in front of her house.


Golfers Endure Delay and Darkness
The gallery rooted for one and a half golfers today.
Dawn Coe-Jones, who says her nightmare is giving birth in a bunker, lit up the United States Women's Open here in maternity clothes.
It is not called the Open for nothing.
Expectant mothers are welcome, and Coe-Jones remained in contention this afternoon even though she is six months pregnant with her first child.
"I ran a little today and some lady screamed, 'Don't run! Please, don't run!' " she said.


Sports of The Times; Heroes, Icons and Monuments
EARLIER this week, a small group of amateur athletics officials gathered in Manhattan to celebrate a monumental moment in track and field as the New York Athletic Club became the official home of the Jesse Owens International Trophy.
Since 1981, the trophy has been awarded annually to the amateur or Olympic athlete who best personifies the qualities attributed to Owens: great athletic achievement, sportsmanship and a sincere commitment to cooperation among people of all nations.


Drought Conditions Pull Reservoir Levels Down
WITH water levels in the New York City reservoir system dropping below normal -- only 82.2 percent full -- meteorologists said last week that it would take a hurricane to reverse the drought conditions plaguing the region.
Scattered thundershowers during the week dropped from one to two inches of rain on parts of the county but failed to provide the uniform soaking necessary.
"One nice little hurricane would be more like it," said George McKillop, a hydrologist with the National Weather Service.
"That would do the trick."


102 Degrees: You Call That Hot? Look Back
July 9, 1936
It was hot yesterday, but it's been hotter.
On July 9, 1936, temperatures reached 106 degrees at the Central Park Observatory, melting asphalt roadways and killing seven people, accordingj to the front page of The New York Times on July 10, 1936.
But a glance at the headline does not reveal the whole scorching story.
The headline quoted the official high of 102.3 degrees, which was measured from the roof of the Whitehall Building in lower Manhattan and tempered by bay breezes.
But the third paragraph of the story reports the high at Central Park as being 106 in the shade at 5 P.M.
The Central Park reading was recorded as the official high, making it the hottest day in the city's history.
Charles Benjamin Kimble, 99, startled his family on that day, a two-paragraph story on the front page says, when he left his home in Fort Lee, N.J., and walkedj a mile to the center of town and back.
"In his trhee-hour absense Mrs. Lillian Reimers, his daughter, whith whome he lives, called the police in fear the old man had succumbed to the extreme temperature," the article says.
"Mr. Kimble was disgusted when he heard of this on his return. He said he had gone down to the village to 'see how things looked," and 'there was no need to kick up such a fuss.
'You'd think I was 10 years old instead of just shor of a 100,' he said. 'I'm old enough take care of myself.' " July 21, 1977
The city's second hottest day came on July 21, 1977, when temperatures reached 104.
Nestled between the headlines about looting in the streets of Washington during a blackout and bids for the Soviets to limit missles, The New York Times ran a front page story about the blistering heat.
"New Yorkers clung to air-conditioned offices and the shady sides of streets when they had to venture out," the story read.
"Tourists adjusted their schedules to include cooler actractions." LYNETTE HOLLOWAY


Foreign Affairs; Time For Truth
When American officials resign in protest it's usually a headline for a day and then forgotten.
That was certainly the case with George Kenney, the State Department desk officer for Yugoslavia, who was the first official to resign in protest -- August 1992 -- over the failure of the U.S. to intervene in Bosnia.
At the time of his resignation, Mr.
Kenney had never actually been to Yugoslavia, but since then he has traveled through, and written extensively on, the Balkans.
The result is that Mr.
Kenney is no longer an advocate of intervention.
In a lengthy interview, he argued that the only realistic option now for the U.S. and its allies is to focus on moving the parties to a negotiated settlement, based on the power realities on the ground.
It is time, he says, for a bad peace, because that is the only one available.


Movies This Week
LOOK for some golden movie moments on television this week.
In Richard Boleslawski's THEODORA GOES WILD (1936), Irene Bunne as a shy villager who has written a steamy best seller abruptly descends on her Manhattan publisher like a cyclone, complete with Russian wolfhound.
"Another thing," she hurls at the cowed staffers, "I want more publicity!" What an entrance!
The sedate Miss Dunne's official thaw in light comedy (opposite the game Melvyn Douglas) followed some "Show Boat" rakishness.
Then "The Awful Truth" with Cary Grant hit the jackpot.
For now, viva Theodora! -- Wednesday at 8 A.M. on Cinemax.
Early on in John Ford's great GRAPES OF WRATH (1940), with her family ready to head west, Ma Joad (Jane Darwell) sifts through mementos, like a World's Fair postcard to the plaintive "Red River Valley" on harmonica.
Dig the road-stop scene with the hungry Joad children eyeing a candy display.
It's straight out of John Steinbeck -- Monday at 10 P.M. and 2:10 A.M. on Amercian Movie Classics.
In a chuckly bit from Henry Koster's FLOWER DRUM SONG (1961), a young immigrant (Miyoski Umeki, in photograph) asks directions from a Chinese-American in San Francisco.
"Sorry, sister," she's told, "I don't speak Chinese." Miss Umeki is charming when she sings "I Am Going to Like It Here," from the Rodgers and Hammerstein stage score.
So is Nancy Kwan with "I Enjoy Being Girl." Sold -- Sunday at 10:30 P.M. on Disney.
A breathless moment from Fritz Lang's murky masterpiece, M (1931), shows a child-killer (Peter Lorre), flung before his captors and jury -- criminal Berlin.
Look at those faces -- Saturday at 9 P.M. on CUNY.
Through the swamp in Preston's Sturges's SULLIVAN'S TRAVELS (1941), a line of shuffling, shackled convicts (including Joel McCrea, as a misplaced Hollywood director) joins a poor, black congregation to watch a cartoon.
Minutes later, the church rocks with laughter -- Friday at 10 P.M. and 3 P.M. on American Movie Classics.
Howard Thompson


IN SHORT: FICTION
IN THE LOYAL MOUNTAINS  By Rick Bass. Houghton Mifflin, $21.95.


Fifth Third Bancorp Inc.(FITB,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Jun 30


The Republicans Are Threatening to Bury the Ghost of the Military Draft
No one in the United States has been drafted into the military since 1972.
But the Selective Service System, the agency in charge of the draft, lives on -- with a budget of more than $20 million a year.
Now, in one of the latest skirmishes of the Republican revolution, the House of Representatives is threatening to abolish the agency to save money.


Subcommittee Has Unlisted Fax Number
To the Editor:
Learning of the July 11 House Subcommittee on Appropriations budget markup on Title 3 of the Education Act, of interest to my institution, I called for the subcommittee's fax number so I could send a letter.


Man Is Arrested In Halloween Death
It started in an incident last Halloween with egg-throwing, escalated to bottles, and by the time it was over Angel Lopez Almodovar, a mechanic who was bringing a tricycle home to his 4-year-old son in Brooklyn, had been shot to death.
Nine months later, the police arrested a 20-year-old man and charged him with the murder.
The man, Hector Suarez, was arrested Thursday night and charged with second-degree murder, Officer Kathleen Kelly, a police spokeswoman, said.


'Emblems of Mind'
To the Editor:
Kendall L. Walton obfuscates some important points through careless use of musical terminology.
By writing that "men's and women's vocal ranges are approximately an octave apart, which allows them to sing in unison" (my emphasis), he fails to distinguish between unison (pitches of the same frequency) and octave (pitches whose frequencies vibrate in the ratio 2:1).
Yes, men and women can sing in unison, but only in the segments of their ranges that overlap -- at the higher end for men, lower for women.
In other words, if these ranges were less than an octave apart (or if they were identical), we would be able to sing in unison much more readily.


Star Ratings Don't Tell Entire Story
INVESTORS are seeing stars, and some, at least, don't like it.
Barney Teich, a retired investor in Walnut Creek, Calif., wrote a letter to The New York Times and the Securities and Exchange Commission complaining that funds should provide more than just star ratings in their advertisements.


The World; Drawing a Line In the Pacific
HERE among the dazzling sand beaches and lush jungle on the island of Okinawa, 30,000 Americans serve on military bases, waiting for the enemy to strike.
But who is the enemy? And where?


PHOTOGRAPHER'S JOURNAL


U.S. Opening to Vietnam Sends China a Message
To the Editor:
Lost in the controversy surrounding normalization of relations between the United States and Vietnam has been one overriding geopolitical accomplishment.


To and From N.Y. Airports
NOW that the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey has announced that it cannot build a new rail link from midtown Manhattan to Kennedy International Airport, the metropolitan area remains wedded to its three major airports by road only.
Subways make most, but not all, of the trip: the A train to Howard Beach connects to a free bus that passes through parking lots to loop around the Kennedy terminals; the E, F, G, R and 7 subway lines also require a bus trip for the last leg.
The other choices encompass private cars, taxis, buses, vans and car services.


Lingering in Languedoc
I'VE been to France often, and happily, but never have I been as enthralled as I was on a trip last June to the valley of the Herault River in Languedoc.
In part it was the landscape.
All around were dramatic vistas of distant, rugged mountains and deep ravines, punctuated by placid vineyards and sprawls of mysterious stone towns.
In part, too, it was those towns, which up close proved to be twists of narrow streets that climbed to ancient chateaus and seemed untouched by modernity.
I was in the Herault to visit cousins who had rented a house -- sight unseen, from a newspaper ad -- in the tiny town of Brissac-le-Haut, population 40.
I had flown from Paris to the nearest big city, Montpellier, and there my cousins met me and drove me to their house 28 miles away, along a route that started out straight but soon became steep and filled with what the French call lacets, shoelace turns.


Votes in Congress
Tally Last Week in Connecticut, New Jersey and New York  Senate 1.
Regulatory Reform: Vote on an amendment to a bill to require regulatory agencies to conduct risk assessments and cost-benefit analyses when drafting rules that enforce environmental and other laws.
The amendment would limit the bill's effects to rules with overall costs to American business of at least $100 million a year.
Approved 53 to 45, July 11. 2.
Regulatory Reform: Vote on an amendment to a bill to require regulatory agencies to conduct risk assessments and cost-benefit analyses when drafting rules that enforce environmental and other laws.
The amendment would let a new rule of meat inspections be imposed free of any possible challenge under the regulatory legislation.
Rejected 51 to 49, July 12.


U.S. Trust Corp.(USTC,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Jun 30


Longing for Magic
RESERVATION BLUES By Sherman Alexie. 306 pp. New York: The Atlantic Monthly Press. $21.


Bonds No Hero
To the Sports Editor:
Major league baseball has died.
Not at the ticket office or the negotiating table, but when Barry Bonds failed to turn around.
At the time, baseball owners were meeting in Minneapolis to address a problem of dwindling attendance.
They attempted to solve the crisis by decreasing the duration of the game.
All the while, in Candlestick Park, Barry Bonds was presiding over the burial of the sport when he failed to chase a fly hit by Met catcher Kelly Stinnett.


Columbus Aria: The Noisy Art Of Dining Out
A worker lifts an electric saw from the ground and begins to cut through a steel pipe on Columbus Avenue just north of 77th Street.
The ear-splitting whine rips through the midday air.
Across 77th Street, lunchtime diners at the large outdoor cafe of Isabella's restaurant continue with their salads and sandwiches.
They never turn to look.
"We were so engrossed in our conversation, we didn't even notice the construction," said Tony Pinelli, who had just finished his lunch.
"Actually, I didn't notice it until we crossed the street and it was in our way."


July 9-15; Big and Little Lamas Scolded
When the world's most beloved Buddhist monk, the Dalai Lama of Tibet, who lives in exile with tens of thousands of followers in India, celebrated his 60th birthday with three days of meetings and prayers, the Chinese Government denounced him.
The Chinese Embassy in New Delhi demanded that India should prevent the spiritual leader of six million Tibetans from conducting political activities under the guise of a birthday celebration.


Joanna E. Rein, Richard Randall
Joanna Esther Rein, a daughter of Bert W. Rein of Chevy Chase, Md., and the late Jennifer C. Rein, was married last evening to Richard Allen Randall, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Donald Randall of Phoenix.
Rabbi Arthur C. Blecher officiated at the Navy Chapel in Washington.
Col.
Donald M. Covington, a Presbyterian minister who retired as a chaplain in the Army, took part in the ceremony.
Ms.
Rein, 26, is keeping her name.
She graduated cum laude from Princeton University and received a master's degree in management from Northwestern University.
In September, she is to become an assistant product manager at Clairol Inc. in New York.
Her father is a partner in the Washington law firm of Wiley, Rein &amp; Fielding.
Her mother taught French at the Bethesda (Md.) Elementary School.
The bride's stepmother, Barbara Rein, is a speech and language pathologist in Chevy Chase.


A Life's Memories From the 'Queen of Jazz'
IT was not until Marian McPartland, born in England, met the cornetist Jimmy McPartland that her passage into the American jazz scene was clinched.
In 1945 they married.
Twenty-five years later, they were divorced.
"It was a failure," Mrs.
McPartland said, meaning the divorce.
"We sold our house in Merrick. I bought the one I live in in Port Washington. But we kept looking out for each other and working together. We really cared about each other."


July 9-15; Can You Spot the Lethal Weapon?


Sheila Chervin, Peter Schwartz
Sheila Arleen Chervin and Peter Ellis Schwartz, financial executives in New York, are to be married today at the Beach Point Club in Mamaroneck, N.Y.
Rabbi Jeffrey Sirkman is to perform the ceremony.
Ms.
Chervin, who is keeping her name, is a vice president and an associate general counsel at Kidder, Peabody &amp; Company.
She graduated from Hunter College and received a master's degree in education from the College of New Rochelle and her law degree from St.
John's University.
The bride is a daughter of the late Lillian and Harry Kuppersmith.


Wrong Direction on Malpractice
In reforming product liability laws, the House has passed misguided restrictions on the ability of patients to sue doctors and hospitals for malpractice.
The Senate dropped medical malpractice from its product-liability bill, but the House provisions remain alive in the conference committee.
Sponsors say Federal legislation is needed because lopsided jury verdicts are saddling blameless physicians with huge malpractice premiums and forcing them to practice defensive medicine -- administering needless tests and procedures to ward off later claims of negligence when patients suffer unavoidable bad outcomes.


Cairo Trove
To the Editor: I read with interest your article on the restoration of the Ben Ezra Synagogue in Old Cairo (Travel Advisory, "Cairo Synagogue Is Restored," May 28).
The article noted that the 1892 synagogue was best known as the site where the Cairo Geniza, or storeroom, a trove of Hebrew manuscripts dating from the 10th century, was found in 1896.
The article also noted that 20,000 of these fragments were now at the Jewish Theological Seminary in New York.


Chandler Fleming, Richard M. Todd
Chandler Cunningham Fleming, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Robert McLemore Fleming of Chatham, N.J., was married yesterday to Richard Morris Todd, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
James dePeyster Todd of Greenwich, Conn.
The Rev.
Dr.
Charles Rush, an American Baptist minister, performed the ceremony at Christ Church in Summit, N.J.
The Rev.
Sue Anne Morrow, a United Methodist minister who is the associate dean of the chapel at Princeton University, took part.
The couple, both 23, graduated from Princeton, he cum laude.
They are medical students at Vanderbilt University.


First Commerce Corp.(FCOM,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Jun 31


Immigrants' Friend: The Settlement House
SETTLEMENT houses started as a new concept in charity in turn-of-the century London.
The wealthy would settle in poor neighborhoods to better understand the community's problems.
"It was seen as a bridge between the upper and lower classes," said Michael Everett, the assistant director of development at the Union Settlement Association, the East Harlem institution, which was founded in 1895 by members of the Union Theological Seminary.


Edward F. Gray, 78, Organizer for U.A.W. and Social Causes
Edward F. Gray, a former union official who began his career recruiting factory workers in New Jersey and ended it by organizing the elderly in New York, died on Thursday at the Cabrini Hospice in Manhattan.
He was 78.
The cause was complications of Parkinson's disease, said his wife, Lois.


How 'Shrunk' Snuck In
TRIVIALIZE HAD ITS MOMENT in the vogue-verb sun," I wrote, "until the usage of this older verb shrunk to the very occasional."
Louis Jay Herman, noted Gotcha!
Gangster, objected: "Permit me to join the Uofallpeople Club, to upbraid you for shrunk. All usage manuals consider shrank the preferred or exclusive past tense of shrink, shrunk being the past participle." Kerry Wood of Palo Alto, Calif., adds, "I never thunk you'd have done such a thing."


Cynthia L. Ogden, Christopher Lord
Cynthia L. Ogden, a daughter of Ruth S. Woodcock of Bloomfield, Conn., and Hugh Ogden of Glastonbury, Conn., was married yesterday to Christopher J. Lord, the son of Athena V. Lord of Albany and the late Victor A. Lord.
The Rev.
Emily Holcombe performed the ceremony at Friends Meeting House in West Hartford, Conn.
Ms.
Ogden, 34, is keeping her name.
She is a fellow in the Epidemic Intelligence Service of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention in Hyattsville, Md.
She is a graduate of Trinity College in Hartford and received a Ph.D. in city and regional planning from Cornell University.
Her father is a professor of English at Trinity College and is a poet.


Uninvited Guests, Hungry but Often Amiable
THERE are several stone walls on the property, so sooner or later, it was bound to happen.
Chipmunks have moved in.
Perhaps it would be more accurate to say a chipmunk has moved in.
So far, it appears to be without a mate.
But this is not to be counted on; the chipmunk is, after all, a family type.
Although no nest has been discovered, this forager's hiding place has -- the downspout of a roof gutter.


Branson, Mo.
Branson, Mo., accommodates two kinds of visitors: those who want to be entertained in air-conditioned theaters for breakfast, lunch and dinner, and those who come to fish or to explore the ancient mountains shading misty streams and caves in their green, piney folds.
The area has long courted tourists.
In 1907, a New Yorker named Harold Bell Wright published "The Shepherd of the Hills," a novel based on the lives of Ozark Mountain people living in nearby Mutton Hollow.
The book was a best seller and people began journeying to the area, traveling by train to Hollister, Mo., a couple of miles south of Branson.


Liberties; Running For My Life
Something very special has happened to me. I have been epically cursed.
I discovered this while flipping through an advance copy of a new book by Marlin Fitzwater, the press secretary for Presidents Reagan and Bush.
There, on page 179 of "Call the Briefing!" I came upon the curse.


Whitney Holding Corp.(WTNY,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Jun 30


Sports of The Times; Yankees Inspire Q. But No A.
AT the All-Star Game last Tuesday, the American League president, Gene Budig, glanced over at Buck Showalter, spiffier than usual in an olive suit with a tan shirt and figured tie.
"He looks like a professor of accounting at the University of Kansas," Budig said.


Jets' Rebuilding Starts on the Line
When a National Football League team finishes a season with a 6-10 record and averages only 16.5 points a game (25th in the league) and only 293.9 yards in total offense (22d in the league) and rushes for 100 yards a game only six times, it's time for a change.
The Jets have made plenty of changes on offense, leaving them with no seasoned wide receivers, a wide-open competition at tailback and almost an entirely new offensive line.
Receivers can usually be found.
Tailbacks can usually step in quickly.
But pro football wisdom holds that offensive lines take two or three years to develop, that the linemen need that time to blend and play as a unit because teamwork is more important on the offensive line than anywhere else.


O'Sullivan Corp.(OSL,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Jun 30


Alisa Herbsman, Lloyd Groveman
Alisa Karen Herbsman, the daughter of Dr.
Horace Herbsman of Cedarhurst, L.I., and the late Brenda Herbsman, is to be married this evening to Lloyd Adam Groveman, the son of Burnette S. Groveman of Roslyn Heights, L.I., and the late Mitchel J. Groveman.
Rabbi Gilbert S. Rosenthal is to perform the ceremony at the Temple Israel in Lawrence, L.I.
The bride, 29, teaches kindergarten at Community School 154 in Manhattan.
She graduated from Tufts University and received a master's degree in elementary education from Columbia University.
Her father is the chairman of the department of surgery at St.
John's Episcopal Hospital in Far Rockaway, Queens, and is a professor of clinical surgery at the State University Health Science Center at Brooklyn.
The bride is the stepdaughter of Rosalind Herbsman, an assistant director in the development department at North Shore University Hospital in Manhasset, L.I.


Put the Students First
The state has moved to take over the Newark school system, and has already done so in Jersey City and Paterson.
Is this the best way to correct troubled schools?
Is there a better way?
For those Newark school board members and school system managers who have watched in horror as their gravy boat was sucked dry by a correctly intervening state, live with it.


July 9-15: Quiet Zealots; Palestinian Militants Back Down in Gaza
The confrontation between Yasir Arafat and the militant Palestinian Islamic zealots opposed to the peace plan in Gaza has been building up over the past year.
There have been dire warnings of a civil war and a bloodbath .
But this month, when Mr.
Arafat ordered his security forces to crack down on the militants, the reaction was anti-climactic: the militants backed down from their threats to go to war against the Palestinian Authority, as Mr.
Arafat's government is known.
Even when the Palestinian police went about arresting scores of Islamic militants who had vowed to fight if challenged, there was no fight.
Instead, the militants redrew their red lines around the modest goal of preserving their infrastructure of schools, mosques and social institutions.
"The men are easy to replace, institutions are not," a senior official of Hamas, the fundamentalist opposition group said in an interview last week in Gaza, adding that a civil war is the furthest thing from the group's mind.
Both Palestinians and Israelis say they fully expect further acts of terror by the militants.
What has changed, they insist, is the power of these acts to freeze the peace plan.
YOUSSEF M. IBRAHIM


New Concerns Raised Over a Computer Smut Study
Growing controversy over a widely publicized study of on-line computer pornography, conducted by a researcher at Carnegie Mellon University, has prompted the university to investigate whether the research violated ethical or academic guidelines.
The investigation follows the disclosure by angry faculty members that an undergraduate student and his principal faculty adviser at Carnegie Mellon spied on the private computer habits of nearly 3,000 students, staff members and other faculty members last year as part of the research study into pornography viewing habits.


Trying to Gauge Feasibility or Folly of 42d St. Trolley
After nearly two decades of debate, a host of studies and preliminary approval by the City Council, the 42d Street trolley project has reached a critical juncture.
Decisions now being made will determine whether the project lives or dies.
The last trolley on 42d Street rolled to a stop in 1946.
"I'm hopeful the city will act now so it can get the trolley running before another 50 years pass," said Janette Sadik-Khan, an official of the Federal Transit Administration.
With conservative politics and tightened budgets at all levels of government, such projects will be less likely in the future, she said.


Festival Fiddler


L.I. Vines
Pinot Blanc
Lenz Winery, Lieb Vineyards, 1993. About $13.
The grapes that the Lenz vineyard manager, Sam McCullough, and his crew machine harvested on Sept. 23, 1993, at the corner of Oregon Road and Bridge Lane in Cutchogue, will emerge in a few days in their new, liquid identity.
The wine will go public as soon as the bottles are labeled.


Two Top Picks Reach Contract Terms
The start of training camp again is proving to be more of an incentive to signing first-round draft choices than the National Football League's rookie salary cap was.
Yesterday, two of the top 10 choices came to terms with their teams: Carolina quarterback Kerry Collins, who received a $7 million signing bonus that his agent said was the largest ever for a rookie, and Philadelphia defensive end Mike Mamula.


Move Over, Cows: This Isn't the County Fair You Remember
It's opening night at the Ocean County Fair, and in the incubator, chick No. 1 emerges from the wreckage of its brown shell to test its stubby wings.
At the other end of the tent, 13-year-old Jackie Witt of Toms River, returning champion exhibitor of guinea pigs, rabbits and ducks, is hoping that Tyson, her beautiful but belligerent Plymouth Barred rooster, will add to her trophies.
But though it may be business as usual in the poultry tent, the Ocean County Fair, like most of the 21 agricultural fairs around the state, is changing.
As the county's grazing land gets swallowed up by development, competitions involving large livestock are disappearing in favor of rabbit and cat shows.
Booths offering POG milk caps and cellular phone service have displaced the traditional displays of tractors and combines.


Think of the Children
The state has moved to take over the Newark school system, and has already done so in Jersey City and Paterson.
Is this the best way to correct troubled schools?
Is there a better way?
All of you who have the answers to the plight of my school district, come in and help us reform.
On your way, stop off and pick up a child from his or her home and bring that youngster to school.
Carefully observe the home environment and the ills of the street that the youngster must maneuver to get to school.


Carpenters' Union Readies For Supervised Election
The job now pays $360,791 a year, and on Thursday voting begins to determine who will get it: the presidency of the carpenters' union in the New York region, a union long beleaguered by corruption and mobsters.
As part of a government drive to reform the union, the election will be overseen by court-appointed monitors and investigators.
And for the first time, the president and other officials will be elected by the membership instead of by delegates chosen by leaders of union locals.


A Craftsman In the Fine Art Of Pitching
The National League had an opening.
Greg Maddux of the Atlanta Braves had shown a hint of human frailty.
The right-hander with the amazing control and seeming ability to ward off defeats unlike any of his contemporaries had suffered the slightest of groin pulls just before last week's All-Star Game break.


Crusader for New York City Landmarks Moves On
ANYONE who has ever felt blessed walking through the Beaux-Arts grandeur of cavernous Grand Central Terminal -- or has felt frustrated grappling with the regulations designed to protect New York City's landmarks -- owes something to Kent L. Barwick, president of the Municipal Art Society.
Over two decades Mr.
Barwick has become one of the leading crusaders for preserving the city's notable buildings.
His work in the 70's in preventing the construction of an office tower on top of Grand Central Terminal not only preserved what is part of the city's heart, but also led to a United States Supreme Court ruling that established the right of local governments to preserve architecturally distinctive sites and structures.


Men in Love
HOW LONG HAS THIS BEEN GOING ON?
By Ethan Mordden. 590 pp.
New York: Villard Books. $25.
LIKE PEOPLE IN HISTORY By Felice Picano. 512 pp.
New York: Viking. $23.95.


Kirsten M. Blau, Douglas L. Krohn
Kirsten Miriam Blau, a daughter of Renee and Stanley M. Blau of New York, was married last evening in Brooklyn to Douglas Lee Krohn, the son of Barbara and Harvey B. Krohn of Westfield, N.J.
Rabbi Charles Kroloff performed the ceremony at the Brooklyn Botanic Garden.
The bride and the bridegroom, both 25, graduated from Cornell University.
Mrs.
Krohn is an associate publisher at Advanstar, a publishing company in New York.
Her father is the vice chairman of Executone Information Systems, a telecommunications company in Milford, Conn.
Her mother is a partner in the Antique Salon, an antiques store in New York.


Magic Johnson Unsure Of a Return to Lakers
MAGIC JOHNSON's agent says the former National Basketball Association star still hasn't decided whether to return to the Los Angeles Lakers.
In a story in The Boston Globe yesterday, Johnson seemed to indicate strongly that he wouldn't return to the Lakers, saying he wanted to concentrate on his new movie theater complex in Los Angeles.
But his agent, LON ROSEN, said Johnson's remarks were taken out of context.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-11  RELIEF FOR BOSNIAN REFUGEES  The refugee crisis in Tuzla eased after the Bosnian Government, in a policy shift, began moving thousands of people displaced in the Bosnian Serb take-over of Srebrenica to outlying towns.  1


'So, Boss, Do I Deserve a Raise?'
You've built quite a case for yourself.
You've worked 16 hours a day, skipped a three-week vacation and tackled the project your boss couldn't.
But do all these sacrifices add up to a raise, or just another Employee of the Month trophy?
If you have a story about that toughest of business decisions -- requesting a fatter paycheck -- send it to On the Job, Money and Business, The New York Times, 229 West 43d Street, New York 10036.
Or by E-mail to onthejob@nytimes.com.
Include your telephone number.
All submissions become the property of The Times and may be republished in any medium.


MARKET TIMING
Monday The Commerce Department reports business inventories and sales for May.


When Hatred Defines a Criminal Act
THE tranquillity of her vacation retreat in the mountains of Vermont was shattered, State Senator Melodie Peters recalled, when vandals tore through the house last December and smashed everything that was breakable.
Every door and window, all the furnishings, were reduced to rubble.
The only item the vandals took was a photograph of Ms.
Peters, who is white, and her husband, Earl, who is black.


The Rebirth of Dresden Reaches a Dizzying Pace
FEW cities in Europe are pulsating like Dresden.
Its historic buildings are being renovated, new hotels and restaurants are opening, and famed museums, cathedrals, gardens, palaces and concert halls are full of visitors.
The number of tourists visiting Dresden in recent years has climbed steadily, from 464,896 in 1992 and 528,078 in 1993 to 662,742 last year.


Seat Canceled
To the Editor: I recently had a most unpleasant and expensive experience with Royal Jordanian Airlines.
I flew to Amman to begin a Holy Land pilgrimage under the auspices of St.
George's College (Anglican), Jerusalem.
After a tour in Jordan, the Sinai, Israel and the West Bank I returned to Amman for the flight home.
On checking in I found to my horror that I and another participant in the pilgrimage showed up on the computer as canceled." We had done all the right things; I had confirmed my return flight three times, including the mandatory confirmation within 72 hours of departure.


Habitats/Eastchester, N.Y.; The Happy 'Runaways'
LOOKING at gigantic houses in New Jersey and minuscule condominiums in New York City, they had become, in their words, surly and discouraged.
The agents, they said, just weren't producing.
They'd been dragged around for days on end by agents showing them things that were too ordinary, too sterile and too expensive.
They wanted a cozy house, not a cookie-cutter house, something that would make them feel joyful, in an enveloping neighborhood.
They wanted to spend $250,000 to $350,000.


First Michigan Bank Corp.(FMBC,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Jun 30


Bunker Talk
REICH ANGEL By Anita Mason. 373 pp. New York: Soho Press. $24.


When the Fine Is Too Low, Guilty Companies Ignore It
To the Editor:
The July 2 article "Enduring the Year of the Dust" tells how Metropolitan Life was fined a meaningless $265 for "allowing the emission of a visible air contaminant" after complaints poured in.
It is just another egregious example of why contaminators continue to thrive in New York City.


In the End, Bitter Taste Of Tears And Ink
Eight photographers were scheduled to work yesterday at New York Newsday.
But, said Chris Hatch, the photo editor, "I expect everyone's coming in; everyone wants a piece of tomorrow's paper."
In the city room yesterday, the police radio still crackled.
The Sunday editor, Mari McQueen, scanned the wire-service daybook, matching reporter to potential story: Brian Ballou from the cop shop to cover the death of an abused infant; Malik Ducard to handle a "bright" on homeless youngsters getting baseball lessons.


Diana George, D. H. Telemachou
Diana Louise George, a daughter of Judge Harriet P. George and Justice Norman George of Floral Park, Queens, is to be married today to Demetris Harry Telemachou, the son of Harry and Magda Telemachou of Nicosia, Cyprus.
The Rev.
Panayiotis Papageorghiou, a Greek Orthodox priest, is to perform the ceremony at St.
Napa Church in Ayia Napa, Cyprus.
The bride, who works in Nicosia, is an accountant and a manager of offshore services for Coopers &amp; Lybrand, the accounting firm.
She graduated from Queens College.
Her father is an acting justice of State Supreme Court and is a judge of the Court of Claims of the State of New York, both in Brooklyn.
Her mother is a judge of the Housing Part of the New York City Civil Court in Kew Gardens, Queens.


Credit the Father
To the Editor:
Mr.
Lopate writes in part that "the pioneering films of Jean Renoir, Orson Welles and Marcel Ophuls (among others) in the 30's and 40's awakened a taste for a gliding, graceful camera."


Parametric Technology Corp.(PMTC,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to July 1


Water War: Is This River Big Enough for Rowboats and Jet Skis?
Lambertville is a quiet town of 4,500, with flower-laced lanes, Revolutionary War cottages, an annual shad festival -- and, more recently, boutiques and stylish restaurants that have spilled across the Delaware River from the antiquing capital of New Hope, Pa.
These days, however, Lambertville isn't always quiet.
Almost any summer afternoon, you can hear the roar of jet skis on the river -- and, sometimes, loud arguments between jet skiers and environmentalists like George Grother, a founder of the Delaware River Coalition and member of the Swan Creek Rowing Club.


Doll House Party
WITH AN INHERITANCE FROM THEIR FAMILY, WEALTHY GERMAN-JEWS, THE Stettheimer sisters -- Florine, Ettie and Carrie -- were the very models of "the new woman," as the French art critic Marius Ary-Leblond described the feminist of 1901.
The new woman, he wrote, lives "a full life, a complete and powerful one, equal in intensity and output to that of a man." Indeed, the Stettheimers declared men impossible but worthy of flirtation.
They wore pants, smoked cigarettes, disdained marriage, romance and children, and were constantly surrounded by artists and writers who were drawn to their soigne gatherings.
They were inseparable, those Stettheimers, possibly a reaction to their father's desertion shortly after Ettie's birth.
They lived with their mother here and abroad, and life was a series of quiet luxuries.
Florine painted, Ettie wrote two fairly obscure novels, "Philosophy" and "Love Days," under the pseudonym Henrie Waste (Henrietta Walter Stettheimer); Carrie's chief contribution to the family was managing its domestic and worldly affairs, which included overseeing what the art critic Henry McBride described as one of the most intellectual salons of the day.


Dispirited Armstrong Comes Oh So Close
Lance Armstrong, the American leader of the Motorola team, came so close -- a bicycle length or two at most -- to winning a stage of the Tour de France today, an achievement he had been thinking about for more than two weeks.
"I like this one, too," he said, gesturing to a profile handout of this 13th of 20 daily stages before the Tour began in Brittany on July 1.
"It'll be hot and I like that, and all these ups and downs, I like that." His analysis was perfect.


Jackpot! The Lowly Slot Is a Cash Cow
SLOT machines are like pop songs, offering minute variations on established themes, with hooks to grab your attention.
Some of them actually talk, telling the gambler in a coy digital voice, "Fill me up," or "You look like a winner."
They flash and pop and twinkle with multicolored charts that reveal a bewildering combination of payouts.
The 25-cent machine that Norma Silverstein of Camden County is playing at the Trump Taj Mahal this morning has a handle that sets the fruit salad combinations spinning, as well as a button that does the same thing.
But the button merely clicks; the handle comes down with an audible, ratcheting, satisfying crrrrunch.


For Those Who Fancy Cats, And Those Who Aspire To
Think you'd like to own a cat, but don't know which kind?
Head to the 59th Anniversary Garden State Cat Show, which winds up today at the Garden State Exhibit Center in Somerset.
The show features 450 purebred cats representing more than 35 breeds from around the world.
A computer asks 10 life-style questions and then suggests the best breeds based on the responses.
Admission is $7 for adults, $3 for senior citizens and children under 12.
Children under 5 are admitted free.
For more information, call (908) 469-4000.


Getting Ready for a Youthful Performance of 'West Side Story'
IF the boards are shaking with the dancing feet of children, it must be summer.
Youngsters who want to act, dance and sing can find public and private performing arts programs throughout the county, although budget cutbacks have made the pickings slimmer than in past years.
Summer is a time to focus on pursuits that receive fragmented attention during the school year.
Hours can be spent becoming a better tap dancer or learning the lines to a play.
And while a spirit of fun suits the season, children also learn that discipline can lead to something worthwhile.


Fanfares, Marches And More
FOR the last five summers, hundreds of music lovers in Woodbury have been entertained by the Waterbury Symphony, and on Saturday afternoon the group's music director, Leif Bjaland, makes it six in a row, leading the brass and wind sections of the orchestra in the annual "Picnic and Pops" concert in the Hollow.
The program celebrates the 50th anniversary of V-E Day with marches by John Phillips Sousa, bugle calls by Leroy Anderson, fanfares by Morton Gould and other music from the World War II era.


This Old House: The Agony and Ecstasy
THE old house had everything they wanted: the long winding driveway; the five acres that seemed like 50 because they were surrounded by the pastures of far-flung farms; picturesque weathered gray outbuildings where each could have a painting studio and finally, the quirky old added-to-over-the-years farmhouse with the original slate roof.
It was funny because Lynn and Larry Smith hadn't even set out to find an old house.
In fact, Mr.
Smith says, he would have taken a modern A-frame on the same setting, in the sleepy town of Hope, N.J., near the Pennsylvania border.


The Capitalist; Fidelities
JEFF VINIK WAS SOMEWHERE between the women's shoes and the men's accessories at the Salvatore Ferragamo boutique on Fifth Avenue when he mentioned Silicon Graphics.
He appeared to be trapped in a pincer of several hundred investors, who had come at the behest of Worth Magazine to celebrate his success, when he mentioned, by the by, to a couple of men sipping Champagne that he expected the share price of Silicon Graphics to double.
I believe only a few people heard him, though just about everyone would have liked to.
The economist John Maynard Keynes once described the art of investing as "anticipating what average opinion expects average opinion to be." Vinik represents average opinion.
He runs the Magellan Fund, the huge mutual fund that controls $45 billion of Fidelity Investments' $200 billion portfolio.
The crowd of hundreds trailed closely behind the human bellwether as he left the clothing store and traveled down to the University Club, where he was scheduled to deliver a lecture.
On the way I thought he might drop a further nugget, but when I asked him (discreetly, of course) about the stocks in his portfolio, the only name that he mentioned was Silicon Graphics.
Then he strolled to the podium and explained to a standing-room-only audience that America is in a "boom-boom era, . . . in only the third or fourth inning of the current bull market." His best guess was that the stock market would rise for another 7 to 10 years.


CONFLICT IN THE BALKANS: Bosnian Serbs Push Past U.N. Posts Into Muslim Enclave; Europe Unlikely to Act
While European officials indicated today that there was little prospect of using military force in Bosnia to prevent the fall of Zepa, they said they were working on a plan to reinforce United Nations troops in another enclave and in Sarajevo, the capital.
France opened the latest round of diplomatic maneuvering on Thursday when President Jacques Chirac threatened to pull the nearly 4,000 French soldiers in the peacekeeping force out of Bosnia unless the United Nations agreed to take stronger action.
He has proposed using the new European rapid-reaction force to ease the Bosnian Serb siege of Sarajevo and to protect Gorazde.
"If France actually believed that military action could save Zepa and Srebrenica, then no doubt French troops would be marching on Zepa and Srebrenica at this time," the British Foreign Secretary, Malcolm Rifkind said today.
"They are not."
Jordan, which has 2,500 troops in Bosnia, also said today that it would pull out if nothing is done to stop Serbian attacks.


Dueling Banjos on a Grand Scale: Rival Festivals
For several thousand bluegrass devotees, the Peaceful Valley Bluegrass Festival is one of the last strongholds of tradition, where the songs are old and the style is restrained.
"I don't like the progressive stuff," said M. D. Culpepper, 71, a Kentucky-born coal miner, as he settled in for four days of picking and fiddling at a campground nestled between two forested ridges in the Catskills 100 miles northwest of New York City.
"Today, these young guys play so fast they get out on a limb and then can't climb back."


Consolidated Papers Inc.(CDP,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Jun 30


BOMBS BURSTING IN AIR, STILL
Sean Wilentz is right to compare today's militiamen to a type of fringe factionalism that has always been part of our political landscape ("Bombs Bursting in Air, Still," June 25).
His article illustrates how taking the moderate course between violent extremes is a democratic society's greatest challenge.
KATHARINE RAUCH Warwick, R.I.


After 10 Years, Hoover Dam Center Is Open
The new Hoover Dam visitors' center opened last month after 10 years of construction at a cost of $120 million.
The three-story glass and concrete structure hugs a rocky canyon wall near the northern edge of the dam, on the Nevada side, 35 miles southeast of Las Vegas on the Colorado River.


Courtney Strouce, John D. Blundin
Courtney Elizabeth Strouce, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard A. Strouce of Allentown, Pa., was married yesterday to John Douglas Blundin, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
John L. Blundin of Englewood, N.J.
The Rev.
Dr.
Jefferson Aiken, a Presbyterian minister, officiated at the First Presbyterian Church in Allentown.
The Rev.
Herbert G. Draesel, an Episcopal priest, took part in the ceremony.
Mrs.
Blundin, 23, graduated from Cornell University.
She is an account executive at Magazine Services Inc., an advertising, marketing and sales company in New York.
Her father is the former owner of Lehigh Valley Laboratories in Allentown.


Need an Extra Week Off? Visit the Company Store
AS long as there's a market, it seems, everything is available for a price.
In the United States, where the average worker is relatively well-paid but vacation-poor, time off has become a commodity to be bought and sold.
Since the late 1980's, an increasing number of companies -- Du Pont, Quaker Oats, Coca-Cola and American Express among them -- have begun including extra vacation time in their flexible benefits programs.
Hewitt Associates, the employee benefit consulting firm, estimated last September that about 15 percent of American companies let employees buy or sell time, though usually no more than five days a year.


Easy Come, Easy Go: A Cautionary Tale
John Scarne, who lived most of his life in Hudson County (he died in 1985 at the age of 82), was a legendary, street-smart expert on games and gambling.
In his "Complete Guide to Gambling" (Simon &amp; Schuster, 1961), he had this to say about slot machines:
Automation came to the gambling industry in 1895, when Charles Fey placed the first nickel-in-the-slot machine in the gambling places of San Francisco.
Today the slot machine, long known as the "one-armed bandit," is without any doubt gambling's most consistent money-maker.
There has never been any other gambling device which has produced such enormous profits with so little effort . . .


Two Weeks of Fresh Air In Suburbs, Pool Included
With the sun glaring in everyone's eyes and the air hanging heavy over the platforms, a crowd of people at the Mineola station eagerly awaited the train from New York City on a recent afternoon.
They were not looking for the usual commuters returning home from a day at work.
They were awaiting a group of close to 20 chatty, giggling, energetic youngsters headed out of the city for two weeks of play, relaxation and, most of all, a change of pace from their daily urban routines.
Among the crowd, Warren Cronacher stood next to his nephew, David Gesuadi, a 10-year-old from Rhode Island, waiting for Crystal Westbrook, 9, to return for her third summer as a Fresh Air child here.


Brett Savage and Ryan Baker
WHILE some weddings are as quiet in spirit as an Edward Hopper painting, Brett Savage and Ryan Baker's wedding was like a parade, Super Bowl celebration, light show, disco party and black-tie dinner all at once.
Everything about the wedding was oversize, beginning with the invitations, which were so large that they could have been used to mark the bases in a softball game.


Students' Choice: Winning Essays On Favorite Places to Visit
Seventeen elementary school students were honored last week by the state Division of Travel and Tourism for their essays about destinations in New Jersey.
Students from kindergarten through sixth grade were asked to visit one of more than 100 sites throughout the state and write about their experiences.
Here are excerpts.
I went to the Cape May Lighthouse.
There are 30 steps between each landing.
There were 3 lighthouses.
The Coast Guard continues to operate the lighthouse as an active aid to navigation.
STEPHANIE METZ Second grade, Northfield
At the New Jersey State Aquarium I saw different types of fish.
There were some poisonous fish.
I saw a bass, it was sitting on a rock.
GARY POWELL Fifth grade, West Caldwell
I can take a step back into the past at Longstreet Farm and pretend I am Laura Ingalls Wilder.
I can take a trip into the future at Liberty Science Center and be an alien from Mars dropping down to visit Earthlings.
JENNIFER LIN Second grade, Middletown
It was sheep-shearing day at Howell Living History Farm.
They used a special kind of scissor.
We washed the wool in soapy water.
We let it dry.
Afterwards, we teased the wool.
BRENT WILSON First grade, Hamilton Square
I learned that New Jersey is important.
It may not seem like much, but inside its small boundaries, there are loads of wonderful things to explore.
JACKLYN WERNER Fourth grade, Forked River


PLAYING IN THE NEIGHBORHOOD
BRONX PARK EAST Sights and Smells Of a Summer Garden


NEWS AND TOPICS
Look!
Up in the sky!
A gorgeous bloom of balloons, and in two weeks they'll be floating over the hills and backyards of Hunterdon County. (Laura Pedrick for The New York Times)


For Employee Benefits, It Pays to Wear the Union Label
American companies are spending more, on average, to provide benefits for their employees.
But sometimes they do so only under pressure, and often added benefits come at the price of smaller pay raises.
Which industries spend the most on benefits?
Companies in industries that are either government regulated or unionized or both.
From a worker's point of view, pressure on the boss pays in terms of benefits.


Introverts, Extroverts And Mothers Who Wait
UPTOWN -- Mark Morris was an emotional fireworks display in his dressing room at the New York State Theater on July 12, and his quiet and unassuming mother, Maxine Morris, seemed to be enjoying the show.
The brash young choreographer had just received a standing ovation at the opening night of his "L'Allegro, Il Penseroso ed Il Moderato," a kind of mood-swing ballet presented as part of Lincoln Center's Serious Fun Festival.
"It was very good," said Mrs.
Morris, who was in a matronly pink dress.
"I didn't see one misstep all night."
Mr.
Morris, who was in a lot of canary yellow, enjoyed watching his work, too, despite the woman sitting behind him.
"She was wearing all these jingly-jangly silver bracelets," he said as he chain-smoked and guzzled a tall can of beer.
"If it had been somebody else's performance, I'd have ripped them off her."
If the evening-length ballet was an abstract depiction of the introvert and the extovert, mother and son were the living embodiment of those bipolar qualities.
"I have a lot of pep," Mr. Morris said.
"You could call him a showoff at times, I guess," said the reticent Mrs.
Morris, as she watched an international crowd lavish compliments on her son.
"It's epic-making!" someone told him.
"What a thrill it is to be here!" someone else added.
The antic Mr.
Morris, in turn, expressed himself in flamboyant language peppered with an occasional obscenity his mother chose to ignore.
"He's not allowed to use profanity at home," she said. "And neither are his friends."
When things had quieted down, mother and son left the dressing room for a reception on the theater's promenade.
"If I'm hanging on to you, it's only because I'm a little tired," said Mrs.
Morris, who had just arrived from Seattle, where, as a toddler, Mr.
Morris hung on to a coffee table in her living room while dancing.
"Don't worry, Mom, I have enough equilibrium for the both of us," he said.
"I just hope there's beer up there." Mrs.
Morris, who doesn't approve of drinking, said she was looking forward to a glass of Coca-Cola.
"It's a fete! It's a fete!" Mr.
Morris yelled as they were welcomed with applause and showered with more compliments.
After an hour, it was time to call it a night.
"They've closed the bar, for Christ's sake," Mr.
Morris said before catching himself and telling his mother he didn't mean to use the Lord's name in vain.
"But, since I'm not a Christian, I can," he added.
His mother didn't care to argue the point.
"Come on, let's blow, Mom," he said.
"O.K.," she said.
"Let's get the hell out of here," he added.
During the fraction of a second that passed, Mrs.
Morris didn't even have to raise an eyebrow.
"I mean," Mr. Morris said, "heck."
Beyond the Red Carpet
It was near midnight on July 5, and a private party welcoming Christy Turlington as a new partner in the Fashion Cafe was still in progress.
April Sandmeyer, a sweet-natured woman with a childlike smile, had been standing with a crowd behind police barricades outside the themey-restaurant at Rockefeller Center for five hours.
"My daughter's inside and I didn't want her to be here alone," Mrs.
Sandmeyer said as thin somebodies like Jay McInerney and Carmen Dell'Orefice came and went on a red carpet in front of a crowd of gawkers who didn't recognize them.
"She loves the modeling world," Mrs.
Sandmeyer said about her daughter, Maria Caballero, 17, who has a part in the new movie "Kids," directed by Larry Clark.
"It's what she really wants to do. She's had a vanity problem since she was 13. It used to take her a minimum of two hours to get ready to go to school, but now that straight hair is back in, she doesn't have to go through quite so many contortions."
Naomi Campbell, who long ago had made a dazzling entrance with her Fashion Cafe partners, Ms.
Turlington, Claudia Schiffer and Elle Macpherson, stepped outside.
"Thanks for coming, everybody," she said before disappearing into a car.
"Please go home now because the party's over."
Mrs.
Sandmeyer, along with the rest of the crowd, held her ground.
"I hope Maria comes out soon," she said as she shifted on her tennis sneakers.
More time passed.
More people who looked important -- Eileen Ford, Kevin Aucoin, Kenny Scharf, Quincy Jones -- came out of the party.
Finally, Ms.
Caballero, a slender, somewhat exotic-looking teen-ager in a blue cocktail dress, appeared with a much older man at her side.
"I'd like to take her to the Whiskey Bar for one drink and then I'll bring her right home," the man told Mrs.
Sandmeyer, who sent him teetering off by himself with her pleasant but unyielding smile.
"This is why I wanted to wait here," she told her daughter, who proceeded to report on the party.
"It was pretty boring," Ms.
Caballero said with the grand ennui of the Manhattan teen-ager.
"The band was good. The food was O.K."
"What about the decor?" her mother asked.
"It was a little cheesy," Ms.
Caballero said, adding that the supermodels in attendance had pretty much kept to themselves all evening and that she was a little disappointed not to have met any modeling agents.
"If I can make a living by standing in front of a camera everyday, I'd love to do that," she said.
"Otherwise, I'll just be a recording artist." Her mother muttered something about attending college first; then, she inquired about Ms.
Macpherson's skintight, somewhat diaphanous pants.
"Was that her underwear you could see underneath?" Mrs. Sandmeyer asked.
"It was a red thong," Ms. Caballero answered.
Having established that essential point, it was time to go home.
And not by bus, either.
"I'm taking you home by cab, Mom," she said.


Jordanian Is Lionized In Israel
In the three months since he arrived as Jordan's first Ambassador to Israel, Marwan Muasher has become a celebrity, although sometimes a reluctant one.
He is a sought-after guest at dinners and receptions.
He has appeared on television.
He gives lectures.
He has been interviewed by the Israeli press.


Crossing Over, the Old-Fashioned Way
THESE DAYS, CROSSOVER recordings are most often marketing ploys for performers.
Put, say, Luciano Pavarotti and Bryan Adams together, and let them trade phrases in a middlebrow ballad as they indulge in some synchronized mugging for the television cameras.
No one pretends that anything musically innovative is going on.
But in the early part of this century, especially the 20's and 30's, many popular and classical musicians were intensely curious about what was going on across the way.
In their pursuit of innovation artists from different traditions not only crossed the borders that divided them, they also settled in for a while on the other turf, tried on the local costumes, picked up a few mementos and took them home.


Sarah Smith, J. D. Klingbeil Jr.
Sarah Stuart Macaulay Smith, a daughter of Jane S. M. Smith of Washington and the late Thomas William Macaulay Smith, was married yesterday to James David Klingbeil Jr., a son of Sally A. Klingbeil and James D. Klingbeil of San Francisco.
The Rev.
Canon Donald F. Boyer performed the ceremony at St.
James Episcopal Church in Woodstock, Vt.
Mrs.
Klingbeil, 28, graduated from the University of Pennsylvania, as did her husband, and received a master's degree in reading and language education from the University of California at Berkeley.
Until recently she was a first-grade teacher at the Town School in San Francisco.


When Television Is an Open Book
WHEN the summer heat is so thick it shimmers, there are two excellent ways to get cool: run through a sprinkler's mist or go to a library and read near the air-conditioner.
Two public television series and a special are intended to send young readers to the stacks.
On the special, "Celebrate Storytelling" (Channel 13, Sunday, July 23 at noot), Kelly McGillis wanders into a book-filled room to introduce two Hans Christian Andersen stories.
She tells "Thumbelina," and Glenn Close narrates "The Emperor and the Nightingale."
On "Storytime" (Channel 13, weekdays at 10:30 A.M., Channel 31 Monday through Thursday at 3:30 P.M.), which just began its second year on PBS, celebrites stop by a library set to read a story and chat with a puppet named Kino.
On Monday, for example, John Goodman drops in to read "Little Polar Bear," by Hans de Beer, and "Rose Meets Mr. Wintergarten," by Bob Graham.
"Reading Rainbow" (Channel 13, weekdays at 4 P.M.; Channel 21, weekdays at 9:30 A.M.), which has been on the air since 1983, uses a book as a starting point for an adventure, activity or discussion, and offers children's mini-reviews of related books.
On one show LeVar Burton, the host, follows a 17-year-old girl who has always wanted to be a pilot on her first flight, and Linda Lavin reads "Ruth Law Thrills a Nation," by Don Brown.
Mr.
Burton plays with light, and Robert Guillaume reads Robert Louis Stevenson's poem "My Shadow."
While Congress and parents cluck over the state of pop culture and its effects on children, programs like these continue to show that there are signs of intelligent life on television.
Far from the din of the Mighty Morphin Power Rangers, beyond the known quantities of "Sesame Street" and "Barney," the programs exist like small, calm islands, waiting for children and their parents to happen upon them.
The pace is slow, leaving room for imagination.
The stories unfold as the camera lingers on illustrations.
Some are minimally animated.
Musical touches enhance the dramatic ebbs and flows.
If a child can slow down long enough to be drawn in, the effect can be mesmerizing.
These programs are meant to jog parents to read to their children, and to prompt children to ask them to.
Julie Cummins, the coordinator of children's services for the New York Public Library, said the New York City public schools have increased their push to keep pupils reading over the summer.
Those who do, she said, "keep up their level of conprehension and don't have to catch up when they get back to school."
The books that are read on the shows are a mix of the familiar and the new.
The pattern between stories shows how books can start conversations.
And on "Storytime," seeing a grown-up curled up with a couple of kids on a couch is a reminder that children -- and parents -- need physical closeness to thrive and that reading together is one way to be close.
Is anybody tuning in?
Ms.
Cummins said that when it can, the library tries to make available the books on "Reading Rainbow."
"Showing people reading, and valuing reading, passes along that value to children," she said.
"Anything that makes a connection between books and enjoyment is O.K. in our book."


How Minnesota Is Coping With Those Canada Geese
To the Editor:
Regarding your July 2 article "In War With Geese, Most Towns Are Losing," I understand that Minnesota has another approach to the Canada geese problem.
Some 200 of the fattest birds captured weekly find their way to the plates of the needy.
Practical folk, those Minnesotans.
KEN KARP Fort Lee


Bosnia Lets Refugees Leave Camp But 20,000 Others Are Missing
As thousands of Muslim refugees from Srebrenica were moved from a wretched camp outside the airport here in northeastern Bosnia, United Nations officials said today that about 20,000 other Srebrenica refugees were unaccounted for.
"There are 20,000 or so people missing, and we have not been able to trace them," said Yuri Shishayev, a United Nations spokesman in Tuzla, 45 miles northeast of Srebrenica.
"Most of them are men of draft age, and the Serbs' stated position is that they have been taken away for screening. But given the manner in which they carried out the operation in Srebrenica, I think we have some grounds to fear the worst."


Gershwin, The Beatles And More
The New York Pops in Damrosch Park at Lincoln Center, July 10.


Hot! Hot! Hot! The Sweaters Of Summer
Summer sweaters are not only a style statement, but also a necessity on even the hottest days as a comfortable protection against air-conditioning's too-often frigid blast.
The long sleeves of a sweater, looped around the shoulders, may be a traditional look, but they become a fashion statement when added to this summer's revival of classic sportswear or the sleeveless linen sheath dress.
From the Gap to Chanel, the summer's big favorite appears to be the twin-sweater set in matching colors, in either cardigan or pullover style.
The newest twin sets are the short-sleeved cardigans (top, far left).
The summer sweaters come in a wide range of knits: cotton, linens and blends of natural and synthetic yarns.


Ms. Hemmer and Mr. Schlingmann
Jennifer Ann Hemmer, the daughter of Camille H. Hemmer of Sacramento, Calif., and John F. Hemmer of Redondo Beach, Cailf., was married yesterday to Matthias Schlingmann, a son of Erika Schlingmann of Asemissen, Germany, and the late Herbert Schlingmann.
Judge Philip V. Sarkisian of the Superior Court of Alameda County in California officiated at a private residence in Tahoe City, Calif.
Ms.
Hemmer, who is 30 and is keeping her name, is a sponsorship account manager at Soccer USA Partners, a sports marketing agency in New York.
She graduated from the University of California at Berkeley and received a master's degree in international affairs from Columbia University.


Ideas &amp; Trends; The Spies' Code And How It Broke
TO the human brain, with its insatiable hunger for order, nothing is more disorienting than randomness.
Soviet cryptographers knew this well when they set out to devise a code for communicating with the spy ring that included Julius and Ethel Rosenberg.
With a system as simple as it was ingenious, they tried to insure that any message intercepted by United States intelligence agents would seem as meaningless as the snow on a television set tuned to an empty station.
But pure, unadulterated randomness can be extremely difficult to manufacture.
As was revealed last week after decades of secrecy, in a ceremony at the Central Intelligence Agency headquarters, the Russians suffered from a lapse in quality control.
They inadvertently let some pattern find its way into their scrambled codes, a loose thread that allowed American code breakers to unravel the scheme slowly.


Documents Were Destroyed as F.B.I. Resisted Siege Investigation, Report Says
A Justice Department report not yet made public on the F.B.I.'s standoff with a white separatist in Idaho shows that in late 1992 and early 1993 -- the period during which Bureau officials are suspected of destroying documents about the incident -- F.B.I. managers were frantically trying to block Federal prosecutors from obtaining the Bureau's records on the case.
Justice Department investigators, who uncovered the document destruction in recent weeks, have found that a career F.B.I. official stripped the files of official records that would have clearly shown if top F.B.I. officials in Washington were in command of the ill-fated operation.


IN SHORT: FICTION
COSETTE  The Sequel to "Les Miserables." By Laura Kalpakian. HarperCollins, $24.


Coalition to Focus On Support for the Arts
MORE than 120 arts leaders from around the country are expected to gather at Doral Arrowwood in Rye Brook on July 28 for the annual conference of the National Coalition of United Arts Funds.
The Westchester Arts Council will be the host of the three-day meeting, which will focus on new approaches to fund-raising at a time of government and corporate cutbacks.
John Brademus, former president of New York University and a champion of the arts, and Leon Botstein, president of Bard College and music director of the American Symphony Orchestra, will be the featured speakers.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
AMONG WHALES  By Roger Payne. Scribner, $27.50.


In Bach's 'Goldbergs,' Practice Makes Partly Perfect
IF I WERE IN A CRITICAL FRAME OF MIND, there would be no end of caviling: here an unevenness in 64th-note passages, there the loss of an inner voice, elsewhere a failure to differentiate timbral qualities between sections.
More practice is needed in one spot, more attention to the harmonic progression in another, more dissection of difficult passages throughout.
But I am patient and long-suffering. For I am also the player.


THE DEADLIEST D.A.
THE PHONE RANG IN DAVE WEBB'S downtown Philadelphia apartment at 7:15 on the morning of April 23, 1991.
Webb, 42, was acting chief of homicide in the prosecutor's office, soon to be appointed chief by the new District Attorney, Lynne Abraham.
Homicide detectives needed Webb's approval before making an arrest or getting a search warrant.
And since local killers showed little respect for the sleep of local prosecutors, the phone rang all night -- on one particularly nasty night, Webb got 12 calls, on four killings, between 11 P.M. and 6 A.M.
Receiving a call at 7:15 was a luxury.
"Looks like it's going to be a double," William Gross, a detective, told Webb.
"One's already gone, the other one is shot in the head." The dead man, 26-year-old Ricardo Thomas, had apparently been shot in the head while sleeping.
He was still in the fetal position when the body was discovered on a couch in the southwest Philadelphia house of Lisa Johnson, 22, who had been shot in the head as she lay on another couch.
Her father had discovered them when he came downstairs at 6 A.M.


Mari-Jo Winkler, Edward A. Ioffreda
Mari-Jo Winkler, a daughter of Norman and JoAnne Winkler of Orchard Park, N.Y., was married at her parent's house yesterday to Edward Andrew Ioffreda, a son of Dr.
Pasqualino F. Ioffreda of Highland Park, N.J., and the late Lois Ioffreda.
Lois Kellerman, the Senior Leader of the Brooklyn Society for Ethical Culture, performed the ceremony.
Mrs.
Winkler-Ioffreda, 28, and her husband, 30, are freelance production supervisors in the motion picture industry.
The bride, a graduate of American University, is currently the production supervisor for the screen adaptation of Arthur Miller's "The Crucible," for 20th Century Fox.
Mr.
Winkler-Ioffreda, a graduate of New York University, was until recently an assistant to a producer of "To Wong Foo, Thanks for Everything, Julie Newmar," a Universal Pictures film.


Corrections
A report last Sunday about the wedding of Dr.
Karin Lynn Schutjer and Dr.
Benjamin Leontief Alpers referred incorrectly to the award of the 1973 Nobel Memorial Prize in Economic Science to the bridegroom's grandfather Dr.
Wassily Leontief.
He was the sole recipient; the prize was not shared.


A Magic Bus for a Weekend Or for a Long, Strange Trip
VOLKSWAGEN campers are fine for camping, but for many people they may not be practical as everyday transportation.
Their lackluster performance can be a nuisance while commuting, and a conventional station wagon or mini-van offers similar flexibility for carrying people and cargo -- with considerably better road manners.
And how often does one go camping?
In lieu of buying a VW camper, renting one may be an option.
Three American companies specialize in renting the vehicles for camping and vacation travel, offering adventurers the opportunity to drive, eat, sleep and generally make their home inside a VW van for a minimum of three days.
Prices vary by company and season, with the cost of a three-day rental ranging from a base charge of $195 to $345 with unlimited mileage.
The typical excursion taken by customers of each company lasts a week to 10 days and covers nearly 1,000 miles.


Loving Parents for Highways
Some New Jerseyans are hitting the road this summer; others are cleaning it up.
Since May, more than two dozen organizations have joined the Department of Transportation's Adopt-a-Highway program, bringing the total to 678 groups and an estimated 4,000 volunteers since the program's start in 1991.


THE NEW JAZZ AGE
I'm a 20-year-old student at Williams College, and despite my father's talk of the good old days, I never cared for jazz in my childhood.
Maybe my musical sensibilities have matured because now I am one of four or five D.J.'s hosting a weekly jazz show at our college radio station, WCFM.
Conroy's article was a great way for me to put my recent musical change of heart into perspective.


The Rib Tickler's Approach to Social Provocation
MORE THAN RATINGS ARE at stake for Michael Moore this summer as his sometimes loopy, sometimes acidly satiric news-magazine program, "TV Nation," returns to prime time.
His whole world view is on the line.
Mr.
Moore, the iconoclastic film maker who is destined to have his name followed forever by the phrase "producer and director of the award-winning documentary 'Roger and Me,' " says his career is propelled by the conviction that Americans are smarter and more politically sophisticated than the television industry thinks.


Veterans and Young Performers at Caramoor
SOME of the most revered artists mix and match with young performers this week at the Caramoor Festival.
This afternoon at 5:30, for instance, Alicia de Larrocha and Andre Previn offer four-hand Mozart, after which Mr.
Previn joins some so-called rising stars, Ayako Yoshida and Wendy Warner (an Avery Fisher Career Grant Award-winner several years ago), for the Mendelssohn D minor Trio.
On Thursday afternoon at 4:15, another young-artist pairing brings the violin-piano duo of Maria Bachmann and Jon Klibonoff to the Spanish Courtyard for sonatas by Ravel, Saint-Saens and John Corigliano.


Microchip Technology Inc.(MCHC,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Jun 30


Ancient Mariners
Twenty years ago, there were only a couple of T-shirt stores in Provincetown, Mass.
The town's currency had long since shifted from fishing to tourism, but the town's pride ran deep and local merchants were shy about exploiting the Provincetown image.
That reticence didn't last.
Now there seem to be as many T-shirt stores as there are shoppers.
But for those of us who have always worshiped the spirit of the place, a quiet society still exists.
This fraternity is apparent in the arch of a brow and the roll of an eye exchanged in summer between people who have weathered the winter on the fragile tip of Cape Cod.
Popular among us is the big T-shirt of the summer of 1975, the one with "Provincetown, the Last Resort" written across it.
It means that geography is either fate or choice, that you are either born in Provincetown and unable to leave or you came for a weekend and never left.
In either case, a destiny is shared.


Ms. Stebbins And Mr. McCaffrey
Katherine Anne Stebbins, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Ronald H. Stebbins of Westford, Vt., was married yesterday to David Michael McCaffrey, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
John J. McCaffrey of Hopewell Junction, N.Y.
The Rev.
Richard D. Ringenwald Sr., a Congregational minister, performed the ceremony at the Wilburton Inn in Manchester, Vt.


No Big Man Camp
PETE NEWELL canceled his annual Big Man Camp on Friday because of the National Basketball Association lockout.


Hancock Holding Co.(HBHC,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Jun 30


After the Fall: 2 Faces of Mexico's Economy
MOST Wednesdays, at precisely 2 P.M., Government officials gather here at the ornate National Palace to give the latest figures on declining inflation, surging stock prices and other positive signs of Mexico's steady climb back to economic stability.
While the good news is being related inside, unemployed Mexican workers sometimes mill outside on the huge Plaza of the Constitution, occasionally swaggering up to a microphone facing the palace windows.
They are hungry, they call out, and they are angry because the Government is forcing them to pay for getting the nation's economy back on track.


July 9-15: Lethal Bites; The Tick that Brought Lyme Disease Now Brings Death
Just in case humans weren't repulsed enough by Ixodes scapularis, the deer tick, scientists last week provided a new reason for fear and loathing.
The tiny parasite, made infamous from Nantucket to Minnesota for its ability to transmit Lyme disease, has now been shown to harbor a lethal bacterial illness, called human granulocytic ehrlichiosis, or H.G.E.
The human infection, first identified in several dozen cases in Wisconsin and Minnesota, has stricken a dozen residents of New York City suburbs in the first few weeks of this year's summer tick-bite season.
The infection can cause sudden severe flu-like symptoms and, if not treated with the appropriate antibiotics, can become life-threatening, researchers say.
Previously implicated in at least four deaths, H.G.E. is suspected most recently in the case of a New York man who ended up the intensive care unit at a New York City hospital last month.
He quickly healed once the right drugs took hold.
It's possible for a single tick bite to transmit Lyme, H.G.E., and even perhaps a third known infectious organism, a protozoan called babesia, said Dr.
J.
Stephen Dumler, a microbiologist at the University of Maryland, who is testing for H.G.E. infections using DNA analysis similar to that used in the O.J.
Simpson trial.
"It's pretty scary," he said, "if you think about what's inside of a tick." ANDREW C. REVKIN


On the Highways This Week: 15 Spots to Avoid
A look at trouble spots you may encounter in the next week -- or month, or months -- courtesy of Transcom, an interstate transportation agency.
1.
ROUTE 4 -- Fort Lee.
Eastbound left lane and ramp to northbound I-95 closed, through July.
One lane from upper and lowel level of George Washington Bridge to westbound Route 4 closed, through Nov. 15.


A Mini-Trade War, Disarmed


A QUESTION FOR: T. CORAGHESSAN BOYLE
Q: Do you have a fence around your own house?
A: I certainly do -- a redwood fence about six feet high.
And I have a gate across the driveway and a lock on the front gate.
I put the lock up myself because I live in this very famous old house and tourists come to look at it.
The first week I owned the place, people showed up in my living room.


From Wonder Boy to Leader
It could be more than a coincidence that the same people who sponsor Jeff Gordon also make Teflon.
During one of his personal appearances at the Du Pont corporate headquarters, stock car racing's newest phenom must have acquired his own nonstick surface.
Dale Earnhardt, who trails Gordon in the championship standing as well as the money-winning list, started calling the 23-year-old driver "Wonder Boy" earlier this year.
The feeling was that Earnhardt wasn't totally awestruck.


Business-Friendly New York
To the Editor:
"Building a Business-Friendly New York"  [ June 4 ]  paints a portrait of new Urban Development Corporation chief, Charles A. Gargano, as a man who would alter the mission of the U.D.C. to focus more on supporting private development than on promoting public projects.
While few would argue that what New York needs now is a healthier private economy, Mr.
Gargano should not lose sight of the long-term benefits of government investment in public and quasi-public projects.
The very projects toward which Mr.
Gargano has adopted a "go-slow" approach -- the waterfront park along the Hudson River, from Battery Park City to 59th Street; an international trade center and hotel in Harlem, and a light rail link-up between Manhattan and the airports -- are precisely what is needed to make Manhattan a more desirable place to live -- and to work.
Whatever short-term benefits the "Disneyfication" of Times Square and the "mallification" of Rockland County may bring -- in construction jobs now and service jobs later -- they do little to make New York a more vital and more pleasant place to live.


The Emerald City
THE BOSTON IRISH A Political History.
By Thomas H. O'Connor.
Illustrated. 363 pp.
Boston:  Northeastern University Press. $24.95.


A Question of Resources
The state has moved to take over the Newark school system, and has already done so in Jersey City and Paterson.
Is this the best way to correct troubled schools?
Is there a better way?
I can't help wondering what difference a takeover will make if the schools have no more resources than they did 10 years ago.


No Headline
"It was terrible this  morning because I got out of the shower to dry off and I was wet again. The more I toweled myself, the more I perspired." -- MICHAEL CAPUTO, of Bayville, L.I.  [ 28:1. ]


ON THE TOWNS
MUSIC ALLAN P. KIRBY ARTS CENTER The 1995 Opera Festival of New Jersey concludes with "Elixir of Love." Today at 3 P.M.
Tickets: $18-$135.
The Lawrenceville School, Route 26 in Lawrenceville. (609) 936-1500.
BRIDGETON'S RIVERFRONT In a series of free Sunday night concerts, the Pitman Hobo Band performs today at 7 P.M.
The Brown Street Chowder Society plays next Sunday.
Routes 49 and 77 in Bridgeton. (609) 451-9208.


Along With A.L. West Competition, Rangers Also Face Heat Hurdle
The Chicago Cubs, one long-held theory goes, cannot win pennants because of the many day games they play in the hot summer months.
The Texas Rangers don't play many day games, but a similar theory holds that they can't win either because the heat and humidity they play in are even more oppressive than the Cubs face.
After spending a couple of days in the Arlington heat last week for the All-Star Game, baseball people who might not previously have experienced it gained a better understanding of the heat hurdle the Rangers have to overcome.


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
EARTH DAYS
Family Days on Saturday and Sunday, presented from 1 to 5 each day by the Connecticut Museum of Natural History in Storrs, will be devoted to the earth, the minerals it contains, and what can be done with them.
Children may pan for gold, dig in a make-believe quarry and reproduce fossils.
They can watch videos of tornadoes, demonstrations of an erupting volcano and see how minerals become fluorescent under ultra-violet light.


Jane A. Newman, Evan B. Azriliant
Jane Alison Newman, a daughter of Mel and Irene Newman of Plainview, L.I., was married yesterday evening to Evan Bret Azriliant, a son of Sidney and Wendy Azriliant of Woodbury, L.I.
Cantor David Benedict performed the ceremony at the Essex House in New York.
Ms.
Newman-Azriliant is a manager of policy analysis at Pfizer Inc., the pharmaceuticals company in New York.
She graduated from the State University at Binghamton, N.Y., and received a master's degree in public health from Yale University.
Her father is a salesman in Woodbury for Pro Celebrity, a sportswear company.
Her mother teaches special education at the Sparke School in Island Trees, L.I.


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
Greenport's Nonstop Train
IT'S not that Frank Field wants to turn his backyard in Greenport into Disney World.
It's just that Mr.
Field loves trains, and riding in them.
He always has.
"I'm a third-generation railroad man," he said.


Send One Their Way


CRIME
"You know, my job, it's hard to sit in judgment about what people do," Inspector Charlie Resnick says in John Harvey's LIVING PROOF (Holt, $22.50).
"What happens, most of the time anyway, whatever it is someone's done, somehow you come to understand."
You won't find a more ethical or compassionate copper than Resnick, which is one reason this series, set in the depressed industrial city of Nottingham, represents the top of the line in the traditional British police procedural.
Another reason is that without deviating from the classic detective formula, Mr.
Harvey writes truthful stories about people who have to fight to retain their humanity in the harsh social climate of their gritty city.
In this context, crime is what happens when they fail.


Margaret Leeson, Thomas Gramaglia
Margaret Hazard Leeson, a daughter of Robert Leeson Jr. and Margaret H. Goddard Leeson of Narragansett, R.I., was married there yesterday to Thomas Ricker Gramaglia, a son of Ronald Gramaglia and Gloria Ricker Gramaglia of Morristown, N.J.
The Rev.
Russell Ruffino performed the ceremony at St.
Peter's by-the-Sea, an Episcopal church.
Ms.
Leeson, 33, is keeping her name.
She is an associate at Sherin &amp; Lodgen, a law firm in Boston.
She graduated from Brown University and received her law degree from Northeastern University.


Uninvited Guests, Hungry but Often Amiable
THERE are several stone walls on the property, so sooner or later, it was bound to happen.
Chipmunks have moved in.
Perhaps it would be more accurate to say a chipmunk has moved in.
So far, it appears to be without a mate.
But this is not to be counted on; the chipmunk is, after all, a family type.
Although no nest has been discovered, this forager's hiding place has -- the downspout of a roof gutter.


Applied Extrusion Technologies Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Jun 30


Seriously, 'Love for Three Oranges' Can Be Funny
PROKOFIEV'S "LOVE FOR Three Oranges" is an exuberant and endearing little gem.
But considering how unseriously opera in general is taken these days, what chance is there that that most abusable of forms, an operatic comedy, might be taken seriously?
Sure enough, the new laser-disk "Love" from Pioneer Classics comes with a jacket disclaimer reassuring the prospective viewer that "the music is mostly trivial" ("a terrific five-finger exercise for the young Prokofiev") and that "this production achieves an almost greater seriousness by virtue of the wizardry of its production and refusal to take itself too seriously."


Abbreviating Daily Odyssey For Commuters
For years, commuters between Staten Island and midtown Manhattan have had to use cars, express buses and conventional ferries with subway connections.
Their routes are often circuitous: over bridges, through tunnels, across Brooklyn or even into New Jersey and back to Manhattan.
No matter how the trip is made, it takes at least 60 to 90 minutes during rush hour, often longer given routine glitches like construction, traffic accidents, congestion, inclement weather and subway disruptions.


The World: Withdrawal Symptoms; Honor, Too, Is Put to Flight in Bosnia
MANY things have died or been seriously compromised in Bosnia.
The optimism of the cold war's end.
The credibility of NATO.
The American commitment to European security.
The notion that a Europe no longer divided shares a commitment to basic human dignity.
But perhaps the death of Western honor has been the most devastating.
It was a sense of honor, conceived as part of a military culture that also embraced the values of self-sacrifice and unswerving courage, that drove American boys into Nazi fire and onto the Normandy beaches.
The same values were the guarantee and the bedrock of postwar security and prosperity in Western Europe.
Even in Vietnam, where America's confidence in itself was battered, the honor of fighting to extend the reach of freedom stood at the core of the beliefs of those who backed the war.


Angela I. Chan, Marc A. Risser
Angela Ivy Chan, the daughter of Julie and Norman Chan of Fresh Meadows, Queens, was married yesterday to Marc Andrew Risser, the son of Donald and Louise Risser of Orland Park, Ill.
Msgr.
Thomas A. Modugno performed the ceremony at St.
Monica's Roman Catholic Church in Manhattan.
The bride, 22, and the bridegroom, 25, graduated from the University of Miami, where Mrs.
Risser is studying for her medical degree.
Her father is an independent civil engineer in New York, where her mother is a statistician at the United Nations.


Splish Splash


On the Roads: Trouble Spots Worth Missing
A look at trouble spots you may encounter in the next week -- or month, or months -- courtesy of Transcom, an interstate transportation agency.
1.
ROUTE 4 -- Fort Lee.
Eastbound left lane and ramp to northbound I-95 closed, through July.
One lane from upper and lowel level of George Washington Bridge to westbound Route 4 closed, through Nov. 15.


At 12, Shuttle's a Pumpkin?
A proposal to shorten operating hours on the Franklin Avenue Shuttle drew opposition last week from riders who wonder how a city that claims not to sleep could consider ending round-the-clock service on even one of its shortest lines.
The shuttle, which the Transit Authority has proposed closing from midnight to 6 A.M., is the only connection in Brooklyn between the IND A and C lines, which run through northern Brooklyn, and the BMT D and Q lines, which go to southern Brooklyn.
The next available connection is at the West Fourth Street station in Manhattan.
About 10,000 people ride the shuttle each day.


The Nation; Winning Friends On Social Issues
ON the so-called social issues, President Clinton's political advisers think he is well positioned on abortion.
Gun-control, too.
But they fretted that Republicans might be getting a leg up on two other issues, violence on television and prayer in the schools.
So with next year's election campaign just below the horizon, the President last week set some new coordinates for himself.


Rutgers Student Is Killed As Robbers Attack Car
Cindy Del Carmen Villalba came home Thursday after six weeks in Costa Rica, dropped her bags at her parents' apartment, gave her whole family souvenirs, and went for a drive with her best friend.
Within an hour Ms.
Villalba, a senior at Rutgers University, was dead.
The police said she was shot by three robbers as she and her friend sat talking in a parked car in Paterson, N.J.
Yesterday the police arrested three teen-agers and charged them with murder and robbery.


A Taste of the Water Gap, From 9 Painters
TO the hypothetical crow, this small town is but 30 miles from the Delaware River, and travelers heading west would do well to pause here.
The scenery is reason enough at any time, but right now it is getting a boost from an exhibition by nine painters, which is on view at Sussex County Community College.
Apart from anything else, "Delaware Water Gap Landscapes," as it is called, gives Water Gap-bound travelers a taste of things to come.
And well it might, for whether or not the artists live in the area (and most do), they are clearly partial to it.


John Weakland, an Originator of Family Therapy, Is Dead at 76
John F. Weakland, an innovative psychotherapist who helped originate the field of family therapy and created elegantly simple strategies for solving problems of human behavior at the Mental Research Institute in Palo Alto, Calif., died on July 8 at his home in Palo Alto.
He was 76.
His wife, Anna Wu, said the cause was Lou Gehrig's disease.


Charles Ives's In-Laws
To the Editor:
Regarding Russell Banks's essay on Mark Twain and the Rev.
Joseph Twich ell ("How a Clergyman From Hartford Freed Huckleberry Finn," June 18), Twichell had another important link with American culture and arts.
He was the father-in-law of Charles Ives, who married Twichell's daughter Harmony (yes, that was her name) in 1908.


July 9-15: Hiroshima Remembered; An Exhibition Shows What The Smithsonian Didn't
Remember the eviscerated Smithsonian Air and Space Museum exhibit on the Enola Gay, the B-29 that dropped the bomb on Hiroshima?
Many of the sorts of artifacts and images that were stripped away from that show are now on the walls of American University, in Washington.
The Smithsonian's plans for a major exhibit on the Enola Gay were radically altered last January by the institution's president, after months of criticism.
Veterans groups and members of Congress complained that the exhibition's text portrayed Americans as aggressors and Japanese as victims in the bombing.
Eventually, nearly all references to the bombing's effects on Japan were erased.
Historians were flabbergasted.
Although Washington University officials said their show was not an answer to the Smithsonian's show, the university's exhibit included artifacts like those planned for the Smithsonian.
There were various items on loan from Japanese museums -- a melted clock and lunchbox, disintegrated clothes and kitchen goods -- and graphic pictures of the bombing's victims.
Speaking at the new exhibit's opening ceremony, a bomb survivor described seeing a friend's face "peeled, hanging like pieces of rag." Another survivor said the dead bodies around Hiroshima "looked like charred fish."
Scholars on both sides of this debate have wondered if 50 years was long enough to heal the bombing's emotional scars.
Apparently not.
TIMOTHY MCNULTY


Tantalizing In TriBeCa
BAROCCO ** (212) 431-1445; 301 Church Street, at Walker Street; $$; all major credit cards


Colonial BancGroup (CNB,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Jun 30


Christopher Webster, Heather Lyle
Heather Alison Lyle, the daughter of Valerie and Fraser Maxwell Lyle of Mendham, N.J., was married yesterday to Christopher Scott Webster, a son of Margaret and Dr.
Donald Webster of Syracuse.
The Rev.
Canon John T. Morrow performed the ceremony at St.
Luke's Episcopal Church in Gladstone, N.J.
Mrs.
Webster, 23, graduated from the College of William and Mary and last month received a master's degree in public administration from Syracuse University.
Her father retired as a portfolio manager at Kidder, Peabody &amp; Company, the securities brokers in New York.


New Home for Museum Of Judaica in London
The Jewish Museum in London, closed since last July, has reopened at a new site near Camden Town Underground station.
Founded in 1932, the museum, which houses the British national collection of Judaica, now has three times the display space that it had at its previous location on Woburn Place in Euston.
The museum has three galleries.
The History Gallery traces the story of Jews in Britain from 1066 to recent times.
Among the exhibits are medieval notched wooden tax receipts, 18th-century portraits and an interactive map of Britain that shows the increase in Jews from 1290 to 1990.


No Headline
HE rode standing by the subway door, over 6 feet tall, and hanging to a strap on the No. 1 heading into the Bronx.
He looked young, strong, mean.
The dark look in his eyes, the sneer on his lips were unmistakable: blank hatred.
Contempt.
Was he a gang member? Or a freelance thug? Was he armed?


'Emblems of Mind'
To the Editor:
While I am grateful for the attentiveness with which Kendall L. Walton approached my book "Emblems of Mind: The Inner Life of Music and Mathematics" (June 18), there are several crucial assertions he makes that merit response.


Ideas &amp; Trends: The New Bipartisanship; Resolved: No More Bleeding Hearts
ALMOST every week in Washington these days, liberal advocacy groups like the Center on Budget and Policy Priorities publish analyses of Republican budget cuts that show they fall disproportionately upon the poor.
Almost every day, some lonely liberal stands in the House or Senate, or takes the microphone in a congressional committee, and warns that the restructuring of poverty programs dating back 30 or 60 years will lead, inexorably, to the suffering of children.


Economic Growth Leaves States In Best Shape Since Early 80's
An economy that has been growing for more than four years is finally shining on state governments, easing the way for nine of them to make significant cuts in taxes and allowing many to increase spending on popular programs like education and prisons, according to a survey published today.
For the first time in a decade, the National Conference of State Legislatures reports that states, on average, have reduced taxes by more than they raised them.
The survey did not examine whether some of these reductions simply represented shifts of programs to county and local governments.


Gonzalez's Role
To the Sports Editor:
Pancho Gonzalez had an effect beyond the world of sports ("Pancho Gonzalez, U.S. Tennis Champion, Dies at 67," The Times, July 5).


Entertaining the Devil in Connecticut
WITCHCRAFT is still alive in the United States," said John Putnam Demos. The statement sounds like a headline in a supermarket tabloid, and coming from Mr. Demos, a quiet-spoken and scholarly man in his late 50's, seems almost incredulous.
But he is serious and has credentials that make him an expert witness on witchcraft as it was in the 17th century, and as he sees it today, with parallels even including the bombing of the federal building in Oklahoma City.


Paradise Lost: America Refracted By a Foreign Prism
It's sad to look back at hope from the perspective of disenchantment, but as the American Century draws to a close, that prospect probably needs to be faced.
How did the hero turn into a villain in so many people's eyes?
How did a land that once signified the natural paradise fall into rusting disarray? a brilliant new show at the Canadian Center for Architecture in Montreal confronts the roots of our present discontent with such intelligence and depth that you end up feeling exhilarated instead of depressed.
"Scenes of the World to Come" is the first in a monumental five-part series that the center will present over the next three years.
Conceived by Phyllis Lambert, the center's director, the "American Century" series will examine different facets of architecture and urbanism.
Future exhibitions will look at the visionary urban schemes of Frank Lloyd Wright, Frederick Law Olmsted's landscape designs, Disney theme parks and suburban lawns.


Residential Resales
In the following reports, the "listed at" price is the asking price when negotiations began that ended in the sale.
Time on market is from most recent listing to contract.
MANHATTAN
GREENWICH VILLAGE  $425,000
14 East 4th Street  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,181-sq.-ft. condo in a loft building; 24-hr. doorman, concierge, 2 exposures; common charge $420; taxes $3,828, listed at $425,000, 17 weeks on market (Broker: Corcoran Group)  TRIBECA  $1.18 million
56 Thomas Street  3-bedroom, 3-bath, 2,441-sq.-ft. duplex condo in a recently renovated loft building; elevator, 1,143-sq.-ft. of private roof and garden, 3 exposures; common charge $650, taxes $2,160, listed at $1.29 million, 8 weeks on market (Brokers: Swift &amp; Watson; Anne Milling)  UPPER EAST SIDE  $485,000
1175 York Avenue  (York River House)  2-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath postwar co-op; 24-hr. doormen, dining room, terrace, 3 exposures; maintenance $2,200, 50% tax-deductible, listed at $515,000, 26 weeks on market (Broker: Feathered Nest)  UPPER WEST SIDE  $380,000
331 West 84th Street  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,100-sq.-ft. co-op in a brownstone; new kitchen and baths, fireplace, terrace, high ceilings; maintenance $847, 70% tax-deductible; listed at $425,000, 3 weeks on market (Broker: Klara Madlin)  BRONX
CITY ISLAND  $240,000
66 Reynolds Street  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 55-year-old cape cod; dining room, fireplace, patio, 2-car garage, private beach, ; taxes $2,000, listed at $245,000, 2 weeks on market (Broker: Jacqueline Kyle Kall)  RIVERDALE  $135,000
5700 Arlington Avenue  (Skyview)  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,650-sq.-ft. postwar co-op; 24-hr. doormen, dining area, terrace, Hudson River view, health club and pool; maintenance $1,293 including utilities, 51% tax-deductible, listed at $139,000, 56 weeks on market (Broker: J.I. Sopher)  BROOKLYN
BROOKLYN HEIGHTS  $275,000
128 Willow Street  3-bedroom, 2-bath co-op in a prewar building; entry foyer, dining room, eat-in kitchen, common garden; maintenance $1,202, 56% tax-deductible, listed at $295,000, 13 weeks on market (Broker: Brooklyn Landmark)  PARK SLOPE  $542,500
222 Lincoln Place  4-family, 4-story brownstone; dining room, 1 1/2 baths in primary unit; 2 bedrooms, 1 bath in two units; studio on first floor; original moldings and detail; taxes $5,748, listed at $595,000, 65 weeks on market (Broker: F.J. Kazeroid)  PROSPECT PARK SOUTH  $275,000
141 Stratford Road  9-bedroom, 3 bath, 90-year-old, wood-frame house; dining room, eat-in kitchen, library, fireplace, parquet floors, 1-car garage, 50- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $275,000, 44 weeks on market (Broker: Reliance)  QUEENS
REGO PARK  $210,000
68-32 Alderton Street  3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath 60-year-old semi-attached brick Tudor; dining room, eat-in kitchen, 2 fireplaces, finished basement, 1-car garage; taxes $1,400, listed at $229,000, 4 weeks on market (Broker: Kingdom Realty)  STATEN ISLAND  DONGAN HILLS  $405,000
130 Overlook Avenue  2-family detached house; 2 bedrooms, 1 bath, dining room, eat-in kitchen in each unit; 1 bedroom, 1 bath, hospitality suite in guest cottage; taxes $2,500, listed at $459,000, 22 weeks on market (Broker: Vitali-Sunshine)  SNUG HARBOR  $179,000
262 Fillmore Street  2-family, 100-year-old Queen Anne Victorian; 4 bedrooms, 2 baths, 2 fireplaces, terrace in primary unit; 1 bedroom, 1 bath, porch in other; 63-by 100-ft. lot; taxes $900, listed at $189,000, 4 weeks on market (Broker: Gateway Arms)  WESTCHESTER
NEW ROCHELLE  $348,000
577 Forest Avenue  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 69-year-old colonial; tiled entry hall, fireplace, eat-in kitchen, dining room, den, full unfinished basement; taxes $5,320, listed at $369,500, 7 weeks on market (Broker: Julia B. Fee)  SCARSDALE  $515,000
15 Brook Lane  5-bedroom, 4 1/2-bath colonial; entry hall, screened porch, patio, modern eat-in kitchen, playroom; .33 acre; taxes $11,929, listed at $515,000, 18 weeks on market (Brokers: Julia B. Fee; Dudley D. Doernberg)
WHITE PLAINS  $278,000
61 Smith Avenue  4-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 73-year-old colonial; side hall, breakfast nook, patio, sunroom, 2-car garage; taxes $3,305, listed at $289,000, 10 weeks on market (Brokers: Century 21 Wolff; Coldwell Banker Schlott)  YONKERS  $210,000
97 Staunton Street  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 55-year-old frame house; family room, screened patio, dining room; taxes $3,844, listed at $229,000, 19 weeks on market (Brokers: Century 21 Gold Castle; The Prudential Rita Cohen)
CONNECTICUT
COLCHESTER  $100,000
252 Bull Hill Road  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 55-year-old Cape Cod; handicapped accessibility, screened-porch, storage shed with electricity, 1-car garage, .66 acre; taxes $1,759, listed at $108,000, 2 weeks on market (Broker: Beazley Co.)  GREENWICH  $1.67 million
415 Round Hill Road  4-bedroom, 4 1/2-bath, 80-year-old center-hall colonial; family room, 3 flagstone terraces, heated pool, 2-car garage, 1.4-acre lot; taxes $7,985, listed at $1.595 million, 31 weeks on market (Brokers: Coldwell Banker; Sally O'Brien &amp; Assiciates)  NORWALK  $160,000
243 Flaxhill Road  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 43-year-old wood-frame colonial; dining room, den, fireplace, French doors, 1-car garage, .19 acre lot; taxes $4,264, listed at $169,900, 16 weeks on market (Brokers: Preferred Properties; Pilas Smith)  WILTON  $440,000
131 Old Kings Highway  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 29-year-old colonial; country kitchen, fireplace, 2-car garage, 1.16 acre; taxes $4,799, listed at $459,000, 7 weeks on market (Broker: William Pitt)  NEW JERSEY
CAPE MAY  $128,500
29 Fishing Creek Road  5-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 3-year-old Cape Cod; fireplace, c/a, studio over 1-car garage, covered porch; taxes $2,989, listed at $149,900, 11 weeks on market (Broker: DeMusz)  HOWELL TOWNSHIP  $145,000
4 Timberline Drive  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 15-year-old split level; 2-car garage, walk-in closets, eat-in-kitchen, patio; taxes $3,965, listed at $160,500, 4 weeks on market (Broker: Prudential New Jersey)  PENNINGTON  $260,000
131 East Delaware Avenue  4-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 83-year-old Colonial; screened porch, fireplace, den, 2-car garage; taxes $4,586; listed at $279,000, 9 weeks on market (Broker: Richard A. Weidel)  WAYNE  $129,900
601 Black Oak Ridge  2-bedroom, 1-bath, 55-year-old bunaglow; one-half acre lot 2-car garage, eat-in-kitchen; taxes $3,292; listed at $129,900, 2 weeks on market (Broker: Weichert)  LONG ISLAND
MILLER PLACE  $138,000
122 Woodhull Landing Road  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 35-year-old Cape Cod; eat-in kitchen, family room, 1-car garage, 0.5 acre, walk to water; taxes $4,800, listed at $141,900, 4 weeks on market (ERA Albo Agency)  NORTHPORT  $230,000
1218 McFadden Drive  5-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 35-year-old colonial; dining room, eat-in kitchen, family room, 2-car garage, 0.5 acre; taxes $5,500, listed at $249,000, 3 weeks on market (Brokers: Prudential Long Island; Coach)  RONKONKOMA  $77,500
3 Carol Street  2-bedroom, 1-bath, 35-year-old ranch; eat-in kitchen, basement; taxes $2,800, listed at $84,990, 3 weeks on market (Broker: Straub Resales)  SEA CLIFF  $270,000
247-249 Eighth Avenue  70-year-old legal 2-family; 3-bedroom, 1-bath owner's unit; 2-bedroom, 1-bath other unit; eat-in kitchen, porch in each; taxes $4,300, listed at $325,000, 8 weeks on market (Broker: Harmonious Homes)


Paradise Lost: America Refracted By a Foreign Prism
It's sad to look back at hope from the perspective of disenchantment, but as the American Century draws to a close, that prospect probably needs to be faced.
How did the hero turn into a villain in so many people's eyes?
How did a land that once signified the natural paradise fall into rusting disarray? a brilliant new show at the Canadian Center for Architecture in Montreal confronts the roots of our present discontent with such intelligence and depth that you end up feeling exhilarated instead of depressed.
"Scenes of the World to Come" is the first in a monumental five-part series that the center will present over the next three years.
Conceived by Phyllis Lambert, the center's director, the "American Century" series will examine different facets of architecture and urbanism.
Future exhibitions will look at the visionary urban schemes of Frank Lloyd Wright, Frederick Law Olmsted's landscape designs, Disney theme parks and suburban lawns.


Russia Refashioned
The Russian economy has come a long way in a short time.
Not quite four years since the disintegration of the Soviet Union, Russia has a market economy.
It is rough, inequitable and weak.
Many Russians, particularly the elderly trapped with fixed pensions from the Soviet era, have fallen into humiliating poverty.
The disparity in living standards, egregious but shielded under Communism, is now much worse and painfully visible to everyone.
The Government's role is still considerable.
But given the calcified state of the Soviet economy, and the crippling grip of the Kremlin's central planners, the transformation has been remarkable.


IN SHORT: FICTION
THE OTHER SIDE/EL OTRO LADO  By Julia Alvarez. Dutton, $18.95.


Movies This Week
LOOK for some golden movie moments on television this week.
In Richard Boleslawski's THEODORA GOES WILD (1936), Irene Bunne as a shy villager who has written a steamy best seller abruptly descends on her Manhattan publisher like a cyclone, complete with Russian wolfhound.
"Another thing," she hurls at the cowed staffers, "I want more publicity!" What an entrance!
The sedate Miss Dunne's official thaw in light comedy (opposite the game Melvyn Douglas) followed some "Show Boat" rakishness.
Then "The Awful Truth" with Cary Grant hit the jackpot.
For now, viva Theodora! -- Wednesday at 8 A.M. on Cinemax.
Early on in John Ford's great GRAPES OF WRATH (1940), with her family ready to head west, Ma Joad (Jane Darwell) sifts through mementos, like a World's Fair postcard to the plaintive "Red River Valley" on harmonica.
Dig the road-stop scene with the hungry Joad children eyeing a candy display.
It's straight out of John Steinbeck -- Monday at 10 P.M. and 2:10 A.M. on Amercian Movie Classics.
In a chuckly bit from Henry Koster's FLOWER DRUM SONG (1961), a young immigrant (Miyoski Umeki, in photograph) asks directions from a Chinese-American in San Francisco.
"Sorry, sister," she's told, "I don't speak Chinese." Miss Umeki is charming when she sings "I Am Going to Like It Here," from the Rodgers and Hammerstein stage score.
So is Nancy Kwan with "I Enjoy Being Girl." Sold -- Sunday at 10:30 P.M. on Disney.
A breathless moment from Fritz Lang's murky masterpiece, M (1931), shows a child-killer (Peter Lorre), flung before his captors and jury -- criminal Berlin.
Look at those faces -- Saturday at 9 P.M. on CUNY.
Through the swamp in Preston's Sturges's SULLIVAN'S TRAVELS (1941), a line of shuffling, shackled convicts (including Joel McCrea, as a misplaced Hollywood director) joins a poor, black congregation to watch a cartoon.
Minutes later, the church rocks with laughter -- Friday at 10 P.M. and 3 P.M. on American Movie Classics.
Howard Thompson


The World; Today's Drama: Twilight of the Nukes
FIFTY years ago today, physicists detonated a nuclear explosive they called The Gadget, rigged on a 100-foot steel tower in the desert near Alamogordo, N.M.
Since that first nuclear test, the United States has built 70,000 nuclear weapons of almost every conceivable kind: warheads, artillery shells, land mines, depth charges and even backpack-style plutonium explosives weighing 58 pounds but equivalent to 10 tons of TNT.
And then there were plain old bombs, those bulbous things with tailfins, designed to be dropped out of airplanes.
But now it is the twilight of the nukes.
They are being taken apart by the United States and the Soviet Union at the rate of 10 or 12 a day, and the new problem is how to keep track them of all.


Playalinda Beach Journal; With Nudity Law, Conservatives Draw a Line in the Sand
For decades, the boardwalk at the northern end of Playalinda Beach on the Canaveral National Seashore near here has been the de facto border for two types of sunbathers: those with swimsuits, and those without.
The two groups seemed to co-exist more or less peacefully until recently, when indignant conservatives persuaded the county to ban not only nudity but also "insufficient" beach attire.
Among the dumbfounded is Claude W. Miller, who after 16 years as the Sheriff of Brevard County is being asked to enforce a law that requires his deputies to distinguish, for example, legal attire from a "G-string" or "dental floss" bathing suit.
He said his deputies would worry only about full nudity and refer complaints about other states of undress to local prosecutors.
He also said he would test the legality of the ordinance in court by making two arrests, of a man and a woman, before making further arrests.


Those Consolation Prizes
To the Editor:
"You're Out! Clean Out Your Office! Now for Some Nice Parting Gifts" (June 11) astutely lists feelings of guilt and old ties of loyalty among the reasons for companies' largess in offering millions of dollars to separated executives.
A single parent with two young children and elderly parents, I, too, along with the mentioned 10,000 workers, have been thrown in the street by well-to-do firms for unstated reasons, and in one case was not even handed required notice or the typical two or four weeks' worth of pay.


Enter the Uninvited Summer Cuests, Sometimes Amiable, Always Hungry
THERE are several stone walls on the property, so sooner or later, it was bound to happen.
Chipmunks have moved in.
Perhaps it would be more accurate to say a chipmunk has moved in.
So far, it appears to be without a mate.
But this is not to be counted on; the chipmunk is, after all, a family type.
Although no nest has been discovered, this forager's hiding place has -- the downspout of a roof gutter.


They're Rebels Without a Cause, and Couldn't Care Less
SHOPLIFTING, TURNSTILE-JUMPING, potsmoking, pill-taking.
Trespassing, assault, rape, possibly murder.
Name a crime or misdemeanor, and if it doesn't involve guns, cars or syringes, teen-agers probably commit it during the day and night that are shown in Larry Clark's film "Kids," which opens on Friday.
They're not career criminals or hard-core gang members, just teen-agers hanging around in New York City, out to have some fun.
When they're not breaking laws, they're having extremely unsafe sex.
What makes Mr.
Clark's film so controversial is that for its teen-aged characters, nothing they do registers as a transgression or an outrage.
For them, it's just another day.


After 16 Days, a Rescue Stirs Hope in Korea
The hole was not much bigger than his head, and the stench of rotting flesh was beginning to fill the hot air this morning.
But An Gung Wook squeezed his way inside, inching forward into the pitch dark, scraping with his hands at the steel wires and porous cement, which fell away in flakes.
After digging for more than two weeks in the rubble of the collapsed Sampoong Department Store, Mr.
An, a rescue worker, was exhausted.
As the death toll rose today to 323 and hopes faded that any more survivors would emerge, Mr.
An wondered whether the sounds he thought he heard were real.
He called out for someone to respond to the beam from his light.


Rachel Jackson Christmas, Karlton L. Derrick
Rachel Jackson Christmas, the daughter of June and Walter Christmas of New York, was married yesterday to Karlton Lewis Derrick, the son of Elizabeth and Walter Derrick also of New York.
The Rev.
Dennis E. Norris performed the ceremony at the Hudson River Museum in Yonkers.


Summertime Circus Grows More Civil
From his perch inside the newsstand at Sheridan Square, Kanu Brahmbhatt has an unobstructed view of Greenwich Village's busiest intersection, where five thoroughfares and a subway station meet in a tangle the locals call "the mousetrap."
"It's crazy out there," Mr.
Brahmbhatt, 42 and a native of India, says as tourists, revelers and neighborhood residents stream by his 10-by-14-foot corrugated metal shed.
"There's too much freedom in the Village," he says.
"It makes too many problems."


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: July 16, 1995
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
3
DEBT OF HONOR, by Tom Clancy. (Berkley, $7.50.) Jack Ryan and the C.I.A. vs. a Japanese plot to strike America's territory and economy.
2
4
THE ALIENIST, by Caleb Carr. (Bantam, $6.99.) A journalist and a psychologist track down a murderer in turn-of-the-century Manhattan.
3
38
CONGO, by Michael Crichton. (Ballantine, $6.99.) An American team seeks to discover why a group of archeologists died among ruins.
4
16
THE CHAMBER, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $7.50.) A lawyer represents a racist who is on death row for his part in a 1967 bombing.
5
10
THE STONE DIARIES, by Carol Shields. (Penguin, $10.95.) The journey of a woman from childhood to motherhood through old age.
6
2
FIRST OFFENSE, by Nancy Taylor Rosenberg. (Signet, $6.99.) A probation officer whose husband is missing finds her life threatened.
7
10
REMEMBER ME, by Mary Higgins Clark. (Pocket, $6.99.) After an estranged couple reunite, they are haunted by a mysterious force.
8
5
CHARADE, by Sandra Brown. (Warner Vision, $6.99.) Following a heart transplant, a television host finds her life enriched -- and threatened.
9
3
ONLY LOVE, by Elizabeth Lowell. (Avon, $5.99.) A woman living in the post-Civil War Rockies fends off dangers and finds romance.
10
1
DOWNTOWN, by Anne Rivers Siddons. (Harper Paperbacks, $6.99.) In Atlanta during the 1960's, a woman learns about life and men.
11
6
UNDUE INFLUENCE, by Steve Martini. (Jove, $6.99.) A defense attorney is caught in a web of murder and deceit within his own family.
12
3
HOLLYWOOD KIDS, by Jackie Collins. (Pocket, $6.99.) The tribulations of the privileged adult children of movie stars.
13
4
ASSAULT AT SELONIA, by Roger MacBride Allen. (Spectra/Bantam, $5.99.) The second volume of the "Star Wars" Corellian Trilogy.
14
27
CIRCLE OF FRIENDS, by Maeve Binchy. (Dell, $6.50.) The coming of age of women in an Irish village and in Dublin's academia.
15
1
ON DANGEROUS GROUND, by Jack Higgins. (Berkley, $6.50.) Powerful interests conspire to stop the transfer of Hong Kong to China in 1997.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
NonFiction
1
3
APOLLO 13, by Jim Lovell and Jeffrey Kluger. (Pocket, $6.50.) The 1970 moon mission.
2
43
EMBRACED BY THE LIGHT, by Betty J. Eadie with Curtis Taylor. (Bantam, $5.99.) A woman's near-death experience.
3
16
REVIVING OPHELIA, by Mary Pipher. (Ballantine, $12.50.) Dangers that beset teen-age girls.
4
122
I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS, by Maya Angelou. (Bantam, $4.99.) A memoir.
5*
79
CARE OF THE SOUL, by Thomas Moore. (Harper Perennial, $12.) Everyday spirituality.
6*
10
MOTHERLESS DAUGHTERS, by Hope Edelman. (Delta, $12.95.) The experiences of women after the deaths of their mothers.
7*
1
THE PRIVATE DIARY OF AN O.J.
JUROR, by Michael Knox with Mike Walker. (Dove, $5.99.) The recollections of a man who was discharged from the jury during the trial of O.J.
Simpson.
8
610
THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $10.95.) Inspiration.
9
44
MAMA MAKES UP HER MIND, by Bailey White. (Vintage, $10.) Life in a Georgia town.
10
31
SOUL MATES, by Thomas Moore. (Harper Perennial, $13.) Love and relationships.
11*
42
HAVING OUR SAY, by Sarah L. Delany and A. Elizabeth Delany with Amy Hill Hearth. (Dell, $5.99.) Two black sisters reflect on their lives.
12
5
THE KENNEDY WOMEN, by Laurence Leamer. (Ivy, $7.99.) Five generations of a family.
13*
10
CREATING A NEW CIVILIZATION, by Alvin Toffler and Heidi Toffler. (Turner Publishing, $7.95.) A proposal for reshaping society.
14*
1
THE CATCHER WAS A SPY, by Nicholas Dawidoff. (Vintage, $13.) The life of Moe Berg, big-league catcher, O.S.S. agent and lady's man.
15*
21
MAKES ME WANNA HOLLER, by Nathan McCall. (Vintage, $12.) The life of a young black man in America.
16*
44
A HISTORY OF GOD, by Karen Armstrong. (Ballantine, $14.) A study of monotheism.
17*
3
LIFE OF THE PARTY, by Christopher Ogden. (Warner, $6.50.) A biography of Pamela Harriman, the Ambassador to France.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Advice, How-To and Miscellaneous
1
42
CHICKEN SOUP FOR THE SOUL, compiled by Jack Canfield and Mark Victor Hansen. (Health Communications, $12.95.) Uplifting stories.
2
11
A 2ND HELPING OF CHICKEN SOUP FOR THE SOUL, compiled by Jack Canfield and Mark Victor Hansen. (Health Communications, $12.95.) One hundred more stories.
3
8
O.J.'S LEGAL PAD, by Henry Beard, John Boswell and Ron Barrett. (Villard, $8.95.) Notes and doodles supposedly made by O.J.
Simpson during his trial; a spoof.
4
220
THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE, by Stephen R. Covey. (Fireside/S&amp;S, $12.) Principles for success.
Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending July 1, at 3,050 bookstores plus wholesalers serving 38,000 other retailers, statistically weighted to represent sales in all such outlets nationwide.
An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.


First Federal Savings Bank of Colorado reports earnings for Qtr to Jun 30


THE NEW JAZZ AGE
Just read Conroy's piece.
Disney couldn't have written it better -- obedient and reverential jazz musicians tramping through the woods, saxophones slung over their shoulders and singing "Whistle While You Work." I think I'm going to miss the jazz of the past, with its inconvenient sarcasm and self-mocking humor.
NORMAN SALANT New York


Daring Modern
AMERICAN RENAISSANCE ** (212) 343-0049; 260 West Broadway, at Ericsson Place; $$$; all major credit cards


Under the Mask: The Case of Hsiao I. Chyi
He scares people.
Even his caseworker, Milagro Echevarria, was afraid of Hsiao I. Chyi at first.
"But then I realized he's really a baby deep down inside," she said.
"His English isn't good. I think the family came from their country, and they just put him in regular schools, and no one helped him. It's sad to see him get down and cry when people don't understand him."


The Prodigal
SACRIFICE OF ISAAC By Neil Gordon. 304 pp. New York: Random House. $22.


Ms. Sherman And Mr. Raymond
Elizabeth Amy Sherman, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Warren T. Sherman of Danbury, Conn., was married there yesterday to Allen Brainard Raymond, the son of Sandra J. Raymond of Mill Valley, Calif., and Nicholas O. Raymond of Flint Hill, Va.
The Rev.
Melinda Keck performed the ceremony at the First Congregational Church of Danbury.
Mrs.
Raymond, 27, is the curator of the frame collection at Gold Leaf Studios, an antiques and frame conservation company in Washington.
She graduated from William Smith College and is studying for a master's degree in art history at American University.
Her father is a cardiologist in Danbury.


NEW YORKERS &amp; CO.
The Kitano Hotel Reopens With New Look and New Goal
After an $80 million, four-year renovation, the Kitano Hotel, a 150-room establishment popular with Japanese executives but little known to the city's American visitors, reopened Thursday on Park Avenue at 38th Street.


St. Paul Bancorp Inc.(SPBC,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Jun 30


Huckster and Publisher
FIREBRAND The Life of Horace Liveright.
By Tom Dardis.
Illustrated. 394 pp.
New York: Random House. $27.50.


St. Andrews Lures Them Back for a 25th Open
On the first tee was His Royal Highness, Prince Andrew, the Duke of York, estranged husband of Fergie.
Driver in hand, he stood in front of the ancient clubhouse at the Old Course today, peering out across the widest fairway in championship golf.
Turning to his caddie, a wisely Scot with a thick burr, the Prince shot him a quizzical look.
"Well," he said, "where to?"


A Pro Gets a Second Chance to Run a Fund
RULE No. 1 for starting an investment fund: Don't do it the week the stock market crashes.
William F. Harnisch, the president of Forstmann-Leff Associates, a money management firm in New York, found himself in that unfortunate position eight years ago.
In October 1987, he went on the road trying to tap investors for a fund that would specialize in -- of all things -- market timing.
But the crash intervened, and the general public never got a chance to sample Mr.
Harnisch's investment expertise.


Competing Universes
SCHRODINGER'S KITTENS AND THE SEARCH FOR REALITY Solving the Quantum Mysteries.
By John Gribbin.
Illustrated. 261 pp.
Boston: Little, Brown &amp; Company. $23.95.


Sick Slot? Call Dr. Peterson
IT'S the middle of a hot, sunny Tuesday afternoon in Atlantic City.
The patrons of Harrah's are concentrating on the slot and video poker machines.
Nothing seems to distract them -- until one of the reels that is supposed to bring up the row of winning cherries stops spinning or the poker machine flashes "coin reversed" and seizes up.
That's when a gambler rushes to seek out a red-shirted casino employee, who fills out a pink slip of paper that ultimately brings Ron Peterson to the rescue.
At the age of 30, Mr.
Peterson has been answering these emergency calls for 10 years.
At least four repairmen are always on duty to fix the glitches that crop up in one or another of Harrah's 2,025 slot machines.


Kamienicki Returns, but Twins Aren't Impressed
This is certainly not going to quash any calls for another pitcher.
Scott Kamieniecki, on the disabled list since spraining his right elbow on May 5, could not pitch his way out of the fourth inning.
One night after the Yankee staff had allowed a season-high 17 hits for a nine-inning game, five pitchers surrendered 16 more to the lowly Minnesota Twins.
And, after scoring four runs in the first two innings, the Yankees managed just two measly base runners until a belated rally in the ninth.


Molly Tennis, Olivier Seguin
Margaret Hyde Tennis, a daughter of Bishop Cabell Tennis and Mrs.
Tennis of Wilmington, Del., was married yesterday to Olivier Seguin, a son of Roger Seguin of Lyons, France, and the late Marie Angell Seguin.
The Rev.
Carla Berkedal, an Episcopal priest, performed the ceremony at St.
Mark's Cathedral in Seattle.
The Very Rev.
Michael G. Ryan, the vicar general of the Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Seattle, took part in the ceremony.
The bride is known as Molly.
She is a public information manager in the marine division at the Port of Seattle.
She graduated from Williams College and received a master's degree in comparative literature from the University of Washington.
She served in the Peace Corps in Chad in 1988 and 1989.
Her father is the Episcopal Bishop of Delaware.


Making a Case When the Art of Compromise Fails
BEFORE filing a suit in small claims court, you need to answer two questions.
First: Do you have a case?


Can Industry Do the Job In Health Care? No Way
To the Editor:  The Princeton economist Uwe E. Reinhardt, in the July 9 Soapbox essay "When Trenton Plays Obstetrician," bemoans the Legislature's passage of the bill requiring two-day maternity hospitalizations.
We will never know how well the health insurance industry can do the job, he complains, if new laws "countermand the industry's guidelines." He's dead wrong.
We already know.


Anna K. Hirai, Kevin B. Cranmer
Anna Kimiko Hirai, the daughter of Elizabeth and George T. Hirai of Montclair, N.J., and London, was married yesterday to Lieut.
Kevin Burke Cranmer, a son of Linda and Thomas L. Cranmer of Great Falls, Va.
The Rev.
Chappell Cranmer, an Episcopal priest and the great-uncle of the bridegroom, officiated at the Church of Christ at Dartmouth College in Hanover, N.H.
The Rev.
J.
York Peeler, a Congregational minister, took part in the ceremony.
Mrs.
Cranmer, 25, graduated from Dartmouth, as did her husband.
She is to begin her third year at Albany Medical College in August.
Her father is a senior analyst at Merrill Lynch Pierce Fenner &amp; Smith Ltd. in London.


Call-Net Enterprises(CNEBF,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Jun 30


Buying an Uneasy Home For New York City Waste
New York City has the people, the drains and the toilets -- more in a few blocks than in this entire West Texas county.
Hudspeth County has the land, 15 times as much as all of New York.
Which is why, when New Yorkers flush, their waste often ends up here, 2,065 miles away, in an isolated, impoverished county on the Mexican border whose largest town can't even afford a sewer system of its own.
Behind these simple facts lies a tale of political intrigue, legal maneuvering and big-city money, spent to persuade Texans to accept some 225 tons a day of what New Yorkers wouldn't.
For a Long Island company named Merco Joint Venture, the prize was a $168 million, six-year contract, beginning in 1992, to dispose of nearly a fifth of New York's sludge, the gunk left over after sewage has been treated.
Making virtuoso use of the legal means available, Merco took only 32 days to win a state approval that normally took months.


South Africa
To the Editor: We have recently returned from a six-week tour of South Africa.
My wife and I met scores of other visitors, but only a few Americans.
We were puzzled.
Americans are avid tourists.
Your own pages have amply described the feast awaiting the traveler there.
And, frankly, it felt good that our tourist dollars were helping people transfer power from an entrenched minority to a democratic majority, by and large through non-violent means.
If people are shying away because they think touring there is dangerous, they're making a big mistake.
A friendly, well-run, English-speaking country, it's far and away the best value for the money in Africa.


New &amp; Noteworthy Paperbacks
APOLLO 13 By Jim Lovell and Jeffrey Kluger.
Pocket Books, $6.50.
The inspiration for the film of the same title, this book re-creates a harrowing journey in a spacecraft that almost became a tomb.
Jim Lovell commanded Apollo 13, which was headed for the moon in April 1970 when an oxygen tank exploded, forcing the crew and Mission Control to devise an escape route back to Earth.
Originally titled "Lost Moon," the book tells "the inside story" of a mission "widely remembered as NASA's finest moment," Rudy Abramson said here in January.
A WAY IN THE WORLD By V. S. Naipaul.
Vintage International, $13.
The making of empires -- national, personal and imaginary -- is the theme of this novel, which is a history of the creative spirit as well as a history of colonialism and its consequences.
Selected as one of the best books of 1994 by the editors of the Book Review, it features a narrator resembling Mr.
Naipaul.
Fiction is his means of exploration, much as the voyage was for the men of earlier centuries -- Columbus, Sir Walter Raleigh, Simon Bolivar and the Venezuelan revolutionary Francisco Miranda -- who also appear as characters.
Last year our reviewer, Brent Staples, called the novel "a distinguished book even by Naipaulian standards, a bewitching piece of work by a mind at the peak of its abilities."


Citizens Banking Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Jun 30


Age-Mellowed Coffeehouses Of Budapest
IN Hungary, the devotion to coffee, like the passion for paprika, is a legacy of the Turks who occupied the country for 150 years.
None of Budapest's earliest coffeehouses still survives, but several that flourished in the late 19th century remain in business.
Holdovers from the golden age of the coffeehouse as literary salon, political forum and clubhouse, their often gloriously decorated interiors are protected by landmark status.
The indulgent excess of their confections appears safe, for the time being, from any contemporary notions of diet.
The demise of the Communist regime and the return of some of these venerable places to private ownership from government control is a turn of events that should please connoisseurs of good, strong coffee and delicious pastries.
With the exception of Angelika -- which went from state to church ownership about two years ago -- the best coffeehouses are the ones in private hands.
The fall of Communism also marked the end of several rather baleful decades for the cafe Lukacs.
Housed in an imposing building on a broad avenue, Lukacs served as the headquarters for the Nazi secret police and then the cafeteria for the Hungarian secret service.
It was reopened to the public in the 1960's and closed last year during a particularly convoluted effort at privatization, which may be resolved soon.


Hamilton Heights Pushing Amsterdam Avenue to Go Upscale
Amsterdam Avenue in the West 130's and 140's is lined with modest storefronts, many vacant.
The standard feature on most blocks is at least one cramped bodega, its products limited to soap powders, canned goods and other household staples that appeal to Hispanic shoppers in the predominantly Dominican neighborhood west of Amsterdam.
Shoppers from Hamilton Heights, the burgeoning black middle-class brownstone district to the east, say they find little enticement in the bodegas.
So they travel to other neighborhoods and to the Bronx for groceries and other goods.


From Welles's Mind: The Power of 'Caesar'
WHEN his compatriots, conspirators-to-be, shout "Hail, Caesar!" the command eerily echoes the sound of "Heil!" The curtain, the flag, the armbands, blood-red all, transmit the visual jolt of the New Jersey Shakespeare Festival's production of "Julius Caesar." It doesn't take a scholar to figure out that we're in Fascist country -- Rome it remains, presumably, though flashed forward from 45 B.C. to the 1930's -- and that somebody is telling us something.
The somebody was Orson Welles.
Already the revolutionary for all media, Welles, then 22 years old, was co-founder of the Mercury Theater in 1937 with John Houseman; he conceived of Shakespeare's tragedy as a 90-minute intermissionless reflection and portent of the decade's political upheaval.
Caesar was said to have resembled Mussolini, Welles played Brutus and all the players were described as wearing street clothes and modern uniforms.


Charting the Way to a Livelier Downtown
IN a perfect world, downtowns are bustling places, full of enticing shops, restaurants and theaters.
Alas, such has not been the case here in recent years, which is why the city retained Ferrandino &amp; Associates, planning and development consultants of Elmsford, to devise a comprehensive marketing and development plan to revitalize downtown.
In August 1994, the consultants started work on the project.
Eight months later, they filed the final report.


Judith A. Tynan, C. E. Crawford
Judith Anne Tynan, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
William F. Tynan 3d of Garden City, L.I., was married there yesterday to Christopher Edward Crawford, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Edward C. Crawford of Plano, Tex.
The Rev.
Richard F. Delaney, a Roman Catholic priest, performed the ceremony at St.
Joseph's Church.
Mrs.
Crawford, 28, is an account executive at Pepe Jeans of London in New York.
She received an associate degree from the Wood Tobe-Coburn School.
Her father owns William F. Tynan Jr.
Inc., a surety bond agency in Garden City.


Q and A
An Update on Peru
Q.
I am planning a trip to Peru and keep hearing conflicting rumors about the safety situation there.
Have there been any problems in the last six months to a year, and, if so, where have they occurred? -- Ezerrene Noblin, Madera, Calif.


In Houston, Rebuilding by Creating
EARNESTINE W. COURTNEY, who is 87, has lived behind the row houses in Houston's Third Ward for 48 years.
She says the neighborhood was lovely when she moved in but declined about 15 years ago, thanks to "dope and prostitution and everything else." Men stripped down stolen cars there.
Boys kicked in her door.
Dead bodies turned up.
So Miss Courtney was pleased when volunteers for Project Row Houses swarmed over the area in 1994 to turn 8 of the 22 abandoned houses into permanent display spaces for black artists.
And she was riled to see boys throwing rocks at the newly repaired roofs.
Miss Courtney came out of her house packing a pistol.
End of rocks.


The Winds Change For Claudia Shear: Now, She Blows Back
NOTHING in Claudia Shear's off-the-wall employment history has prepared her for her oddest job experience of all: being in demand.
Once, as an unemployed actress, Ms.
Shear was so desperate for work she took a job answering phones in a Manhattan brothel.
But these days, when the telephone rings in her Brooklyn apartment, the calls are often from Hollywood, conveying offers for her to star in romantic comedies or develop sitcoms or attend exclusive film workshops.


Cullen/Frost Bankers (CFBI,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Jun 30


A Paul Bunyanesque Incident
A crowd of about 50 gathered at the crime scene while the commissioner examined the remains.
They were stunned -- the crime had occurred in full view of a police officer, but the culprit escaped.
Even the Speaker of the City Council showed up to demand justice.
Last Wednesday's scene at the corner of Ditmars Boulevard and 31st Street had all the makings of a cheap detective novel.
But at this scene, the evidence was leaves instead of blood, and a stump instead of a body.


Kaydon Corp.(KDN,N) reports earnings for Qtr to July 1


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
NEW ANTIQUES
American antiques, once regarded as merely quaint, have become about as expensive as European ones,acquiring a cachet of their own.
With the cost of a few pieces requiring access to more ready cash than most of us can muster, reproductions become the alternative.
Reproductions by more than 50 artisans will be for sale at a "Festival of Traditional American Arts" at the Rye Town Hilton next Saturday and Sunday from 10 A.M. to 5 P.M., with a preview party scheduled Friday from 6 to 10 P.M.


The Two Sides of Bette Midler, Mushy And Divine
BETTE MIDLER'S FACE breaks into an incandescent grin as she considers two titles she almost chose for her new album, "Bette of Roses."
"I toyed with the idea of calling it either 'Mother' or 'Mom,' " she says, cackling mischievously.
"I have this thing where people unload to me and tell me their stories, and I give them advice. I'm not sure how many lives I've ruined, but I can't seem to stop myself. It's a very motherly thing to do."


Top U.S. Officials Meet on Bosnia
Top Administration officials met at the White House today to discuss the American position on Bosnia at a meeting of Western military leaders in London on Sunday.
Secretary of State Warren Christopher and the national security adviser, Anthony Lake, met for two hours.
On Friday, President Clinton directed Gen.
John Shalikashvili, Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, to join with his French and British counterparts for emergency talks Sunday on how to deal with the Bosnian Serb offensive.


Greater New York Savings Bank (GRTR,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Jun 30


A Ball Glittering With Stars and Night Music
TAKE a spectacular waterfront estate, add a huge tent elaborately decorated around a fantasy theme, put a culinary star in the kitchen, a society orchestra in the pit and a cadre of celebrities on the committee and you have the main ingredients for a benefit party in the Hamptons.
The Family Counseling Service has been working for more than a year to deliver on all counts for its Carousel Ball on Saturday.
It has acquired the use of the Leonard Conway beachfront estate in Westhampton Beach.


Surprising Victory by U.S. Wins Praise
To understand the significance of the astounding 3-0 victory by the United States over Argentina last night in the America Cup soccer tournament, one need only visit a playground in this isolated border town where schoolboys were already recreating the historic match this morning.
"No, I'm not going to play unless I get to be Eric Wynalda because he always gets the goals," said 11-year-old Oscar Diaz.
"O.K., but only if you let me be Kasey Keller because then I'll block all your shots, man," said his playmate, 12-year-old Felipe Berco.


Documents Show Clintons Got Vast Benefit From Their Partner in Whitewater Deal
From the moment questions about the Whitewater real estate venture began arising nearly three years ago, the main defense by President Clinton and his wife, Hillary, has been that they lost money on the ill-fated deal and were personally liable for its extensive bank loans.
But newly available documents -- including the first completed independent review of Whitewater, prepared for a Federal agency by a law firm -- cast both positions in a new light.


Correction
A picture on July 2 with a review of "The City of Florence," by R. W. B. Lewis, appeared without credit.
The photographer is Evelyn Hofer.


Streetscapes/Broome Street; When It Comes to Trucks, SoHo Is All Shook Up
DID you know that through trucks are not allowed on Broome Street, which at peak periods seems like their native habitat?
Some local activists do not like that awful, churning feeling of living in a cement mixer and claim that heavy trucking there is not only illegal but is shaking SoHo's historic buildings to bits.
They hope that special signs planned by the city's Department of Transportation will reduce traffic and save the facades.
Restoration professionals, however, say that trucks are not the source of the trouble.


Fannie M. Tseng, Arthur T. Kolios
Fannie May Tseng, a daughter of Carol and Dr.
Kwo-Hwa Tseng of Taipei, Taiwan, was married yesterday to Arthur Theodore Kolios, a son of Theodore Kolios of Mendham, N.J., and the late Aphrodite Kolios.
The Rev.
John Orfanakos performed the ceremony at St.
George Greek Orthodox Church in Clifton, N.J.
Ms.
Tseng, 26, is keeping her name.
She graduated from Brown University and is a candidate for a Ph.D. in economics at the University of Pennsylvania.
Her father is the chief of psychiatry at Cathay General Hospital in Taipei.


The World; U.S. Watches Out for Its Own. Well, Sometimes.
WHAT does Harry Wu have in common with Milton Meier?
Both are American citizens and both are behind bars in foreign countries because, among other things, they are accused of being spies.


MGIC Investment Corp.(MTG,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Jun 30


M.S. Carriers Inc.(MSCA,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Jun 30


Atlancic City; Buffet by DeMille
THE opening of a new casino buffet would not normally warrant much attention.
Every Atlantic City casino has some kind of all-you-can-eat restaurant, though prices, hours and menus vary (from $6.95 at the Claridge to $15.95 at Trump Plaza and the Grand).
Like many things in Atlantic City, the buffets may be best appreciated from a safe distance.
A typical casino buffet can move 300 slot players, walk-in tourists and families on a budget past the hissing steam tables every 20 minutes.
So jammed is the Beverly Hills Buffet at Merv Griffin's Resorts that reservations are required merely to stand in line.


Drunken Drivers in Jail Should Be Under Treatment
To the Editor:
You can make the punishment fit the crime with mandatory sentences for drunken drivers who kill, as suggested by State Senator Gordon A. MacInnes in the July 2 Soapbox essay "When the 'Good Citizen' Kills." But you can't throw away the key; so to deter future alcohol-related homicides, as well as critical spinal cord and head injuries, drunken drivers should experience intensive alcohol and drug treatment while they're inside.
Treatment is a lot cheaper than re-arrests and carnage on the highways.


Old Kent Financial Corp.(OKEN,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Jun 30


Witness Tells Of Bag Sought In Bomb Case
A large duffel bag being sought by Federal agents in connection with the Oklahoma City bombing may contain a cache of explosives and gun parts, a witness in the case says.
That witness, James Rosencrans, said in an interview this week that his next-door neighbor, Michael Fortier, asked him to help bury a large camouflage bag in the scrub behind their trailer homes in this western Arizona town three days before the April 19 explosion.


The Day of the Long Shot
The art of handicapping took a hammering at Belmont Park yesterday when Abaginone, the even-money favorite from California, ran last in the field of eight while Shug McGaughey's Waldoboro, a 20-1 long shot, was winning the True North Handicap.
And Waldoboro scored by two lengths over an even longer shot, the 34-1 Corma Ray.
Abaginone, who arrived from California with his jockey, Gary Stevens, was never a factor.
Waldoboro flew from last place to seventh after half a mile, moved into contention in the homestretch and outran Corma Ray, Mining Burrah and Evil Bear.
The winner, a 4-year-old son of Lyphard owned by Emory Hamilton and ridden by Eddie Maple, raced the six furlongs in 1:093/5 and paid $42.60.


Paper Anchor: Bearded Neophyte Plays Blond, Big-Voiced TV Host
What was cable's NewSport network thinking, letting a writer substitute for Chet Coppock, the blond, big-voiced, suspendered host of NewSport Talk, the nightly two-hour chatfest?
Was it desperation or hubris, letting the bald, bearded Richard Sandomir play a misguided, Plimptonesque trick on us?
"You want to do two hours?" Mike Lardner, senior vice president of Prime SportsChannel Networks, NewSport's parent, asked Sandomir last month.
"It's not easy. It's tougher than Larry King."


CHILDREN'S BOOKS
IN THE MIDDLE OF THE NIGHT By Robert Cormier. 182 pp.
New York: Delacorte Press. $15.95. (Ages 12 and up)  FROM THE NOTEBOOKS OF MELANIN SUN By Jacqueline Woodson. 141 pp.
New York: The Blue Sky Press/Scholastic. $14.95. (Ages 12 and up)


'Amorous Deceptions' at the Rushmore Festival
JUST as the misogynistic, anti-Semitic and otherwise not very nice August Strindberg was an indelible influence on modern drama, he was, by unfortunate consequence, the father of the ugly tell-all autobiography and talk show that is too much upon us.
Without the plays of Strindberg, notably "The Father," "Dance of Death" and "Miss Julie," where would O'Neill and Albee have found the nurturer of their demons?
The Swedish genius (1849-1912) -- by all accounts, a man close to madness -- poured his messed-up life into his plays, 52 of them, and other writings, 35 books, not to mention 15 volumes of letters.


Subway Work Stirs Lead Poisoning Fears
Paint chips flaking off the beams of an elevated subway line have raised concerns among parents and school officials who say children are at risk of lead poisoning.
Residents say renovation work on the M line, which started in 1993, has sent paint chips fluttering into the playground of Junior High School 93 , less than 20 feet from the elevated subway structure, and into neighboring backyards.
Transit Authority officials said the structure was last painted in the 1960's, when use of lead-based paint was prevalent.


Earning His Keep, Neatly
About 7 A.M. -- before the building superintendents get to work on East 33d Street between Second and Third Avenues -- James Revels is there with his broom.
Limping a bit, he makes his way slowly along the north side, then the south, sweeping away cigarette butts, coffee cups, candy wrappers.
In two hours, sidewalks and curbs are immaculate.
And Mr.
Revels has a few more dollars in his pocket -- he is loath to just say how many more -- handed to him by residents of the small apartment buildings lining the block.


Regions Financial Corp.(RGBK,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Jun 30


Motherhood and Other 'New Metaphors'
AS one of the six artists in "New Metaphors" at Blue Hill Cultural Center here, Siena Porta confines herself to the topic of motherhood.
But as curator of the show, Ms.
Porta operates in another realm, the questionable nature of which is implied by two statements in her introductory essay.
These are, respectively, that artists function "as the mythologizers of the environment and the world" and that women are "still not exhibited as often as men."


Another World


Consolidators
To the Editor: "Consolidators: A Fresh Look" (Practical Traveler, May 14) presents the potential savings through using a consolidator ticket without quantifying the additional cost due to the loss of frequent flier mileage.
On a recent trip to Rome my wife and I purchased T.W.A. tickets from a consolidator who combined the cost of the tickets with some hotel nights.
We paid $1,164 each for the round-trip tickets and six nights at a medium-priced hotel.


The Dow Is Near A Real Record
For the last 13 years, the most important investment trend has been the relative prices of financial assets -- stocks and bonds -- as opposed to real assets -- stuff ranging from cars to clothing to silver.
One easy way to monitor that is to look at what might be called the "real" Dow Jones industrial average -- the Dow adjusted for inflation as measured by the Consumer Price Index.
At its low point in 1982, the Dow was less than eight times as high as the price index.
A basket of stocks was worth 7.95 baskets of consumer goods.


Of Picnics and Sailing and Summer Jaunts


Bookshelf
ONE HOT SUMMER DAY.
Written and photographed by Nina Crews.
Greenwillow. $15. (Ages 2 and up) An enchanting little girl tells us just how hot it is, and photomontage illustrations show us her urban neighborhood and incidents from her very ordinary and very happy day -- eating two grape Popsicles, trying to fry an egg on the sidewalk, dancing and splashing when the rain comes.
THE MYSTERY OF THE ANCIENT MAYA: Revised Edition.
By Carolyn Meyer and Charles Gallenkamp.
Margaret K. McElderry. $15. (Ages 12 and up) Archeologists have unearthed and understood so much about the Mayas in the past decade, especially their writing, that the authors have completely revised their earlier book.
The exciting science, good history and fine introduction serve adult readers, too.
CROCODILE GENE AND HIS FRIENDS.
By Eduard Uspensky.
Translated by Nina Ignatowicz.
Illustrated by Vladimir Shpitalnik.
Knopf. $15. (Ages 8 to 12) This classical-style story about friendship between curious animals and children was actually written in Russia 25 years ago.
Although the political situation implicitly satirized (one creature lives in a telephone booth for privacy) has changed somewhat, the story remains charming.
BAM BAM BAM.
By Eve Merriam.
Illustrated by Dan Yaccarino.
Bill Martin/Holt. $14.95. (Ages 2 to 5) A 1966 poem about the demolition that precedes the construction of a skyscraper has been exuberantly reillustrated.
LET'S BE FRIENDS.
By Caroline Ness.
Illustrated by Alex Ayliffe.
Harper Festival. $5.95. (Ages 2 to 5) Zack is a black-and-white cat, Lucy a ginger-and-white puppy.
They are both adorable, and after proper tussling they do make friends.
Sweet.
THE EAGLE KITE.
By Paula Fox.
Richard Jackson/Orchard. $14.95. (Ages 11 to 14) Liam had known about his father's male lover for three years before being told about his father's AIDS, but he has not let himself understand.
In this affecting novel, he comes to terms with denial and with grief.


Jill M. Slansky, Timothy Galbraith
Jill Michelle Slansky, the daughter of Suzanne and Barry Slansky of Millwood, N.Y., was married yesterday evening to Timothy Scott Galbraith, a son of Mary and James Galbraith of Encino, Calif.
Rabbi Chaim Stern performed the ceremony at the Waldorf-Astoria in New York.
Ms.
Slansky, who is 28 and is keeping her name, will enter her second year at Loyola Law School in Los Angeles next month.
She graduated from the University of Maryland at College Park.
Her parents own Webster Auto Parts, a store in the Bronx.


Whitewater Revisited
Newly released documents related to the Whitewater affair cast the defense used by the President and Mrs.
Clinton in a new light.
Article, page 18.


CRIME: Giant Secret Drug Vault
Almost every day, at a different time, an unmarked van rolls up to a building in San Diego County, Calif., where boxes of drugs are unloaded, labeled, weighed and stocked on shelves.
It's the United States Customs Service's new 10,800-square-foot, supermarket-size drug vault, built a year ago with $1.4 million that came from sales of property seized in drug-related arrests.
And it houses about $1 billion of marijuana, heroin, cocaine and weapons taken mostly from cars at the Mexico-California border and occasionally from smugglers' airplanes intercepted by Customs Service jets and helicopters.
All of it is evidence for future trials.


Whitman's D.M.V. Folly A Homemade Mess
Most people come in direct contact with the state about twice a year -- when they pay their taxes, and when they visit a motor vehicle office to renew their license or auto registration.
Writing checks for the first of these is rarely an enjoyable event, and Governor Whitman's hastily conceived and sloppily executed effort to turn 23 state-run Division of Motor Vehicles branch offices over to private management firms has made a disaster of the other.
Late in the week, lines were still snaking out of doors and down streets at several of the branch offices, and people needing new licenses or registrations were still being turned away hours before closing time, four days after the Governor told reporters, on July 7, "We'll be fully staffed and everything will be fine come Monday."


ABOUT LONG ISLAND
DIANE ANTELL wanted to sit on her deck and gaze out at "moving water."
Because Mrs.
Antell and her husband, Gus, live several blocks from the ocean in East Hampton, that could have been a challenge.
But not in the Hamptons, the land of if you want it someone can create it -- for the right price.


July 9-15; Atoms Without Identities
Seventy years ago Albert Einstein was pondering a system of quantum statistics that had been worked out by the great Indian mathematician Satyendra Nath Bose to describe the behavior of things like atomic particles.
It occurred to Einstein that Bose might unknowingly have discovered a surprising possibility: the existence of a kind of super atom made up of merged ordinary atoms that had lost their individual identities.
If anyone but Einstein had come up with the idea it would have been consigned to obscurity, physicists agree.
But as it was, the notion of a "Bose-Einstein condensate," as the hypothetical stuff was named, remained alive, albeit on a back burner.


DIARY
STOCK OPTIONS The Low Four Figures
There are stock options and there are stock options; never has this been clearer.
You often hear of top executives getting them -- windfalls that would pay off the mortgages in entire neighborhoods, with enough left for a few centuries' worth of groceries.
But at Chemical Bank, some goodies trickled down to humbler workers last week, too; when the stock topped $50 for three days running, a share plan announced a year ago kicked in.
The numbers had considerably fewer decimal places than those in executive pay packages -- a profit of $1,481 (before taxes) -- but it did spark interest.
"It was amazing how suddenly the whole organization began paying attention to the stock price," said Chemical's chairman, Walter Shipley, who at yearend owned 551,950 shares and has options to buy 530,000 more.
TOBACCO  Yes, It's a Drug.
Now What?
The F.D.A. has this tricky problem.
It has decided that nicotine is an addictive drug, and one that's clearly dangerous; plug those facts into a legal computer and you'd have to ban cigarettes.
It can't do that, of course -- smokers would probably burn Washington to the ground (or bury it in ashes).
So last week the agency sent some more modest ideas to the White House (given the explosiveness of this issue, it passed the buck).
These included banning vending-machine sales, clamping down on sales to minors, and barring "Joe Camel"-type ads (which seem to have nearly vanished anyway).
Even such modest measures face a rough ride, though.
Tobacco is "a legal commodity" and should be treated as such, said one tobacco-state lawmaker, while another was "distressed" and "annoyed." . . .
Also last week, a glimpse into tobacco history: In 1950, an epidemiologist named Morton Levin wrote one of the first papers to show that smoking causes lung cancer, and campaigned against smoking throughout his career.
Dr.
Levin just died at 91.
SPENDING IT  Down and Out at Genentech
It's hard to get by on nearly $1 million a year.
So to make ends meet -- and considerable ends they must be -- G. Kirk Raab kept borrowing from Genentech, where he happened to be chief executive.
Finally, Mr.
Raab sought a $2 million personal-loan guarantee from Roche Holdings of Switzerland, even as he was negotiating the sale of his company to Roche -- a deal, by the way, that shareholders say shortchanged them.
This was too much for the board, which sent Mr.
Raab packing last week.
That ended a stormy tenure at this fast-growing company, one marked by strong criticism of its sales practices.
A top Genentech sales executive, in fact, is about to go on trial on charges of paying kickbacks to a pediatrician to prescribe Genentech's growth hormone.
INVESTIGATIONS  Blowing a Golden Whistle
It is not, generally, a great idea to bite the hand that feeds you -- especially if that hand belongs to a powerful company like Archer-Daniels-Midland.
That company has fed Mark Whitacre very nicely, in fact: as head of the BioProducts division, he is a rising company star.
But it's unclear whether that star will keep rising.
For last week it turned out that Mr.
Whitacre, working with the F.B.I., secretly taped executives' conversations as part of an inquiry into possible price-fixing.
Though whistleblowers have popped up in all sorts of places to denounce corporate naughtiness, it's highly unusual for such a high executive to play that role.
TRADE  No Favors From China
Yes, we can talk tough with China all we want -- on human rights, on Taiwan's status.
But highmindedness, no matter how virtuous, might also have its costs, for China's sheer bulk gives it indisputable power.
Last week, after saying that no decision was due for months, China snubbed Ford and Chrysler to give Mercedes a $1 billion contract to build mini-vans and engines in China, even though Mercedes has never actually built a true passenger mini-van -- you know, with all the cup-holders.
Chinese officials denied that rising tensions with Washington had anything to do with the decision, but Detroit has to be wondering.
DIPLOMACY  The Next Step in Vietnam
The building of a diplomatic bridge to Vietnam raised emotional issues -- some people saying the move was overdue, others insisting it wouldn't be time till all the missing were accounted for.
But put those issues aside for a moment: a big step in healing the wounds will come when goods can flow freely between the nations.
And despite last week's opening, that can't happen quite yet.
Still needed are a trade agreement and preferred trading status, and even then American companies must struggle to catch up with Asia and Europe to do business in a country with 73 million people, more than France or Britain.
AUTOS  Japan Meets One Trade Goal
Remember that hoopla-laden trade agreement with Japan last month, the one that made the world safe for Lexus owners?
No numbers.
No specific targets.
Just words.
But most people have probably forgotten that when George Bush went to Tokyo three years ago, Japan's auto industry set a target of buying $19 billion worth of American parts in the year that ended this past March, twice the previous level.
And guess what: Japan did so, and more.
Figures out last week showed $19.86 billion in purchases.
There's a footnote, though: that figure is total purchases, not imports.
Most parts were for Japanese plants here.
Japan had set a goal of $4 billion in imported parts, but fell short with just $3.23 billion.
CONSOLIDATION  One Bank, Indivisible
Something strange is going on.
One advantage of a national Government -- politics, if possible, aside -- would seem to be the economies of scale it offers in running things.
But everyone's been slamming the centralized bureaucracy as a failure.
Banking, though, is heading full-blast in the opposite direction.
Repeatedly citing "economies of scale," the nation's banks are tripping over themselves in a rush to merge into behemoths.
A few weeks ago, First Union said it would buy First Fidelity of Newark.
Then last week PNC agreed to buy Midlantic, and First Chicago and NBD agreed to merge into a Midwest powerhouse.
The value of the deals: $5.4 billion, $3 billion and $5.3 billion.
But there was no truth to rumors that Citibank was buying the Federal Reserve.


BEST SELLERS: July 16, 1995
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
1
BEACH MUSIC, by Pat Conroy. (Talese/Doubleday, $27.50.) An American living in Rome returns to South Carolina and tries to cope with his troubled past.
2
2
3
ROSE MADDER, by Stephen King. (Viking, $25.95.) Fleeing an abusive husband, a woman seeks happiness in a strange city by creating her own myth.
3
1
153
THE BRIDGES OF MADISON COUNTY, by Robert James Waller. (Warner, $17.95.) A photographer and a farmer's lonely wife in Iowa.
4
3
12
THE RAINMAKER, by John Grisham. (Doubleday, $25.95.) A young man barely out of law school tries to expose a corporation's multibillion-dollar scam.
5
5
72
THE CELESTINE PROPHECY, by James Redfield. (Warner, $17.95.) An ancient manuscript, found in Peru, provides insights into achieving a fulfilling life.
6
7
3
THE WITNESS, by Sandra Brown. (Warner, $21.95.) A seemingly happy public defender and wife is plunged into a morass of bigotry and hate.
7
4
7
THE APOCALYPSE WATCH, by Robert Ludlum. (Bantam, $24.95.) Tracking a neo-Nazi movement with designs on American and European officials.
8
6
10
LET ME CALL YOU SWEETHEART, by Mary Higgins Clark. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $24.) An unusual murder case haunts a prosecutor's career and her private life.
9
1
DISNEY'S POCAHONTAS. (Mouse Works, $6.98.) The romance of an American Indian princess and an Englishman, told in words and pictures.
10
8
56
POLITICALLY CORRECT BEDTIME STORIES, by James Finn Garner. (Macmillan, $8.95.) Classic tales respun to avoid offending current sensibilities.
11
10
12
LADDER OF YEARS, by Anne Tyler. (Knopf, $24.) At 40, a woman leaves her physician husband and children to start a new life in a strange town.
12
9
9
ONCE UPON A MORE ENLIGHTENED TIME, by James Finn Garner. (Macmillan, $9.95.) Eight more "politically correct bedtime stories."
13
1
AFTER DARK, by Phillip Margolin. (Doubleday, $23.95.) A thriller about murder and corruption in an Oregon court.
14
12
3
REDEMPTION, by Leon Uris. (HarperCollins, $25.) In a sequel to "Trinity," the Larkin family continues to fight for Irish independence.
15*
13
6
STRANGE HIGHWAYS, by Dean Koontz. (Tartikoff/Warner, $23.95.) A collection of suspense tales, including novels, novellas and short stories.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Nonfiction
1
3
4
NEW PASSAGES, by Gail Sheehy. (Random House, $25.) How changing social conditions and longer life expectancies are affecting our lives.
2
5
7
SPONTANEOUS HEALING, by Andrew Weil. (Knopf, $23.) A physician explains the ways in which the body heals itself.
3
6
4
A GOOD WALK SPOILED, by John Feinstein. (Little, Brown, $23.95.) A sportswriter reports on the P.G.A.
Tour in 1993 and 1994.
4
1
40
THE HOT ZONE, by Richard Preston. (Random House, $23.) The discovery of the deadly Ebola virus in Virginia and the efforts to keep it from spreading.
5
2
71
MIDNIGHT IN THE GARDEN OF GOOD AND EVIL, by John Berendt. (Random House, $23.) The mysterious death of a young man in Savannah, Ga.
6
4
7
DAVE BARRY'S COMPLETE GUIDE TO GUYS, by Dave Barry. (Random House, $21.) A humorist explains the strange ways of a species of males called "guys."
7
7
29
SISTERS.
Essays by Carol Saline.
Photographs by Sharon J. Wohlmuth. (Running Press, $27.50.) The relationships of 36 sets of sisters.
8
8
22
THE DEATH OF COMMON SENSE, by Philip K. Howard. (Random House, $18.) How governmental rules and regulations are fettering the lives of all Americans.
9
1
TO RENEW AMERICA, by Newt Gingrich. (HarperCollins, $24.) The Speaker of the House describes his solutions to the country's problems.
10
1
WHEN ELEPHANTS WEEP, by Jeffrey Moussaieff Masson and Susan McCarthy. (Delacorte, $23.95.) The emotional lives of animals.
11
10
5
SLEEPING AT THE STARLITE MOTEL, by Bailey White. (Addison-Wesley, $20.) A Georgia schoolteacher tells about her adventures while traveling and at home.
12
9
6
KATO KAELIN, by Marc Eliot. (Harper Paperbacks, $20.) A friend of O.J.
Simpson's on events surrounding the murders of Nicole Simpson and Ron Goldman.
13
12
82
THE BOOK OF VIRTUES, by William J. Bennett. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $30.) Moral stories adapted from the Greeks, the Bible, folklore and elsewhere.
14
15
8
PAULA, by Isabel Allende. (HarperCollins, $24.) The novelist tells stories of her family's life as she tends her fatally ill daughter.
15*
13
13
FROM BEGINNING TO END, by Robert Fulghum. (Villard, $20.) The rituals we practice and the spiritual journeys we take, from childhood to old age.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous
1
1
112
MEN ARE FROM MARS, WOMEN ARE FROM VENUS, by John Gray. (HarperCollins, $23.) Communicating.
2
2
17
THE SEVEN SPIRITUAL LAWS OF SUCCESS, by Deepak Chopra. (Amber-Allen/New World Library, $12.95.) How to "generate wealth in all its forms."
3
3
9
HOW TO ARGUE AND WIN EVERY TIME, by Gerry Spence. (St. Martin's, $22.95.) A lawyer describes ways to win arguments at home and at work.
4
9
MARS AND VENUS IN THE BEDROOM, by John Gray. (HarperCollins, $22.) Maintaining passion.
Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending July 1, at 3,050 bookstores plus wholesalers serving 28,000 other retailers (gift shops, department stores, newsstands, supermarkets), statistically weighted to represent sales in all such outlets nationwide.
An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
And Bear in Mind (Editor's Choices of other recent books of particular interest) AND WHEN DID YOU LAST SEE YOUR FATHER? by Blake Morrison. (Picador USA, $21.) An English poet's perfectly convincing memoir of his father, a man both overbearing and engagingly quirky, whose death comes to the reader as a surprise.
THE CITY OF FLORENCE: Historical Vistas and Personal Sightings, by R.W.B.
Lewis. (Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux, $27.50.) An autobiographical, anecdotal, historical memoir, filled with love and learning, about a distinguished scholar's affair with a miraculous city.
COLD SNAP: Stories, by Thom Jones. (Little, Brown, $19.95.) A collection that turns a merciless, ironic gaze on the organic trap called life, in which spiritual beings -- humans -- are forever in jeopardy of mere chemical accidents or biological insults.
THE ENGINE OF REASON, THE SEAT OF THE SOUL: A Philosophical Journey Into the Brain, by Paul M. Churchland. (Bradford/MIT, $29.95.) A philosopher's argument, clear, witty and scientifically up-to-date, that all of human mental life, however subjective it feels, is reducible to material activity taking place in the brain.
THE LIARS' CLUB: A Memoir, by Mary Karr. (Viking, $22.95.) A haunting memoir of growing up in East Texas while trying to figure one's parents out, especially a hugely enigmatic mother who says little, reads Camus and Sartre and tries to throw herself from cars while drunk.
THE LOVE LETTER, by Cathleen Schine. (Houghton Mifflin, $19.95.) Helen is 42, capable and loves Edith Wharton.
Johnny is 20, acne-spotted and -- like, excellent! -- a big Tom Robbins fan.
In this comic novel they fall in love.
MOVING VIOLATIONS: War Zones, Wheelchairs, and Declarations of Independence, by John Hockenberry. (Hyperion, $24.95.) Swaggering in a wheelchair isn't easy, but this candidly aggressive National Public Radio correspondent is up to the job (or any other).
THE NEXT AMERICAN NATION: The New Nationalism and the Fourth American Revolution, by Michael Lind. (Free Press, $25.) An intelligent, industrious, not very cheerful look at possible futures.
Balkanization through identity politics?
Stratification, Brazilian style?
THE PRICE OF A CHILD, by Lorene Cary. (Knopf, $23.) A sensual, funny first novel that transposes to pre-Civil War Philadelphia the theme of the author's 1991 memoir, "Black Ice": the duty of an escapee toward the oppressed she leaves behind.
SECRET LIFE: An Autobiography, by Michael Ryan. (Pantheon, $25.) The biggest secret was Mr.
Ryan's sex addiction, from which he says he is recovering; this disturbing, amazingly risky work of self-exposure by an accomplished poet is a portrait of the artist as a young deviant.
VENICE REDISCOVERED, by John Pemble. (Oxford University, $25.) A historian's fresh, fascinating account of the potent symbolic resurrection of Venice in the European imagination after its political death in 1815.


Crookedest Street Closed for Repairs
A popular zigzag block of San Francisco's Lombard Street, often billed as "the crook edest street in the world," has been closed to car traffic for major repairs, and is scheduled to reopen on Sept. 6.
Walkways on both sides of the serpentine street, near the top of Russian Hill and a short walk from the Chinatown and North Beach districts, will remain open to pedestrians.


Carrie Englander and Sascha Previn
Carrie Englander, the daughter of Harriet and William Englander of Port Washington, L.I., was married on Thursday to Sascha Previn, a son of Andre Previn, the conductor and composer, of Bedford Hills, N.Y., and the actress Mia Farrow, of Bridgewater, Conn.
Rabbi Donna Berman performed the ceremony at the Swan Club in Roslyn, L.I.
Mrs.
Previn, 29, graduated from New York University and received a master's degree in social work from Hunter College.
She is a psychiatric social worker and social services coordinator for the Parternship for the Homeless in New York, and is also a stand-up comedian.
Her father is senior partner in Englander &amp; Albert, a labor law firm in Mineola, L.I., and is also a photographer.
Her mother is a speech and language pathologist in Port Washington, where she also teaches speech at the Sousa Elementary School.


For Some REIT Investors, Time Is Short
TIME is running out for thousands of investors in a disastrous real estate deal sold by Paine Webber.
And, thanks to some quirks in the legal system, almost none of them know it.
The investment, called Retail Property Investors, is at the center of a complex legal cat fight.
It is a battle that could determine how much of their money the investors will ever see again.


Where You Go When You Visit: The Official Top 10 List
The most-visited destinations in the state (and one outside it) in 1994, according to the New Jersey Division of Travel and Tourism.
1. Atlantic City
2. Cape May
3. The Wildwoods
4. Ocean City
5. Newark
6. Long Beach Island
7. Princeton
8. Brigantine
9. Morristown
10. Statue of Liberty/Ellis Island


Bosnian Serbs Push Past U.N. Posts Into Muslim Enclave
Bosnian Serb forces moved to take the heights in the protected enclave of Zepa today, senior Western diplomats and military officials said, brushing past United Nations observation posts and shelling civilians in their drive to capture a second United Nations "safe area" in less than a week.
The Bosnian Serb leadership said tonight that Bosnian Government soldiers had moved into the United Nations posts and disarmed the peacekeepers.


How Can You Describe Meager Defense Spending as Lavish?
To the Editor:
"The Pentagon Jackpot" (editorial, July 10) serves as an example of what happens when misinformed journalists attempt to analyze a military budget without understanding the budget process or the nation's security needs.


The Power of the Word
To the Editor:
Warm kudos to Helen Vendler for her perceptive, intelligent and sane review of "The Language of Life." Praise is due Bill Moyers for his good intentions in this area, but, alas, we all know what the road to hell is paved with.


Payroll Count Makes Misleading Jobs Index
To the Editor:
The headline "Payroll Swelled by 215,000 in June; Jobless Rate Fell" (front page, July 8) is misleading.


In the Region/Connecticut; Breaking Down Resistance to Low-Income Housing
IT is no secret that Fairfield -- the wealthiest county in one of the wealthiest states in the nation -- regards low-income housing as anathema.
Until recently most proposals for such housing were systematically and legally rejected under the area's predominant large-lot, single-family zoning.
Rejections still occur, but since the Affordable Housing Appeals Law was passed by the General Assembly in 1990 those decisions can be reversed.
Today, a relatively small but steady stream of attractive housing priced within reach of teachers, firefighters, police officers, older people on fixed incomes and low- to mid-level employees of the region's corporate community is being built, often with the help of the courts.


Fastenal Co. (FAST,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Jun 30


'Made in Italy' Taste Starts With Fresh Vegetables
WHEN friends return from vacations in Italy, they invariably complain that the food simply doesn't taste the same here.
A plate of spaghetti with tomatoes and basil that tasted sublime in Positano or Siena is ordinary when made at home.
But now fresh, locally grown vegetables are coming into season.
When produce is cooked within hours (or even minutes) of being picked, and a good fruity olive oil is on hand, you can get close to re-creating that Italian flavor -- if not the setting.


Peoples Heritage Financial Group Inc.(PHBK,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Jun 30


Global Marine Inc.(GLM,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Jun 30


LOST AND FOUND: Loved Ones By the Car
Everyone knows Americans love their cars.
What's tantalizing is how much they love to pose by their cars.
In the snapshots here (from flea markets and friends' old albums), the automobile may be included to date the moment or to show how the people traveled, or how far they have come.
Most of the photos are mysteries: An early Thelma and Louise?
A mother and child after a visit to the grandparents?
But the photo at the top right gives a glimpse of the hidden stories that pull a viewer to lost family snaps.
It was taken in 1947 at a picnic near Portland, Ore., of two families 10 years after they fled Hitler.
And yet nothing about the photo suggests tragedy.
It reads only as an American moment, celebrating the pleasure of leisure, the freedom of the road and the power of a Pontiac sedan that could carry you anywhere.


INSIDE
HIDDEN NEW YORK 3 Down by the river: A shantytown for transvestite prostitutes in the West Village.
NEW YORKERS &amp; CO. 4 From afar, four of the city's leading public relations executives call the Hugh Grant game.
MOVIE CLOCK 14  What's showing at the local movie houses, today through Thursday.
GOOD EATING 15 A tour of TriBeCa.
The stunning American Renaissance; the congenial Barocco, and the elegance of Chanterelle.
PLAYING IN THE NEIGHBORHOOD 16 A tribute to the Union Settlement Association; day lilies and roses at the New York Botanical Garden.
SOAPBOX 17 Elaine offers some jaundiced views on the Hamptons.
And letters.


Iomega Corp.(IOMG,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to July 2


Graf Considers Moving
STEFFI GRAF said yesterday that she was considering moving away from Germany following recent problems with the tax authorities, including a much-publicized raid on her house.
The multimillionaire tennis champion, whose tax affairs have been front-page news in her homeland this week, said she believed her financial affairs were in order.


In South Carolina, a Mother's Defense, and Life, Could Hinge on 2 Choices
Susan Smith does not appear to be insane in the layman's eye.
She sits quietly at the defense table between her two lawyers, flipping now and then through a small stack of letters from people writing to wish her well.
After eight months of inactivity in prison, she has gained weight and looks older than 23, almost dowdy, behind wire-rimmed glasses and plain, conservative suits.
Her face is almost serene, except when she turns around to flash a quick, thin smile to a relative in the courtroom, or when talk turns to her sons, and she cries briefly, discreetly.


July 9-15: Hiroshima Remembered; An Exhibition Shows What The Smithsonian Didn't
Remember the eviscerated Smithsonian Air and Space Museum exhibit on the Enola Gay, the B-29 that dropped the bomb on Hiroshima?
Many of the sorts of artifacts and images that were stripped away from that show are now on the walls of American University, in Washington.
The Smithsonian's plans for a major exhibit on the Enola Gay were radically altered last January by the institution's president, after months of criticism.
Veterans groups and members of Congress complained that the exhibition's text portrayed Americans as aggressors and Japanese as victims in the bombing.
Eventually, nearly all references to the bombing's effects on Japan were erased.
Historians were flabbergasted.
Although Washington University officials said their show was not an answer to the Smithsonian's show, the university's exhibit included artifacts like those planned for the Smithsonian.
There were various items on loan from Japanese museums -- a melted clock and lunchbox, disintegrated clothes and kitchen goods -- and graphic pictures of the bombing's victims.
Speaking at the new exhibit's opening ceremony, a bomb survivor described seeing a friend's face "peeled, hanging like pieces of rag." Another survivor said the dead bodies around Hiroshima "looked like charred fish."
Scholars on both sides of this debate have wondered if 50 years was long enough to heal the bombing's emotional scars.
Apparently not.
TIMOTHY MCNULTY


DOLE AND GRAMM CLASH ON REVISING LAWS ON WELFARE
Senators Bob Dole and Phil Gramm clashed pointedly today over welfare in a display of the Republican split that has stalled the legislation in a Senate increasingly roiled by Presidential politics.
In an address on the closing day of the Republican National Committee's summer meeting here, Senator Dole, the majority leader, threatened to keep the chamber in session all August if necessary to pass a welfare bill that would give states more control over their programs.
To the Senate, which treasures its summer break, that is a near-apocalyptic threat that can complicate the prospects of other bills as well.


Help for a Nature Trail Through the Meadowlands
A proposed 21-mile nature trail through the teeming marshes of the Hackensack Meadowlands got a big push last week, in the form of a $600,000 state grant to the Hackensack Meadowlands Development Commission.
The Meadows Path would run from Losen Slote Creek Park in Little Ferry down to West Hudson Park in Kearny, hugging the west bank of the Hackensack River much of the way.
It would connect a patchwork of existing trails, roads, sidewalks and utility and rail rights-of-way, some of which now run through private property and are off limits.
In addition to the wetlands that provide refuge for more than 200 species of birds, the trail will guide hikers through or past lowland forest, baseball fields, a large office park and even an abandoned landfill.


Metro-North Unions Continue To Talk Past Strike Deadline
A strike deadline came and went early this morning as officials of the Metro-North Commuter Railroad and 17 of its unions continued marathon contract negotiations, with both sides still far apart on several issues.
A strike had been scheduled to begin after the union's 12:01 A.M. deadline, but both sides agreed with a Federal mediator to continue talking, although no settlement was assured.
The negotiations were apparently snagged over Metro-North's demands for a variety of work rule changes that would give it greater flexibility in scheduling night and weekend work, using part-time employees and contracting out some railroad operations.


Notes of a Red Menace
THE GOLDEN AGE IS IN US Journeys and Encounters, 1987-1994.
By Alexander Cockburn. 434 pp.
New York:  Verso. $24.95.


Rock-Tenn Co.(RKTN,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Jun 30


Gooden Is Benched Again
WHO'S an all-around nice guy off the field?
Apparently not Dwight Gooden, the former pitching whiz of the New York Mets, whose latest woe is that he has lost the larger-than-life place in Manhattan that he held for the last decade: a 42-foot-wide-by-95-foot-high outdoor mural for Nike.
The mural is at 351 West 42d Street on the side of the Holland Hotel, which, like the 30-year-old Mr.
Gooden, has fallen on hard times.
Charles Oakley, 31, the power forward for the New York Knicks and "an all-around nice guy off the court," as the Nike mural now states, is up in Mr.
Gooden's place, but this has nothing to do with Mr.
Gooden's troubles with cocaine and the law, or whether he is a nice guy, Nike says.


Eyes Forward
To the Editor:
At the heart of Phillip Lopate's lament for the wholeness of linear narrative found in films of previous eras lurks an intellectually paralyzing nostalgia  [ "It's Not Heroes Who Have Bad Grammar; It's Films," June 18 ] .


In South Carolina, a Mother's Defense, and Life, Could Hinge on 2 Choices
Susan Smith does not appear to be insane in the layman's eye.
She sits quietly at the defense table between her two lawyers, flipping now and then through a small stack of letters from people writing to wish her well.
After eight months of inactivity in prison, she has gained weight and looks older than 23, almost dowdy, behind wire-rimmed glasses and plain, conservative suits.
Her face is almost serene, except when she turns around to flash a quick, thin smile to a relative in the courtroom, or when talk turns to her sons, and she cries briefly, discreetly.


Newspaper Executives Gird for War of (Last Two) Tabloids
For years, the experts have held that financial troubles at New York City's tabloids were the market's way of saying that New York could not be a four-newspaper town.
The market finally spoke, with a vengeance, when an executive flew in from Los Angeles last week and, after 10 years of losses, closed New York Newsday in an instant.


Welfare Program Helps Many Climb the Ladder
THIRTY-NINE-YEAR-OLD Frances S., the mother of two, was dependent on public assistance for years.
In addition to battling a drug and alcohol problem, she became homeless after an abusive marriage and lived in a shelter with her children.
Now Frances, a Briarcliff Manor resident whose full name is being withheld to avoid embarrassing her family, is off welfare and working 20 hours a week with autistic children as a behavioral therapist.
She credits a model program with helping her turn her life around.


Key to Buying an Old House: A New Inspection
THERE are two kinds of people who buy old houses: old-house people -- who generally know what to expect -- and regular house people, who stumbled into the perfect setting or the best bargain or the most mellow and lovely old manse and had to have it.
"Oh, yeah, there can be more wrong with old houses than with new houses," said Skip Broom, a house restorer and builder from Hadlyme, Conn., who also does pre-purchase house inspections for $250 to $350.
"But you have to realize how incredibly strong these old places are.


Trustmark Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Jun 30


How TV Gets Away With Murder
ABANDONED IN THE WASTELAND Children, Television, and the First Amendment.
By Newton N. Minow and Craig L. LaMay. 237 pp.
New York: Hill &amp; Wang. $20.


Stage Struck


F.Y.I.
Bronx Swing and Slalom Q.  Maybe it's the heat but my mind is on a winter question: I know that people sometimes cross-country ski in Van Cortlandt Park in the Bronx, but have people ever taken advantage of some of those hills for a little downhill action?


Meditrust (MT,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Jun 30


The Test Results (Drumroll, Please)
"FOR of all sad words of tongue or pen, the saddest are these: 'It might have been!' "
John Greenleaf Whittier wrote that sentence more than 100 years ago, and now I know what he meant.
After going public in this section ("Does a Reporter Have the Right Stuff?" June 25) with my intention to take a simulated examination to become a certified financial planner, I cannot tell a lie.


Hong Kong Aquarium Is Back in the Swim
Visitors to Ocean Park, a Hong Kong amusement park with a water theme, can explore the expanded Atoll Reef aquarium, with 3.8 million gallons of water and some 7,000 fish.
More than 400 species native to the Phillipines, Singapore, Vietnam, Australia, the Maldives and the Red Sea are displayed.
The Atoll Reef reopened in the spring; it had been closed since October 1992 for a $7.7 million refurbishment program.
Ocean Park is on Hong Kong island, between Aberdeen and Repulse Bay.
Entrance to the Atoll Reef is included in admission to the amusement park, which is about $17, $8 for children 12 and under.


Corrections
The Habitats column last Sunday, about a doctor's 54th-floor apartment, misstated the address and the age of his building, the Corinthian.
It is at 330 East 38th Street, not 380, and it is 7 years old, not 10.


THE NEW JAZZ AGE
Frank Conroy's "Stop Nitpicking a Genius" (June 25) is perhaps the best writing on jazz I've read.
I've had some of the later experiences: Coltrane's "Favorite Things"; Mingus's quartet.
Conroy has done you proud.
DON GARBER Brooklyn


How About Opponents Of Bilingual Education?
When I first read "Classes Where Students' Languages Are as Varied as the Subjects"  [ June 25 ]  I was quite upset because it seems to make every attempt to present the views, thoughts and quotations of bilingual-education supporters, but fails to present the ideas and viewpoints of those who oppose it.
As a part-time staff member to Congressman Peter King, Republican of Seaford, whose bill the National Language Act would not only make English the official language, but would also eliminate funding for the Federal Office of Bilingual Education, I know that this opposition is significant and really should not be trivialized.
After all, the importance of an understanding of English is proven simply by a glimpse at the Help Wanted section that shows there are not many job opportunities for people who do not speak it.
However, after rereading the article, my thoughts shifted beyond the fact that my boss's ideas were being ignored and focused instead on the fact that by offering such a one-sided piece of journalism, your publication is doing your institution and the American people a great disservice.
In an era when many people turn to the medias as their only source of news, bias in reporting serves to disenfranchise people further from the system than the subjects that you primarily write about.


The First in the Velvet Glove
Vaclav Klaus, the imperious conservative economist who is Prime Minister of the Czech Republic, is on stage in the cultural hall of Sokolov, a coal-mining town where the pollution is so bad the air tastes of grit.
He is explaining to an admiring audience how all is well in the land.
Unemployment, at 3.3 percent, is the lowest in Europe.
Inflation is 10 percent, one of the most moderate rates in the former Eastern bloc.
And the country has a healthy budget surplus of $400 million, the only Central European nation in this enviable position.
The sole dissonant note during the smoothly orchestrated performance comes from some students in the balcony holding up a white banner to protest proposed nationwide fees for university education, and the combative Klaus rises to the provocation.
"Why should anyone in this room pay for the investment in somebody else's future?" asks the Prime Minister, cutting the air with a few karate chops and staring down his young critics.
The audience, mostly middle-aged and elderly, likes the jousting and erupts in applause.


Home Shopping Network Inc.(HSN,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Jun 30


The Nation; Idle Hands Within the Devil's Own Playground
INSIDE a metal factory on Industrial Boulevard in the small Texas city of Lockhart, an ambitious social experiment is proceeding quietly.
The factory is actually part of a medium-security prison, and 138 inmates are working at regular wages there, employed by private corporations making computer circuit boards, eyeglasses and air conditioners.


July 9-15: Political Prisoners; Myanmar's Dissident Leader, Daw Aung San Suu Kyi, Is Freed at Last
When Nelson Mandela was released from prison, the title of world's most famous political prisoner fell to Daw Aung San Suu Kyi, the dissident leader in Myanmar, the nation once called Burma.
But now, happily, she has lost the title, too.
After having been detained for nearly six years, she was freed from house arrest last week by the army generals who run the country.


It's Vegetable-Transplant Time
Transplant broccoli, cabbage and cauliflower seedlings into the garden for a fall crop.
If you didn't start any from seed, check local nurseries, or ask vegetable-gardening friends for extras.
These crops usually do better in the fall because they escape both bugs and heat.
Take softwood cuttings of shrubs like butterfly bush, weigela, honeysuckle, mock orange, privet and roses.
Cut just above a leaf node, trim back to three sets of leaves, dip the stem in water, dip it in rooting hormone powder and insert in potting soil, with two nodes beneath the soil.
Label the plants, including the date.
Place pots in a homemade propagation tent made of plastic bags.
Keep the soil moist.
Cuttings will take one to two months to root.


Tussaud's and Movie Chain Join Disney in 42d Street Project
Clearing the way for the redevelopment of 42d Street, Madame Tussaud's, the famous London wax museum, and AMC Entertainment, a movie theater chain, have reached agreements to open new attractions in the city's old theater district, people involved in the transactions say.
The agreements appeared to fulfill a requirement set by the Walt Disney Company, which has a tentative contract to rehabilitate the New Amsterdam Theater but threatened to pull out unless the city met yesterday's deadline to attract two more entertainment companies to invest in cleaning up the seedy block between Seventh and Eighth Avenues.


Oasis
PEOPLE HAVE THEIR OWN WAYS OF USING CENTRAL PARK.
SUMMERS it's for lovers, patzers, dreamers, cruisers, anglers, birders, foragers and practitioners of t'ai chi.
Anything can happen.
Here's proof: Once, playing with my friends near the 86th Street transverse, I looked up and saw a large brown handbag swinging from a tree.
The reward was big enough for lunch at Schrafft's and a movie.
In the monkey house at the old zoo, Caroline the gorilla spat at my grandmother and hit her in the face. (Caroline's cagemate was Jo Ann, the same name as my older sister.) The park is where, when my mother was 5, she buried Dickie, her pet canary, in a corn flakes box.
Once, when there was a restaurant at Bethesda Fountain, I saw a man order an "arty-choky." He ate the whole thing, even the fur, with a knife and fork.
Other, more amazing summer encounters: Egrets that look as if they're posing for Audubon, Madonna, Bill Clinton and almost every old boyfriend I ever had.
Central Park is where you want to be in love, or feel more in love if you already are.
It's where you must, must be kissed.
For years growing up, I thought the bridle path was where you went to get married.
Eau de coconut oil, dental floss bikinis, Bruce Davidson (who's been taking pictures in the park for four years), four kinds of music in Ivesian overlap on a Kelly green beach, the miracle when you're little of discovering mica in Manhattan schist and lying on your back in the sun in the exact same place you steered your sled that winter.
It's democracy in action.
There's no palm to grease for a honey hole at the Harlem Meer.
Central Park is an oasis in a steel-and-granite Sahara, the center of the city that's the center of the universe.
Once, when my son was sick, I opened his window and the sound of Simon and Garfunkel wafted in.
Svengalisized, we got our bikes and went out into the night.
The park was a party.
Peter breathed cool air.
By the time we got home, he was cured.
Central Park is my gym, my Walden Pond, my $5 tennis club.
Walking around the reservoir, I can't tell if what I'm hearing is a siren or a loon.
We take from the park what we need.
There's enough to go around -- 843 acres and it's all ours.


Transactions
Baseball  American League
MILWAUKEE BREWERS -- Called up Jamie McAndrew, pitcher, from New Orleans of the American Association.


Life Technologies Inc.(LTEK,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Jun 30


Wanted: a Positive Spin On Central Park Skating
To the Editor:
The July 2 article by Bruce Weber, "A Day in the Life of Central Park," is marred by a prejudice against skaters.
Virtually every mention is negative, including the skater who ran over a pedestrian, and there is no mention of skating as a healthful physical activity.


Kansas City Power &amp; Electric (KLT,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Jun 30


Apply Ice
Here is Ma, doing a flea market in Woodstock, when Death strolls over to her booth.
A bee sting, actually.
Ma doesn't know she is allergic, but she finds out fast: her blood pressure drops, her vision blurs; Ma knows if somebody doesn't do something, she's finished.
It is a dire moment, but for the time being, let us leave Ma, collapsed near her folding table and somewhat cyanotic, and talk about her fashion sense: elastic waists.
And as for casual wear -- that is, for doing flea markets -- the T-shirts they give college kids on spring break at Daytona Beach.
Ma sneaks into line to get them because they are her favorite price: free.
She does like a nice piece of jewelry, though, and when she hits the ground in Woodstock she is wearing, on her left hand, a platinum ring encircled with diamonds.
Which she raises feebly.


POSTINGS: A Landmark and Dining Map; Strolls and Snacks In Jackson Heights
A new glossy foldout map and guide, "Historic Jackson Heights Visitors Guide," is available for the cost of two 32-cent stamps from the Jackson Heights Beautification Group in Queens, which compiled it.
Its maps, list of 28 restaurants and 20 historical and cultural sites go beyond the borders of the 1920's garden community into Flushing and Long Island City.
Still, the focal point is Jackson Heights, bordered by Junction Boulevard on the the east, Roosevelt Avenue on the south, the Brooklyn-Queens Expressway on the west and LaGuardia Airport to the north, and its 30-square-block historic district, landmarked in 1994.
"We're hoping to appeal to people interested in ethnic foods," said Daniel C. Karatzas, a director of the group.
"We have Argentinian, Italian, Indian, Korean, Chinese, Thai, Colombian, Peruvian, Uruguayan restaurants. We're hoping to get people interested in neighborhoods and historic preservation."


Dutch Settlers Start Boom in Texas Dairy Farms
It is near midnight on Friday at the Cutting Horse saloon, and only nine boisterous young men remain.
They are drinking Coors Light and speaking Dutch.
Martin Van Beek, a thatch-haired blond, jumps from the table and, seizing the Country and Western duo's microphone, belts out a bawdy, foot-stomping Dutch ballad about life after work on a dairy farm.


It Was Big, It Was Fun and That's Enough
THE ONLY THING missing was a bow on top.
"Wrapped Reichstag" looked like a giant present, and it was.
The work by  Christo and Jeanne-Claude, his wife, turned out to be a great gift to this historic city.
I came here expecting not much from the ballyhooed project and found myself swept up in it.
"It" means the whole giddy affair -- the revelers who turned the bleak fields around the Reichstag into Woodstock East, the art students who gathered to sketch the building, the street vendors, the posturing politicos, the store windows around Berlin suddenly filled with wrapped objects, and the billboards that used the project to hawk beer and cigarettes.


Connecticut Q&amp;A: Michael W. Kozlowski; Pushing Cars Toward the Bar Code Era
IN MARCH, Michael W. Kozlowski, of Granby, was appointed Commissioner of the state's Department of Motor Vehicles, an agency that has a $73.2 million budget, 925 employees and 2.4 million customers -- licensed drivers and vehicle owners.
Mr.
Kozlowski, 42, joined the agency in 1987 and as deputy commissioner from February 1991 to December 1993, he stressed customer service as a way to ease the impact of closing eight of the department's 19 branches.
He was involved with implementation of programs like the roving photo-licensing buses and lease-free satellite offices in shopping malls and town halls.


From Wall St. Guru to Mutual-Fund Empire Builder
WHEN Mario J. Gabelli was a freshman at Fordham University in the early 1960's, he had already developed a precocious interest in the stock market, poring over The Wall Street Journal and buying shares in companies like ITT.
But what old friends really remember from those college years were Mr.
Gabelli's business ventures -- the airline catering business, the student trips to Bermuda, the flashlights he sold from the trunk of his car during electrical brownouts.
Three decades later, the 53-year-old Mr.
Gabelli has become one of Wall Street's most respected stock pickers, with a stellar record of managing money for big institutions and, through mutual funds, individual investors.
As befits a Wall Street guru, he appears often in investment magazines and on television, with his shock of silver hair and his mastery of bons mots -- usually with exclamation points at the end.


Waiting for a Song
To the Sports Editor:
The fans understand the quip that "it ain't over till the fat lady sings." The owners and players didn't allow the song last year when they killed the World Series.
The lack of an agreement between those extortionists this year continues to prevent closure and keeps the stadiums empty.
The fans know it ain't over till it's over.
ED SCANNELL  Simsbury, Conn.


Park's Boosters Fight Nursing Home Plan
POOR Untermyer Park.
Ever since Samuel Untermyer died in 1940, his Beaux Arts estate on North Broadway here has been buffeted by natural and social forces worthy of King Lear.
Untermyer, a millionaire lawyer and botanist, tried to give the property away during his lifetime, but no one wanted it.
He left it to New York State in his will, but because an endowment was not part of the package, the state declined it.
So did Westchester County and the City of Yonkers.
After six years of legal wrangling, the city finally accepted part of the estate as a park, but by then a cycle of decay, which still plagues the property, had begun.


New Yorkers Brave Day of Record Heat
At 8:30 A.M. yesterday, when the temperature had no business being above 90 degrees, Roberto Madrid was watering a circle of impatiens near Cadman Plaza in Brooklyn when Mario DeMaio asked to borrow the hose.
Mr.
DeMaio, 34, rinsed his hands and arms, then splashed his face.
He let the water gush down over his shaved head.
"I'm homeless," he told Mr. Madrid. "I got to cool off somehow."


U.S. Opening to Vietnam Sends China a Message; Make Cuba Next
To the Editor:
It is indeed an occasion to celebrate the normalizing of relations with Vietnam, and it is to be hoped Congressional opponents will not obstruct the signing of a trade agreement and granting of most-favored-nation trading status to Vietnam.


Corrections
An article on July 2 about ferry trips from Manhattan omitted a schedule restriction for Express Navigation's excursion ferry from Pier 11, just south of the South Street Seaport, to Conner's Hotel in Highlands, N.J.
It runs only on Saturdays and Sundays.
The article also omitted telephone numbers for the ferry companies.
New York Waterway, which operates ferries to Weehawken, Hoboken and Liberty State Park in New Jersey: (800) 533-3779; Express Navigation: (908) 872-2628.


Grainger (W.W.) Inc.(GWW,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Jun 30


A Wobbly Kirov Is Saved by 'The Firebird'
YOU DON'T HAVE TO BE A HIStorical determinist to suggest that arts institutions, like artists, mirror the society around them.
To say that the Kirov Ballet from Russia was a company in disarray on its recent visit to New York would be untrue.
But like the country in which it exists, the Kirov is very much a company in transition.
The certainties and standards, both artistic and technical, that defined the troupe in the past are now less obvious.
Something has happened.


'Made in Italy' Taste Starts With Fresh Vegetables
WHEN friends return from vacations in Italy, they invariably complain that the food simply doesn't taste the same here.
A plate of spaghetti with tomatoes and basil that tasted sublime in Positano or Siena is ordinary when made at home.
But now fresh, locally grown vegetables are coming into season.
When produce is cooked within hours (or even minutes) of being picked, and a good fruity olive oil is on hand, you can get close to re-creating that Italian flavor -- if not the setting.


Bolivia's Chief Struggles to Fulfill Promise to Indians
By way of explaining his promise to shift political and economic power to Bolivia's majority Indian population, President Gonzalo Sanchez de Lozada says his reformist zeal probably stems from feeling like an outsider in the United States as the child of an exiled Bolivian diplomat.
"I know what it's like to be different from the rest and to be shut out of the mainstream because for a long time my family was banned from this country," Mr.
Sanchez de Lozada said in an interview.


The Power of the Word
To the Editor:
From the mortuary of critical analysis of what makes good poetry comes a lengthy, pompous and meanspirited review by Helen Vendler.


Rights Of Aged Tenants
EARLIER this year, an 89-year old New York City woman was given a second opportunity to purchase the one-bedroom apartment she has lived in for 34 years.
She had declined the first offer several years ago when the building was originally converted to a co-op and remained a tenant of the co-op sponsor.
She has since declined the second offer, too, but this time her apartment was sold to an investor.
Family members now fear the new owner will evict her when the lease expires.


Stock Cars, Adrenaline and Hustle
TAKE a deep breath.
Smell that hot, heady reek of gasoline, burning brakes and sizzling rubber?
Smell that fried chicken spattering and crackling at the food stand?
That's what stock car racing smells like, what Flemington Fair Speedway smells like on a muggy Saturday night.
"It's amazing, isn't it?" says the Rev.
Dan Schafer, the track's chaplain and a freelance racing photographer.
"Once that racing smell gets in your system, you just can't get it out."


Bit by Bit, a Dreary Landmark Comes Down
A local landmark is being demolished in Journal Square, but no one is complaining.
It is the old Hudson County Jail, a fortresslike seven-story monument to ugliness and despair.
The yellow-brick structure, build in 1926 and vacant since the completion of a much larger jail in Kearny in 1991, will make way for a parking lot.


Stone Chambers Silent on Their Makers
ON a hillside a mile from the nearest paved road, surrounded by a latticework of stone walls, about 10 feet high and 15 feet wide, far wider and higher than needed to contain any cow that ever lived, the stone chambers looked like ancient temples.
"The shaman goes into the chamber and gets charged up," Martin Brech theorized, standing atop the huge wall.
"The rest of the tribe stands here and watches the sun come up."


Saberhagen's Injury Puts Rotation in Doubt
The Mets' two-game winning streak came to a halt last night with a 5-4 loss to the Colorado Rockies at Shea Stadium.
Another defeat?
The Mets can handle that.
After 45 of them you get used to it.
What the Mets might not be able to handle is the potential loss of the ace pitcher Bret Saberhagen, who left the game in the third inning with a strained muscle just below his rib cage on his left side.


Park's New Battlefield Is Grill
Prospect Park's battle of the band shell is not a competition of local talent, and its barbecue fight is nothing like a cook-off.
They are disputes over how the park should balance active recreation and quiet repose.
Residents of Prospect Park West, once called Brooklyn's Gold Coast for its stately homes, have complained for years that the popular concerts in the park's Ninth Street band shell are too loud.
Now they are worried that barbecuers are charring the park's lawns, scarring trees and leaving litter in their wake.


Oil Industry Doesn't Need A Holiday on Royalties
To the Editor:
Congress will soon determine whether to give away potentially billions of dollars in royalties from oil and gas development on Federal lands in the Gulf of Mexico.
Legislation sought by the energy industry would relieve explorers from paying that royalty to the Treasury as an inducement to producers to explore tracts of land in "deep" water where exploration is costly and speculative.


NATO Bombing and Serb Hostage-Taking Now Mark Turning Point in War
As the Western allies ponder how to respond to the latest crisis in the Balkans, they face a fundamental question: Are they willing to risk war over Bosnia?
When the Bosnian Serbs absorbed the most damaging NATO air strikes of the war and took United Nations peacekeepers as hostages six weeks ago, the West backed down, and the Serbs went on the offensive.


Fortune's Smiles: The Lotto Girls
If you don't play the New York State Lottery games, the faces may register only as blips on your consciousness during the 11 o'clock news, popping up somewhere between the latest murder spree and the baby gorillas born at the zoo.
But if you are among the millions of people who make New York's the state lottery with the largest revenue (sales last year of $3 billion, with 41 percent of the profits going toward the state's education budget), you know the Lotto girls.
For about two minutes a day, every day but Christmas, the current lineup -- Kimberly Chapman, Annette Collins, Maxine Gibbs, Stephanie Moore, Judith Ortiz and Yolanda Vega -- is squeezing maximum interest out of the line: "And the next number up is . . . "
During most of the 1980's, winning numbers were announced nightly by Bob Brown, a New York City radio personality.
But in 1988 lottery officials decided that the announcements could use a little glitz.
And so, the Lotto girls, as they became known, were born.


Aiding Minority Students
A benefit for the Support Network, July 12.


The Nation: Nicotine Fit; No Prescription Necessary
IF the Government determines that cigarettes must be regulated as a drug, the Food and Drug Administration will be thrust into a rather odd role: monitoring the marketing of a substance whose chief side effect is death for about one in three of the people who use it.
The agency's mission is usually to prevent substances with severe side effects from being sold at all, except in special cases, as with chemotherapy drugs for cancer.
But while it proposed last week that nicotine in tobacco products be declared a drug subject to F.D.A. jurisdiction, the agency is suggesting a regulatory strategy that is altogether different.
If the White House approves the F.D.A.'s proposal, cigarettes would become subject to some regulations but not to others.


Ms. Mangone and Mr. Kelliher
Christine Mangone, a daughter of Ann and Robert C. Mangone of Larchmont, N.Y., was married on Friday to Damon Michael Kelliher, a son of William Kelliher of San Diego, and the late Loreen Kelliher.
The Rev.
Robert A. Ringler, a nondenominational minister, officiated at the Calamigos Ranch in Malibu, Calif.


Word for Word / Papal Letter; To the Women of the World: An Affirmation of 'Feminine Genius'
IT is a rare day that Pope John Paul II strikes a chord that echoes fairly well with Roman Catholic feminists.
Only about a year ago he infuriated many church liberals by telling the faithful to abandon any thought of women becoming priests.
But last week, the Pope issued a letter to women that was notable not just for its clarity but also for a personal apology for those in the church who had contributed to the oppression of women.


Rachel Tillman, Ronald Del Sesto Jr.
Rachel Tillman, the daughter of William R. Tillman and Mary BendaTillman of Asbury, N.J., was married yesterday to Ronald Winston Del Sesto Jr., a son of Mr.
Del Sesto Sr. of Providence, R.I., and Bettina I. Buonanno of New York.
The Rev.
Mark J. Dolak performed the ceremony at St.
Ann's Catholic Church in Hampton, N.J.
Ms.
Tillman, 27, is keeping her name.
She is the development director of Leadership Washington, a nonprofit training center in Washington.
She graduated from Sarah Lawrence College.
Her father retired as the deputy district director of the Immigration and Naturalization Service in Newark.
Her mother is an educational supervisor at the Middlesex County Educational Services Commission in Piscataway, N.J.


Where Soup and Sunsets Are the Stars
THE East Coast Oyster Bar and Restaurant in East Hampton is a rough-and-ready place with bare wood tables, paper napkins, whirring ceiling fans and great views of Three Mile Harbor and Gardiners Bay.
Diners climb a steep flight of outdoor steps to the casual spot, with its canopied dining porch.
There they can enjoy the spectacular sunsets.
This new seafood house is owned by Kevin Boles and Chris Eggert, who also run Bostwick's Seafood Grill and the Santa Fe Junction in East Hampton.


Erica Lennard, Denis Colomb
Erica Lennard, a photographer in New York and Paris, and Denis Colomb, an interior and furniture designer in Paris, were married on Friday in St.
Marc Jaumegarde, France.
The Rev.
Paul-Eric Labrosse, a Roman Catholic priest, performed the ceremony at the Chapel of St.
Marc Jaumegarde.
Ms.
Lennard is keeping her name.
She graduated from the San Francisco Institute of Art.
Her photographs illustrated "Artist's Gardens," a book published by Harry N. Abrams.
The bride's latest book, "Writer's Houses," is to be published in October.


INSIDE
Eyes on the Internet
Researchers who spied on university students and staff members as part of a study of pornography in cyberspace have caused a furor.
Page 22.
A Times Square Deal
A famed wax museum and a movie chain have agreed to join the redevelopment of 42d Street.
Page 25.


Surviving a Fame That Insists on Surviving
DANNY BONADUCE LIKES being recognized.
By the waitress at the Four Seasons.
By the man who parks his car.
By random people on the street.
It is not your usual celebrity vanity, however.
It is more like the twisted pleasure of the damned.


INSIDE
INVESTING IT /Page 3  Archer-Daniels-Midland's stock has plunged amid allegations of price-fixing.
If history is any guide, that may be good news for savvy investors.
By Anthony Ramirez.
INVESTING IT /Page 3  How thousands of investors in a disastrous real-estate deal found out they were plaintiffs in a lawsuit.
Street Smarts, by Kurt Eichenwald.
MUTUAL FUNDS /Page 5  The last time William F. Harnisch tried to start a fund, the market crash intervened.
Now, he's at it again.
By Edward Wyatt.
VOICES /Page 13  Going public: a whistle-blower's story.
By Michael R. Lissack.


Takeover Is Overdue
The state has moved to take over the Newark school system, and has already done so in Jersey City and Paterson.
Is this the best way to correct troubled schools?
Is there a better way?
The state takeover of the Newark school system is overdue.
The Newark school board has not managed its school system.
It has maintained a cesspool of political patronage and nepotism that cares little for the well-being of its children.


Moya O'Donnell, R. S. Saunders 2d
Moya O'Donnell, a daughter of Sheila and John F. O'Donnell of New York, was married yesterday to Randall Scott Saunders 2d, the son of Roberta F. Saunders of Tarpon Springs, Fla., and Dustin L. Saunders of Hilton Head, S.C.
The Rev.
Ambrose Wolverton performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at the Watch Hill Chapel in Watch Hill, R.I.
Mrs.
Saunders, 26, graduated from Boston University, as did Mr.
Saunders, and received a master's degree in education from the Bank Street College of Education.
She is a prekindergarten teacher at the Episcopal School in New York.
Her father is a partner in Lawrence, O'Donnell, Marcus &amp; Company, a securities brokerage and specialist firm in New York.


JAPAN: Alibi Radio
Japanese looking for a way to misbehave and not get caught by wives or other concerned parties have solved their problem in typical Japanese fashion, with technology.
A Japanese cable radio network, Cable Radio Usen, offers listeners several "alibi stations" that transmit 24 hours of background noise, including the sound of pachinko parlors and train stations.
"Many people ask bar owners to change the channel temporarily from music to an alibi station while they make a call," says Nami Akiyami, a spokeswoman for the company.


Soup Kitchen Draws Hungry -- And Trouble?
When a car driven by a fugitive jumped a curb at Avenue C and East Ninth Street on Monday night and careered into a crowd of homeless people and charity workers, injuring 17, the soup line on that corner was thrust into public eye.
The incident also cast light on a bitter feud between the people serving the food, the Long Island-based Hope for the Future Ministry, and the street's block association over use of La Plaza Cultural, an empty lot on the corner that has long been a hangout for anarchists and drug users.


More Bookstore Casualties
After decades as a favorite haunt of book lovers on the Upper East Side, the Burlington Book Shop on Madison Avenue near 81st Street closed recently for the last time.
Just last week, Endicott Booksellers, a fixture on Columbus Avenue near 81st Street for 14 years, announced its own going-out-of-business sale.
The two shops have something besides their demise in common.
In the last few years, each got a new neighbor, a Barnes &amp; Noble superstore.


War on Rebel Kurds Puts Turkey's Ideals to Test
When Turkish soldiers came to his village last year, they gave Mehmet, a 15-year-old Kurd, and his neighbors a choice: join the Turkish Government in defending the village against Kurdish separatists or leave.
It was really no choice at all.
A few men earlier agreed to become "village guards," armed and paid by the Government.
But they suffered reprisals from the Kurdish Workers Party, a Marxist group whose 11-year-old insurgency in this barren southeastern region has put Turkey's democratic credentials to the test.


CAUSES: Connecting Continents
Here's an idea: Build a tunnel under the Bering Strait.
And here's the newsletter that promotes the idea: The Tunnel Times: The Journal of the Interhemispheric Bering Strait Tunnel &amp; Railroad Group.
The tunnel's advocates want to establish a freight connection, built by private enterprise, across the Northern Hemisphere.
The more than 60-mile tunnel would link Wales, Alaska, and Uelen, Russia, and would require 2,500 miles of new rail on either side to make a fully functioning freight railroad.
A cost of $40 billion would be on the low side.


Corrections
The Streetscapes column on July 2, about the former Spear &amp; Company building at 22 West 34th Street, referred incorrectly to the group whose complaint caused a large advertising mural on the front of the building to be painted over.
It was the 34th Street Partnership that brought the complaint, not the 34th Street Midtown Chamber of Commerce.


Just When Things Were Going so Badly, Success
ON THE WALL OF HIS STUDY, the director and screenwriter Tom DiCillo has hung an ink drawing on white legal paper depicting God as a big-headed, unshaven giant.
His bulging eyes are glued to a baseball-sized version of the world, which he is holding in the palm of his hairy hand.
The drawing is labeled "the film."
It is a DiCillo original, fabricated during post-production of "Living in Oblivion," his second feature film, which opened on Friday.


Mallon in Poor Health But Excellent Position
The stiff gale off the mountain today was Meg Mallon.
While most of her peers got lost in Broadmoor's tall weeds and monstrous greens, Mallon shot a course-record 66, grabbed a two-stroke lead after the third round of the United States Women's Open and stocked up on cold medicine.
Her breathing is erratic, her cough is incessant and her nightly hours of sleep can be counted on one hand, but the Open would be in gridlock without her.
Mallon's 54-hole total of five-under-par 205 is an Open record.


Winning Reprieves for Historic New Jersey
A decade ago, dozens of New Jersey's historic sites had become so dilapidated that they were shuttered and forgotten.
While a few major attractions continued to thrive, smaller ones either struggled to remain open or closed indefinitely.
In the cities, elaborately designed buildings that once evoked civic pride stood crumbling and vacant.
By 1987, the State Legislature realized the extent of the decay and took action: it established the Historic Preservation Bond Program, New Jersey's first fund for preservation.
Since then, voters have approved two bond acts allocating $50 million in state bonds to restore historic sites.
Last week, the New Jersey Historic Trust, which oversees the program, awarded the latest installment of that money -- $10 million -- to 36 sites around the state.


What's Their Problem?
"THESE KIDS, THEY CAN'T ALL BE bad, can they?" asks Glenn Ford in the person of a nervous high school teacher in the 1955 film "Blackboard Jungle." (This is before they've tried to rape one teacher and broken the treasured jazz-record collection of another.) Oh yes, they can.
For at least 40 years, Hollywood has shown just how distrubed, destructive and even depraved the younger generation has become.
Five landmark films about troubled youths reveal that some things have changed and others have not.
ANITA GATES


A Trove of Memories In Photo Albums
After reading "About Long Island: Making a Day of Fantasy for the Bridge and Groom: Just One More"  [ June 18 ]  I ran into my den to find old photo albums.
Fred Marcus, Andy's father, had recorded most of our family events.
He had captured memories of my children, their graduations, their weddings and our anniversaries.
A well-chosen photograph tells it all, and an unposed picture tells the truth.
Nothing else has to be said.


Enter the Uninvited Summer Guests, Sometimes Amiable, Always Hungry
THERE are several stone walls on the property, so sooner or later, it was bound to happen.
Chipmunks have moved in.
Perhaps it would be more accurate to say a chipmunk has moved in.
So far, it appears to be without a mate.
But this is not to be counted on; the chipmunk is, after all, a family type.
Although no nest has been discovered, this forager's hiding place has -- the downspout of a roof gutter.


Medieval Metropolis
A BYZANTINE JOURNEY By John Ash. 330 pp. New York: Random House.


THE NEW JAZZ AGE
From 1955 to 1963 I ran jam sessions in my painter's loft on Sixth Avenue.
There were maybe a dozen such lofts in the city at that time: young guys could come and compete with older cats and test their mettle.
I always marveled that our sole native art form was also the best expression of democracy we had.


LeaRonal Inc.(LRI,N) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Not Much Old Remains Of 3d Oldest Building
To the Editor:
By calling the quondam Joseph Rose House at 273 Water Street "the third oldest building in Manhattan" ("Where Dogs Fought Rats, and Fallen Women Gathered," June 25) you are perpetuating a myth.
Articles in your newspaper in 1989 and 1993 made the same inappropriate claim.


Where to Clamor
To the Editor:
In his essay on "Beauty in the Form, and Even in the Face"  [ July 2 ]  Bill Irwin mentions that Kino on Video has not released Buster Keaton's 1928 classic "The Cameraman." Mr.
Irwin suggests that "if enough of us clamor, maybe Kino will give us more."


Gondoliers Threaten To Make Things Hum
Visitors to Venice briefly heard the hum of an outboard motor coming from a gondola last month, a sound that could resume in the future if the city does not enforce speed limits on the canals.
Gondoliers have threatened to motorize some of their gondolas in an effort to force city officials to reduce the increasingly heavy swells caused by the motorboats that clog the waterways.
Last month the gondoliers made a trial run launching an oarless gondola, fitted with a small motor, which went up the Grand Canal and was then placed in storage.


Kierkegaard and Spandex
THERAPY By David Lodge. 321 pp. New York: Viking. $22.95.


A Gamble on Pedigreed Grapes and Fancy Labels
TWENTY years ago a Connecticut industrialist became involved in a venture new to the state but so old that ancient Greece and Rome each had a god for it -- Dionysus and Bacchus, respectively.
The industrialist was Sherman P. Haight Jr., who was in the textile business.
The new venture was making wine.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
VOLCANO  A Memoir of Hawaii. By Garrett Hongo. Knopf, $24.


New York City's Recovering Fiscal Health
To the Editor:
Re "The Bond Rating Can't Be Ignored" (Op-Ed, July 12): Ester R. Fuchs, former Mayor David N. Dinkins's campaign adviser, is wrong to assert that Standard &amp; Poor's decision to downgrade New York City's bond rating has significant monetary implications.
The market has taken into account a BBB+ rating for city bonds since 1991, when Moody's downgraded the city in the prior administration.


Whitewater Subject in Plea
The Whitewater independent counsel has announced a plea agreement with a business associate of James B. McDougal, who was Bill Clinton's partner in the Whitewater real estate venture.
The plea agreement, disclosed on Thursday in Federal court proceedings in Little Rock, Ark., is a further step by the independent counsel, Kenneth W. Starr, toward building a case against Mr.
McDougal himself.
It involves Larry E. Kuca, who headed Madison Financial, an important subsidiary of Madison Guaranty Savings and Loan, the savings association that Mr.
McDougal owned and ran during the 1980's.


A Word of Praise
To the Editor: Compare the unpleasant experience airplane passengers have while changing ticket dates on United States airlines to my most pleasant one with Mexican airlines.
Two years ago, while in Cancun, we decided to extend our stay.
We went to the Mexicana office with our tickets where courteous personnel who spoke fluent English took care of us with no fuss, no problem and, above all, no penalty.


Department Of Education Spared, Again
The Department of Education, which has come under intense fire in recent weeks from Congressional conservatives who want to dismantle it, has survived for another year, though the reprieve apparently exacted a price.
The House majority leader, Dick Armey of Texas, who scorns the department as an example of "trickle-down incompetence," acknowledged last week that he could not muster the votes this session to pass either of two bills to abolish the department.


Corrections
An article in the Westchester Weekly today about a race between two sloops has become outdated.
After the section went to press, the race, scheduled for July 29, was canceled when vandals burned the sails and mast of one sloop, Sojourner Truth.


Kerry E. Burke, Thomas Filippone
Kerry Ellen Burke, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John B. Burke of Bedford, N.Y., was married yesterday to Thomas Francis Filippone, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Vincent A. Filippone of Manhasset, L.I.
Abbott Mark Serna of the Abbey of St.
Gregory the Great in Portsmouth, R.I., performed the ceremony at St.
Patrick's Roman Catholic Church in Bedford.
Mrs.
Filippone, 28, is an adoption coordinator at Episcopal Social Services in New York.
She graduated from the College of the Holy Cross.
Her father is a member of the New York Stock Exchange.
Her mother, Delia M. Burke, is an admissions representative for the Portsmouth Abbey School in Portsmouth.


Options in Case of a Train Strike
NEGOTIATIONS between Metro-North workers and management continued last week as the Westchester Weekly went to press, and there remained a chance that commuters would wake up tomorrow morning to face a railroad strike.
If that is the case, they will have some options.
Metro-North assembled a range of back-up services to get commuters into and out of city, but officials emphasized that no series of alternatives would smoothly accommodate the more than 90,000 customers who travel to Manhattan by train each weekday.
Expect crowds and delays, they said.


Suzanne H. Emam And Jack Chin
Suzanne H. Emam, the daughter of Dorothy Emam of Riverdale, the Bronx, was married yesterday to Gabriel J. Chin, the son of Frank Chin of Los Angeles and Suzanne Abrams of Syracuse.
Rabbi Burt Aaron Siegel performed the ceremony at the Marriott Marquis in New York.
The bride, 26, was until recently a social worker at the Hebrew Home for the Aged in Riverdale.
She graduated from the State University at Binghamton, N.Y., and received her master's degree in social work from Columbia University.
Her mother is an administrative assistant at Mount Sinai Medical Center in New York.


THAT MADE-in-ITALY TASTE STARTS WITH VEGETABLES
WHEN friends return from vacations in Italy, they invariably complain that the food simply doesn't taste the same here.
A plate of spaghetti with tomatoes and basil that tasted sublime in Positano or Siena is ordinary when made at home.
But now fresh, locally grown vegetables are coming into season.
When produce is cooked within hours (or even minutes) of being picked, and a good fruity olive oil is on hand, you can get close to re-creating that Italian flavor -- if not the setting.


Call It a Pre-Vacation Camping Trip
Around midnight last Tuesday, about 50 people prepared to spend the night on the sidewalk in front of 630 Fifth Avenue, at Rockefeller Center.
The seven-foot-wide area usually set aside for them near the curb was carpeted with sleeping bags, newspapers, plastic trash bags and a few lawn chairs and coolers.
"Everybody's walking by and asking, 'What are you protesting?' or 'Are you praying?' " said Maria Mateiro, of Newark, as she pointed across the street to St.
Patrick's Cathedral.
"Yeah, we're praying we get our passports."


Lufkin Industries Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Jun 30


The House: Battlefield of Short-Tempered Partisanship
Simmering with short-tempered partisanship, the House of Representatives has become a battlefield where Democratic obstructionism confronts Republican cockiness.
The main casualty seems to be the timeliness and legislative efficiency that once marked the new Congress.
Last week, Democrats forced the House to hold 16 procedural roll-call votes, on such matters as "tabling the motion to reconsider the motion to order the previous question," or "that the committee rise and report the bill back to the House with a recommendation that the enacting clause be stricken."


Nicole Cawley, William Boericke
Nicole Cawley, a daughter of Ardath and John Cawley of Hoboken, N.J., was married yesterday to William Hirst Boericke, the son of the the late Elizabeth G. H. Boericke and William T. S. Boericke.
The Rev.
David B. Rickey performed the Episcopal ceremony at the Burden mansion in New York.
Mrs.
Boericke, 37, is a vice president in the media finance group at Banque Paribas in New York.
She graduated from Swarthmore College and received a master's degree in American civilization and an M.B.A. from the University of Pennsylvania.
Her father retired as the director of sales promotion at the Prudential Life Insurance Company in Newark.
Her mother is a sales representative at Merrill Lynch &amp; Company in New York.


A Nation's History in a Family's Heirlooms
EVERY FAMILY COVETS heirlooms and mementos -- from baby shoes to silver punch bowls.
But for families like the Vanderbilts, their faded snapshots and gilded memorabilia often shed light on larger historical events.
Five generations of Vanderbilts are recalled in two summerlong exhibitions of portraits and memorabilia in Newport, R.I.
The shows mark the 100th anniversary of the Breakers, the sumptuously furnished mansion built there by Cornelius Vanderbilt 2d.
He was a grandson of the family patriarch Commodore Cornelius Vanderbilt, who made his fortune in steamships and railroads.


For a Long-Term Answer
The state has moved to take over the Newark school system, and has already done so in Jersey City and Paterson.
Is this the best way to correct troubled schools?
Is there a better way?
I do not see the state as being necessarily interested in long-term solution.
The difficulty with invoking the holy name of capitalism is, in part, its predisposition to short-term thinking.


At The Casinos
What's happening on stage at all the Atlantic City casinos this week.
Tickets are available through Ticketmaster, (800) 736-1420.
Bally's Park Place  Boardwalk and Park Place. (800) 225-5977.
PARK CABARET "Legends in Concert," impersonations of Neil Diamond, Judy Garland, Whitney Houston, Tom Jones, Elvis Presley, Tina Turner, Madonna, Elton John and the Blues Brothers.
Sunday through Thursday at 7:30 and 10 P.M.; Saturday at 8 and 10:30 P.M.
Tickets: $20; $25 on Saturday.
COMING UP Frankie Valli and the Four Seasons, Aug. 1-6.
Caesars Atlantic City  2100 Pacific Avenue. (800) 677-7469.
CIRCUS MAXIMUS THEATER Gladys Knight.
Today at 8 P.M.
Tickets: $40.
Ringo Starr and His All-Star Band.
Friday at 10 P.M., Saturday at 8 and 11 P.M. and next Sunday at 9 P.M.
Tickets: $40.
COMING UP Chicago, July 27-30.
Dionne Warwick, Aug. 4-6 Claridge Hotel  Boardwalk and Park Place. (800) 257-8585.
PALACE THEATER "Magic and Beyond" with Brett Daniels.
Monday and Tuesday at 7:30 P.M.; Wednesday, Thursday, Saturday and Sunday at 7:30 and 10 P.M.
Through Aug. 31.
Tickets: $15; $19 on Saturday.
One-drink minimum.
The Grand  Boston at Pacific Avenue. (609) 340-7200.
CAMBRIDGE BALLROOM Paul Anka with Stewie Stone, comedian.
Today at 7 P.M.
Tickets: $30.
COMING UP George Jones, Aug. 4-5.
Harrah's Hotel Casino  Harrah's Boulevard and Huron Avenue. (800) 242-7724.
BROADWAY-BY-THE-BAY "Guys and Dolls." Through Sept. 3.
Tuesday through Sunday, 7 and 10:30 P.M.
Tickets: $20.
Merv Griffin's Resorts Casino Hotel  1133 Boardwalk. (609) 340-6830.
SUPERSTAR THEATER Tom Jones.
Wednesday and Thursday at 8 P.M., Friday at 10 P.M., Saturday at 9 P.M. and next Sunday at 8 P.M.
Tickets: $40.
Sands Hotel and Casino  Indiana Avenue and Brighton Park. (800) 257-8580.
COPA ROOM "Sophisticated Rhythms." Six singers, a five-piece live band and Walter Freeman, dancer, accompany Clint Holmes as he covers hits by the Mills Brothers, Smokey Robinson, Louis Armstrong, Nat King Cole, the Pointer Sisters and the Supremes.
Sunday through Wednesday at 3:30 and 8:30 P.M.; Saturday at 8 and 11 P.M.
Tickets: $20.
Showboat Hotel Casino  Delaware and Pacific. (609) 343-4000.
MARDI GRAS SHOWROOM "The Basin Street Follies," a revue with song, comedy and magic, with new acts every month.
Featuring Bobby Arvon and Lori Dobson, singers, and the Great Tomsoni &amp; Company, a comedy and magic act.
Through Aug. 5.
Monday through Saturday at 8 and 10:30 P.M.
Tickets: $10.
Tropworld  Boardwalk and Brighton Avenue. (800) 257-6227.
SHOWROOM "Always . . . Patsy Cline," a two-woman, two-act show detailing the story of the friendship between the country singer and one of her fans, Louise Seger.
Today at 7 P.M.
Tickets: $28.50.
COMING UP Dick Fox's "Doo Wop" with the Drifters, the Coasters, the Passions and the Classics, July 26-31.
Trump's Castle Casino Resort  Huron Avenue and Brigantine Boulevard. (800) 777-8477.
KING'S COURT SHOWROOM Dick Clark's "American Bandstand Live: The Beat Goes On." Four decades of rock-and-roll, presented through song, dance, magic, comedy and novelty acts.
Through Sept. 21.
Monday through Thursday and Saturday at 7:30 and 10:30 P.M.; Sunday at 9 P.M.
Tickets: $12.50 on weekdays and $15 on Saturdays.
One-drink minimum.
VIVA LOUNGE Cozy Morley, comedian.
Tuesday through Saturday, 8 P.M.
Free with a one-drink minimum.
Through Sept. 2.
COMING UP The Neville Brothers, Aug. 18-19.
Trump Plaza  Boardwalk at Mississippi Avenue. (800) 759-8786.
PLAZA SHOWROOM The Temptations with Pam Matteson.
Today at 8 P.M.
Tickets: $35.
George Carlin.
Tuesday through Thursday at 9 P.M. and Friday at 10 P.M.
Tickets: $35.
Saturday at 7:30 and 11 P.M.
Tickets: $40.
Next Sun day at 8 P.M.
Tickets: $35.
COMING UP Vic Damone, July 25-30.
Trump Taj Mahal  1000 Boardwalk at Virginia Avenue. (609) 449-1000.
CASBAH "A Tribute to the Platters," with Sonny Turner, singer.
Through July 30.
Monday through Thursday and Saturday and Sunday at 7:30 and 10:30 P.M.
Tickets: $12.50; $15 on Saturday.
COMING UP Phil Coulter, Aug. 4.
Patti LaBelle with Al Green, Aug. 5-6.


Overlooked Master
To the Editor:
Mr.
Lopate omitted from his otherwise eloquent essay any mention of Billy Wilder.
Mr.
Wilder, who began as a screenwriter (e.g., "Five Graves to Cairo"), continued to act as co-author of the films he directed and developed a style of crackling, often witty dialogue to heighten dramatic tension and to clarify the action, for purposes of melodrama ("Double Indemnity"), serious fiction ("Sunset Boulevard" and "Ace in the Hole") and delicious comedy ("Some Like It Hot" and "The Fortune Cookie").
HARVARD HOLLENBERG  New York


Dances at a Glance
Dance Ink magazine turns 5, July 11.


Coming Soon to the Academy of Music Stage: The Screen
The Brooklyn Academy of Music has presented more than music for some time now.
Concerts and operas share its stages with dance recitals, plays and the vanguard performances of its Next Wave festival.
Now the arts complex is planning to build a movie theater.
The academy plans to open a multiscreen arts cinema next summer in the Owen Carey Theater, one of its four performance spaces.


Fresh Taste, Simplicity and Low Cost
FINDING a quick, no-frills lunch where the food is freshly made can be more of a quest than it sounds.
At the following twosome, however, the food tastes fresh and the setting is simple but agreeable.
THE HARVEST BAKERY in Salisbury is in a pale yellow frame house with white trim just off the main thoroughfare.
In addition to excellent breads (including crusty Italian, sourdough baguettes, foccacia, seven grain and cinnamon raisin), there are several soups and as many as 18 salads available daily to take out or eat in.
And after 4 P.M., there are 12 gourmet pizzas (including smoked salmon, Mexican, vegetarian and fruits de mer).


National Commerce Bancorp (NCBC,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Jun 30


A Business Deal Makes a Point for China
At first glance, China's selection of Mercedes-Benz over the Chrysler Corporation and the Ford Motor Company to be a partner in a $1 billion mini-van plant looks like a clear sign that American businesses will pay a steep price for the political bickering between Washington and Beijing.
But the mini-van deal, announced on Wednesday, is probably a better sign of something else: China's ability to make a decision for business reasons and, by carefully timing its announcement, have it look politically motivated.


Madge N.V.(MAGDF,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Jun 30


Gallic Revelry With a Windmill as a Backdrop
ACROSS the Shinnecock Canal and a world away from the innocent pleasures of carousels and other summer delights from another era evoked by the Carousel Ball, the Friends of the Hampton Library in Bridgehampton will be the host of an evening of Gallic revelry on Saturday.
The library benefit will be on the grounds of the Beebe Windmill on Ocean Road under a tent decorated to copy the famous Moulin-Rouge de Paris Cabaret.
The music will come from an accordion, naturellement.
Cancan dancers will give an appropriate hint of naughtiness, and the host, Jean-Claude Baker, will greet guests in the suave French-accented fashion familiar to fans of his New York restaurant, Chez Josephine.
Mr.
Baker, who has a house in East Hampton is the restaurateur and writer, and an unofficially adopted son of Josephine Baker, whose devotion to her inspired his best-selling book, "Josephine: The Hungry Heart."


First Financial (Wis.) Corp.(FFHC,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Jun 30


Emergency Room Option: Free Ride to Hospital's Clinic
On a recent, typical morning, paramedics rushed an ashen-faced heart attack victim into the emergency room at Columbia-Presbyterian Medical Center while a pregnant woman suffering from a psychotic episode was whisked to the mental ward.
A nurse walked by and said to no one in particular, "This is a madhouse."
In the midst of this bustle, Josue Celadilla waited quietly with a stomach ache.
Even if he had to wait for hours, he said, he preferred the emergency room to a local doctor who misdiagnosed his appendicitis last year as mere indigestion.


Airline Group Will Develop Aviation Internet
A new global system for communications with airplanes in flight, described as an internet for the aviation industry, will be developed by a private consortium of 11 airlines with help from the Federal Aviation Administration, the agency has promised.
The system would integrate communications between planes and air traffic controllers, planes and airline companies, and planes and other planes, the agency said on Thursday.
Somewhat like a cellular telephone system, it would locate an airplane anywhere on the globe, and then choose the best method to communicate with it, whether a conventional radio link to the nearest ground antenna or a link to a satellite.


Postman Takes Heat For His Short Pants
IN certain circles, it has been clearly understood for generations: white shoes are simply not to be worn before Memorial Day.
A less well-known fashion edict, but one that apparently has consequences even more dire than social condemnation, has been promulgated by the postmaster here.
According to his rules, mail carriers are not to wear their regulation shorts before Memorial Day.
During a time when the county has recently been cited for having the worst mail delivery in the continental United States -- second only to San Juan, P.R., for poor on-time performance in the country -- and when stories of postal violence regularly crop up in the news, regulations concerning uniforms may not seem like a priority issue for the United States Postal Service.
But Daniel Gislao, a Mount Vernon mail carrier who was recently disciplined for violating the rule, believes it is this type of petty bureaucratic harassment that is symbolic of problems in bigger areas.


PHOTOGRAPHER'S JOURNAL


Deals and Discounts
BARBADOS ON SALE The Elegant Resorts of Barbados have cut their rates for summer through mid-December.
The 40-suite Cobblers Cove costs $180 until Sept. 30 and $230 from Oct. 1 to Dec. 16; the 83-room Glitter Bay charges $195 for a twin room.
Rates are for two people in a room; there are seven resorts in the group altogether.
For information or reservations: (800) 535-3426.
CRUISING TWO FOR ONE Costa Cruise Lines has two-for-one pricing on some of its summer and fall cruises of the Mediterranean.
The first passenger in a cabin pays the regular tariff; the second person sharing the same cabin pays only the round-trip air supplement, which is $950 from New York.
The offer applies to several seven-night western Mediterranean cruises from Genoa on the Costa Allegra in late September and October, with regular fares starting at $2,175; a nine-night repositioning cruise from Amsterdam to Genoa on the Costa Marina departing Sept. 8, starting at $1,970; an 11-night Black Sea cruise on the Eugenio Costa departing Venice Aug. 21, priced from $2,510, and a 12-night Mediterranean cruise on the Daphne, departing Genoa on Aug. 26 and starting at $2,420.
The regular fares include flights from New York.
For more information or reservations: (800) 462-6782.


Airlines Setting Up New Safety Programs
Acting on recommendations by the Government, many airlines have set up new programs intended to improve aviation safety.
The Federal Aviation Administration said last month that after an industrywide meeting on safety in January, 20 airlines had started evaluation programs and 18 carriers had set up safety offices with a mandate to provide independent oversight of their own operations.


A Town Draws Lines in the Shifting Sand
ALL the Borough Council of Monmouth Beach wanted to do Tuesday night was to mollify residents who showed up to protest strict new proposed regulations for the town's recently restored beach.
Looking relieved, Mayor Louis P. Sodano told the crowd that the ordinance, which would have outlawed using the beach after 6 P.M. and banned eating, ball-tossing, changing any article of clothing and an exhaustive list of other activities, had gone back to the legal drawing board for major revisions.
A new draft will be ready in the fall.


Allison Dietrich, Matthew Demetros
Allison Susanne Dietrich, the daughter of Kurt Dietrich and Susanne Kirtland Dietrich of New York, was married on Friday evening to Matthew John Demetros, the son of George Demetros of Waterford, N.Y., and Elizabeth Morgan of Narragansett, R.I.
The Rev.
John Cowburn, a Roman Catholic priest, performed the ceremony in the chapel at the Convent of the Sacred Heart in New York.
Mrs.
Demetros, 31, is the special events manager at the Los Angeles Music Center Opera in Los Angeles.
She graduated from New York University.
Her mother is the vice president of creative development at Estee Lauder Inc., the cosmetics company, in New York.
The bride's father, who is retired, was the art director at the former Mays department store in Brooklyn.


Accountability Required
The state has moved to take over the Newark school system, and has already done so in Jersey City and Paterson.
Is this the best way to correct troubled schools?
Is there a better way?


School Maintenance Money Is a Myth
"Schools Face Renovations of Aging Buildings"  [ June 11 ]  omits the fact that most school budgets voted on by the taxpayers included in them money for "maintenance," misleading residents into believing that the facilities were being properly maintained.
Instead buildings have been allowed to deteriorate while adequate funds have been spent on salaries, health plans, retirement pensions and other perks.
Then the boards come crying to the communities for multimillion-dollar bond issues to effect repairs to the inadequately "maintained" structures that suddenly need attention.
Similarly, the article neglects to point out that school populations are predictable in advance.
But school boards do not alert taxpayers to increases, but wait until it becomes a dire necessity, so as to milk more tax money for the "emergency."


Historic Palestine
To the Editor:
Thomas L. Friedman defines "historic Palestine" as "the territory between the Jordan River and the Mediterranean" (column, July 9).
The boundaries defined by the League of Nations also included the area east of the Jordan River, today the Kingdom of Jordan, 78 percent of historic Palestine.
The Arabs already have more than three-fourths of historic Palestine.
MORTON A. KLEIN  National President Zionist Organization of America New York, July 10, 1995


Commerce Bancorp Inc.(COBA,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Jun 30


Commerce Bancshares Inc.(CBSH,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Jun 30


The New Extremists
Bungee-jumping, speed rock climbing and sky-surfing (leaping from a plane wearing a snowboard-like contraption while your partner videotapes your acrobatics in midair for earthbound judges) have big appeal for sports fans these days.
You may have a caught a glimpse of the inaugural "Extreme Games" last month on ESPN.
What has happened to the way we relate to the outdoors?


Clean Living's New Look
As thrashing hard-core music blared, the dozen or so young men sitting on garage-sale furniture in a student apartment ticked off their enemies: the meat, dairy and alcohol industries; companies that test drugs on animals; those who scoff at their vegetarianism, and perhaps worst of all, "sellouts."
Sellouts are those who used to be what these youths are -- Straight Edgers -- and then made a wrong turn.
They began to drink beer, maybe took a nibble of beef jerky, perhaps smoked some pot.
They strayed.
They would have to be punished.


In the Region/Long Island; Insurers' Creed: Don't Go Near the Waterfront
THOUGH nearly three years have passed since Hurricane Andrew leveled its devastating assault on South Florida, property owners 1,500 miles north are grappling with the ghosts of the hurricane's 150-mile-an-hour winds and its $16 billion in losses.
From Long Beach to Montauk and all along the North Shore homeowners within sniffing distance of salt air have been digging deeper into their pockets lately to insure their property against the distant threat of natural disaster while an even more immediate threat looms on the horizon.
For the many of the companies that insure them are abandoning the beaches and heading for higher ground.


Ms. Bairaktaris, Mr. Anderson
Claudia Maria Bairaktaris, the daughter of Martha and Dimitrios Bairaktaris of Larchmont, N.Y., was married yesterday to Eric Christian Anderson, the son of Loretta and Walter Anderson of White Plains.
The Rev.
Dr.
Joseph Kelly, a Roman Catholic priest, performed the ceremony at the Church of the Resurrection in Rye, N.Y.
Mr. and Mrs.
Anderson, both 25, are graduates of Mercy College, from which the bridegroom also received a master's degree in human-resource management.
He is a staffing manager at Officeteam, a temporary-employment agency in White Plains.


Coffee Shop by Day, Serious Place at Night
ESTIA in Amagansett is a place of delightful inconsistencies and consistently good food.
A storefront coffee shop by day, it is a serious restaurant at night.
It attracts celebrities and beautiful people on summer weekends but belongs to the home folks the rest of the time.
It probably is the only East End spot with a prominent lunch counter and red vinyl stools that are surrounded by the work of local artists for sale at prices of $800, $1,000 and more.


Riggs National Corp.(RIGS,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Jun 30


What to Do if There Is a Metro-North Strike
The Metro-North Commuter Railroad has announced contingency plans for Connecticut commuters to and from New York Cirty if there is a strike by railroad workers, which could come as early as this weekend.
Negotiations continued last week as the Connecticut Weekly section went to press.
If there is a strike, Metro-North said that bus service, provided by the Connecticut Department of Transportation, will run between major New Haven Line railroad stations in Connecticut and the Pelham Bay Park subway station in the Bronx.
Commuters may transfer to and from the No. 6 subway, the Lexington Avenue local.
The railroad said the special buses will operate weekdays only on the following schedules:  INTRASTATE SERVICE
For service within Connecticut, buses will depart New Haven and Greenwich every hour, on the hour, from 6 A.M. to 8 P.M., making stops at the above stations.
The fare will be $5 or less.
PRIVATE BUS SERVICE
Two bus lines offer service between the Port Authority Bus Terminal in Midtown Manhattan and some Connecticut locations.
Peter Pan serves New Haven, Bridgeport and Norwalk.
For information, 1-800-343-9999.
Bonanza serves Waterbury and Danbury.
For information, 1-800-556-3815.
IF YOU MUST DRIVE
Metro-North recommends car-pooling and parking at Yankee Stadium in the Bronx or Shea Stadium in Queens, near subway stops.
No parking when the Yankees or Mets are playing at home.
HELPFUL HINTS
The railroad recommends buying subway tokens in advance and carrying exact change for bus and parking.
The Metro-North information number is 1-800-METRO-INFO.
The Connecticut D.O.T. information number is 203-789-7190.
THE DOWNSIDE
Metro-North cautions that the alternative travel arrangements can serve only 40 percent to 50 percent of the regular daily commuters.


Two Addictions
To the Sports Editor:
Ira Glasser, the executive director of the American Civil Liberties Union, asks why Mickey Mantle's alcoholism was treated in a sympathetic manner while Doc Gooden's addiction to cocaine evoked condemnation.
The answer is simple: When the public learned that Mantle was near death because of his liver condition, there was a spontaneous outburst of sympathy.
Under similar conditions, Gooden would have received the same reaction.


Elizabeth Gaffney, Alexis D. Boro
Elizabeth Mallory Gaffney, the managing editor of The Paris Review, the literary quarterly in New York, was married yesterday to Alexis David Boro, a medical student.
The Rev.
F.
Goldthwaite Sherrill 2d performed the ceremony at Grace Episcopal Church in Brooklyn.
Ms.
Gaffney, who is 28 and is keeping her name, graduated from Vassar College, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa.
She is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard W. Gaffney of Brooklyn.
The bride's father, a painter and printmaker, is the chairman of the department of art, theater and music at Wagner College in Grimes Hill, S.I.
Her mother, Ann Gaffney, is an independent graphic designer in Brooklyn.


Cutting Losses on A Co-op
Q I purchased a co-op studio apartment in the late 1980's at the height of the real estate market.
Since then, the value of the apartment has plummeted to less than half my remaining mortgage.
No bank is willing to refinance and I'm currently losing hundreds of dollars each month on the apartment, which I now sublet.
Is the best short-term solution to walk away from the apartment and let the bank foreclose?
How will this affect my credit rating?
Are there any creative ways for me to sell the apartment and pay off the mortgage?
I've heard about lotteries, but I wouldn't know where to begin. . . .
Ray Borelli, Manhattan.
A "There are an awful lot of people in this position," said Elliot Zuckerman, a Manhattan lawyer who specializes in co-op and condominium law.
"And there are no easy solutions."


Mid-Am Inc.(MIAM,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Jun 30


U.S. Opening to Vietnam Sends China a Message; Don't Prop Them Up
To the Editor:
Re "Hello, Vietnam" (Op-Ed, July 11): Much of the rhetoric used to justify recognition of Vietnam has centered on two points made by Vu-Duc Vuong: national interest and coming to terms with Hanoi.


Teen-Agers Look in Vain for Summer Jobs
WITH few prospects for employment this summer, Tarik Curry, 16, spends most days in front of "X-Men, Children of the Atom," a popular game in the video arcade at Nathan's Famous restaurant here.
"I looked for work, but it's always the same old story," said Tarik, a student at Gorton High School in this city.
"They say, 'Don't call us, we'll call you,' but they never do."


1748 Mansion Full of History but Needs $1 Million in TLC
Since 1748, the home now known as the Van Cortlandt Mansion and Museum has served as the residence of a prosperous merchant, the war room for both British and American generals during the Revolutionary War and a living classroom for uncounted thousands of elementary school children on day trips.
Now, its long history is threatened by its deteriorating state.
Paint is peeling off the walls of the majestic Georgian-style mansion.
A third-floor ceiling and a wall in the east chamber on the second floor are marred by water damage.
The Federal- and Colonial-style furniture is feared to be infested with pests.


Gross's Stats Looking Better After Rangers Rip Red Sox
Rangers 7, Red Sox 2
Kevin Gross, near the bottom of the American League pitching statistics in several categories, allowed five hits in seven and two-thirds innings as the Texas Rangers beat the Boston Red Sox, 7-2, last night.


FEMINIST PEEP SHOW
Is it only me, or do others think the term "feminist" has become meaningless when applied to any dumb thing a woman does as long as she's paid for it (Sunday, "Feminist Peep Show," by Eva Chrysanthe, June 25)?
I miss the days when the term meant "for, by and about" women.
Now stripping for a crowd of frat boys qualifies.
How pathetic.
MARIANNE MILTON Brockport, N.Y.


Giant Catamaran Is Facing a Large Challenge
Even in Newport Harbor, where yachts of every description sail in from around the world, the sight of the mighty catamaran Explorer has turned heads.
Who should amble by the slate gray, 86-foot twin-hulled craft last week but Steve Pettengill, the solo sailor who recently finished second in the BOC race around the world.


After the Vacation: A Fresh Look at Home
SO I come home to "Save our Principal Mr. Durkin" signs across the street and news of an outdoor concert next Sunday afternoon in Union Square Park featuring a band whose sound is described as "furiously intricate mutating rock." Welcome back.
Since everyone wants to know where I went on my summer vacation to escape the tumult and shouting of my neighborhood, I will tell you right off that among the places I visited was the Los Angeles franchise of the House of Blues, which has been threatening to jam one of its restaurant-nightclubs into the old bank building around the corner.
Well, the House of Blues is funky and fun, and I recommend the barbecued chicken.
In fact, I'm looking forward to going to the House of Blues in New York, so long as it's built where it belongs, in Times Square.


Corrections
An article last Sunday about resolving inheritance issues within families misstated the office location of Jeffrey Rosenfeld, a sociologist who provides expert testimony for estate lawyers.
It is Bayside, Queens, not New Jersey.


On Sunday; Let's Face It, Cuomo Won't Sit for This
SOMEWHERE out there is an artist who may actually do what impenitent Republicans in the State Senate, conservative talk-show hosts on the radio and ill-mannered, illiterate scribblers in the press room did not do in 12 years in Albany: cut Mario M. Cuomo off at the knees.
The artist, Fran Lew of White Plains, has been commissioned to do a portrait of Mr.
Cuomo, whose predecessors' three-quarter-length images hang (with nary a knee to be seen) in the corridor outside Mr.
Cuomo's old office in the State Capitol.
This will put Ms.
Lew -- who has also painted the late Prime Minister of Israel, Golda Meir, and Mr.
Cuomo's wife, Matilda -- right up there with artists like Ritter Otto von Krumhaar, who painted New York's 33d governor, Theodore Roosevelt.


First Commonwealth Finanacial Corp.(FCF,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Jun 30


Tell It to the Judge . . . but Only If You Feel You Really Must
THEY were sitting elbow to elbow in Manhattan Small Claims Court but they were miles apart.
He said that when she promised to rent his luxury condominium for 18 days, he had turned away another interested party.
But at the last minute she had backed out of the deal, so he was keeping her $1,800 check.


Some Defeats for Bad News Bears
NEWS about a criminal investigation, a manufacturing disaster or a product flaw can send a company's stock price reeling.
Just look at Archer-Daniels-Midland, the agricultural company whose stock has plunged 11 percent since June 28 on accusations of price-fixing and the disclosure of a broad Government inquiry.
Uncertainty about potential liability and management changes have sent some investors running.


Sharon K. Marcil, T. L. Monahan 3d
Sharon Kerrie Marcil, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Edward Marcil of Crownsville, Md., was married yesterday to Thomas L. Monahan 3d, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Monahan Jr. of South Weymouth, Mass.
Msgr.
John F. Hogan officiated at the Sacred Heart Chapel in Bowie, Md.


Jennifer Lockhart, Matthew Nespole
Jennifer Lynne Lockhart, the daughter of Judy and Gregory Lockhart of Caribou, Me., was married yesterday to Matthew Eric Nespole, a son of Carol Lee and James Nespole of New York.
The Rev.
David Wood, a Baptist minister, performed the ceremony at the Bates College Chapel in Lewiston, Me.
Mrs.
Nespole, 22, and her husband, 24, are graduates of Bates.
She is a program assistant at the Tinker Foundation in New York, a nonprofit organization that gives grants to environmental and economic development organizations in Latin America.
Her father owns G. L. Technology, a computer retail and service store in Caribou.
Her mother teaches English and math at Caribou Middle School.


Binks Manufacturing Co.  (BIN,A) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


CFCF Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Chaparral Steel Co. (CSM,N) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Burmese Military Is Seeking Lasting Role in Government
The Burmese military asked today that it be given a permanent role in the political leadership of this country, a proposal that may be its opening position in negotiations with the newly freed opposition leader, Daw Aung San Suu Kyi.
The request appeared in an essay in the junta-run newspaper, The New Light of Myanmar, which has still not reported the release of Mrs.
Aung San Suu Kyi.
She was freed on Monday after nearly six years under house arrest in Yangon, the capital of the country formerly known as Burma.


Dallas Semiconductor (DS,N) reports earnings for Qtr to July 2


The Psychostate
PSYCHOSIS AND POWER Threats to Democracy in the Self and the Group.
By James M. Glass. 230 pp.
Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell University Press. $29.95.


Coach for Sabres?
The Hartford assistant coach TED NOLAN, 36, who has no previous National Hockey League head coaching experience, will become the next coach of the Buffalo Sabres, according to a published report.
But a spokesman for the Sabres said no decision has been made, contrary to the report published yesterday in The Buffalo News.


Uninvited Guests, Hungry but Often Amiable
THERE are several stone walls on the property, so sooner or later, it was bound to happen.
Chipmunks have moved in.
Perhaps it would be more accurate to say a chipmunk has moved in.
So far, it appears to be without a mate.
But this is not to be counted on; the chipmunk is, after all, a family type.
Although no nest has been discovered, this forager's hiding place has -- the downspout of a roof gutter.


Susan Patsalos, Trevor Huffard
Susan Elizabeth Patsalos, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
James Z. Patsalos of Newburgh, N.Y., was married yesterday to Trevor Lansing Huffard, a son of Susan H. Ball of Stamford, Conn., and P. Phillippi Huffard 3d of Greenwich, Conn.
The Rev.
Charles Schaum performed the ceremony at the Union Presbyterian Church in Balmville, N.Y.
Mrs.
Huffard, 29, is an associate at White &amp; Case, the New York law firm.
She graduated from Colgate University and received her law degree from Syracuse University.
Her father retired as the president of Shipp &amp; Osborne Insurance in Newburgh.


The World Series of Damage Control
WATCHING Hugh Grant try simultaneously to clear his name and promote his movie this week may have fed the public's fascination with the human frailty of Hollywood stars.
But for the city's leading publicists, always armed with a blueprint for battle, the story had a more clinical appeal as a kind of case study of their daily craft: damage control.
Presumably, they have seen, or spun, some version of this before.
As a publicist for Sony Music, Dan Klores recently helped defend Michael Jackson against charges of anti-Semitism.
Howard J. Rubenstein has run interference for New York City mayors and works on keeping George M. Steinbrenner 3d out of trouble.
Linda Gosden Robinson has had a hand in shaping the images of controversial corporate giants like F. Ross Johnson of RJR Nabisco and Michael R. Milken, the junk bond king.
And John Scanlon has navigated one of New York's stickiest divorces for Ivana Trump.


'Made in Italy' Taste Starts With Fresh Vegetables
WHEN friends return from vacations in Italy, they invariably complain that the food simply doesn't taste the same here.
A plate of spaghetti with tomatoes and basil that tasted sublime in Positano or Siena is ordinary when made at home.
But now fresh, locally grown vegetables are coming into season.
When produce is cooked within hours (or even minutes) of being picked, and a good fruity olive oil is on hand, you can get close to re-creating that Italian flavor -- if not the setting.


New Yorkers Against New York
The House of Representatives indulged in some crazy fiscal logic last week.
It moved swiftly toward a vote that will almost certainly blow a hole in Federal spending for the arts.
At the same time, a House subcommittee approved $8 billion more than President Clinton requested for defense, including money for B-2 bombers the Pentagon does not want.
The arts savings would amount to $20 million for 1996, with funding set to end entirely in two years.
The comparison is telling.
Since the Pentagon does not want any more B-2's, the only explanation for expanding their production must be to protect defense-related jobs.
The freshman Republicans whose rebelliousness forced their elders to cut the arts budget more deeply than expected clearly regard museums and theaters as expendable in a time of tight fiscal discipline.


Clinton Criticizes Regulatory Reform


The Best Athletes
To the Sports Editor:
Diana Nyad's "Special Athletes Play Up True Olympic Ideals," (The Times, July 2) on the Special Olympics and Mike Freeman's article on Jerry Rice ("Rice Works for Hours and Defies the Years," The Times, July 2) displayed rare glimmers of hope for today's world of sports.


Franklin Electric Co.  (FELE,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to July 1


A Solution to the Crunch At the Subway: The L.I.R.R.
To the Editor:
One major cause of the congestion problems at the Roosevelt Avenue IRT station in Flushing ("A Street Fight: Subway vs. Roosevelt Ave.," July 2) is the failure to mesh the nearby Long Island Rail Road with the rest of the transit system.


RESULTS PLUS
HARNESS RACING  David's Pass Wins the Meadowlands Pace
John Campbell drove David's Pass to victory last night in the $1 million Meadowlands Pace at East Rutherford, N.J., helping him become the third pacer to win two $1 million races in a season.


Two Reelers


Illinois Central Corp.(IC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Jun 30


Critics Question Nicaraguan Army's Makeover
The metal name plate has been removed from the wall outside military headquarters, new shoulder patches are being made for soldiers, and the commander general is having a revised set of business cards printed.
Just short of the 16th anniversary of its triumphal march into Managua, the Sandinista People's Army has ceased to exist.
Instead, the force that toppled the Somoza family dictatorship on July 19, 1979, and fought a decadelong war with the American-backed Contras is now known officially as the Nicaraguan Army.
But whether that institution also has a new outlook and ethic to go along with its new identity is a matter of some debate here, in part because much of the top command remains in place.


Ghosts on the Palette
Like many other painters, R. B. Kitaj could let his work do the talking.
His interest in things Jewish and his obsession with exile and human brutality surface frequently in his work, from the lonely sepia-toned passenger sitting cross-legged in the train compartment in "The Jew Etc." to the tortured, ghostly gray-and-black figures caught in a blaze of yellow paint in "Germania (The Engine Room)." "Baseball" and "John Ford on his Deathbed" -- in which Ford, surrounded by ghosts from his films, wears an admiral's bridge cap and brandishes a rosary -- are archetypally American.
The assured style and all-too-certain troubles of old age are illustrated in "Bad Back," "Bad Eyes," "Bad Thoughts" and "Bad Heart." But Mr.
Kitaj, a 62-year-old Ohio-born painter who has made his home in London since the late 1950's, is also a man of many words.
And R. B. KITAJ (Rizzoli, $60) abounds in them.
The pages of books, old and new, are elements in many of his early collages; the names of writers and philosophers show up in his titles; Mr.
Kitaj's own fanciful tales and explanations of origins, references and meanings occupy full pages across vibrant reproductions of individual paintings.
In an interview with Richard Morphet, the keeper of the modern collection at the Tate Gallery in London and the editor of the book, Mr.
Kitaj comes across as articulate, funny, learned and humble.
CHRISTINE SCHWARTZ HARTLEY


A Star-Spangled Free-for-All
When the Princeton Borough Council agreed to hoist 60 American flags along downtown Nassau Street between Memorial and Independence Days this year, its members reckoned that the flags would add a touch of patriotic color at a time when people feel most patriotic.
What the Council didn't anticipate was that some residents would want them up longer.
Their removal has become the talk of the town and a possible issue in this fall's borough elections.


The Power of the Word
To the Editor:
Donald Hall once said about Helen Vendler: "When Vendler is the leading critic of contemporary poetry we're in a bad way. She can write a sentence but she has no taste." Her review of "The Language of Life: A Festival of Poets" (June 18) is further confirmation of Mr.
Hall's assessment.


No Age Can Trap Shakespeare the Chameleon
YOU WILL KNOW A THEATER CLASSIC BY the fact that it endures and prevails because of and despite the changes each generation or civilization brings to it.
I made this declaration one week ago, and now that I've seen new versions of "The Tempest" and "Hamlet," I'll continue to stand by it.
There's not a better test than Shakespeare, who wrote for the masses and for the courts, rough and slapdash as you please, then infinitely textured, using words as rhythms, as color, as weaponry, as melody, harmony and the roar on the other side of silence.
Cut or uncut, he can thrill or bore you nearly to death.
Who hasn't gone into a sulking fit when his rustic buffoons with their long-winded jokes take the stage? (Laughter may be universal; comic modes aren't.) Who hasn't had their senses confounded by one of those descriptive passages that gave Elizabethan audiences the sights and sounds their stagecraft couldn't but that our stagecraft duplicates and even competes with?


Early Treatment for H.I.V. Doesn't Prolong Survival, Study Finds
Treatment of H.I.V. infection before it causes symptoms may delay its progression to AIDS but does not prolong survival, a new study has found.
The study, reported today in The British Medical Journal, supports findings from the Concorde study in Europe that in 1993 called into question a standard practice of prescribing the drug AZT for people infected with H.I.V., or human immunodeficiency virus, which causes AIDS.


POSTINGS: Different Levels of Care; Two Renovations For the Homeless
Two vacant, city-owned brick tenements, at 11 and 13 West 103d Street, will be renovated to house the once homeless mentally ill, with each offering a different level of community care.
The buildings will be gutted and rebuilt, with occupancy slated for the fall of 1996.
At 11 West 103d, The Bridge, the nonprofit counseling and housing program operating both buildings, will house 14 people in their 30's and 40's with lifetime histories of mental illness.
They will live in four studios and five shared two-bedroom units.


NEW YORKERS &amp; CO.
The Kitano Hotel Reopens With New Look and New Goal
After an $80 million, four-year renovation, the Kitano Hotel, a 150-room establishment popular with Japanese executives but little known to the city's American visitors, reopened Thursday on Park Avenue at 38th Street.


White Sox Hand Dibble Walking Papers
The fiery reliever ROB DIBBLE was placed on waivers yesterday by the Chicago White Sox, who want to give him his unconditional release.
Dibble, who signed with the White Sox as a free agent on Feb. 27, was 0-1 with a save and a 6.28 earned run average in 16 appearances this year.


A Higher Profile
In his 12 years in Congress, Representative Gary L. Ackerman, a Queens Democrat, has been known as much for his flamboyance as for his legislative record.
But now, he finds himself at the center of a debate on whether the Government should require the testing of newborns for the human immunodeficiency virus.
He has worked aggressively to build support for a bill that would require states to disclose H.I.V. test results to parents.
Article, page B4.


Story Ideas, From Sex to Diapers
The interactive age takes another leap forward or backward or sideways tonight with the premiere of "MTV News Unfiltered." Here's how it works: The music channel invites viewers to call an 800 number with story ideas, then sends cameras to the most promising respondents for use in telling their stories.
MTV edits a few of the results, and that makes for a half-hour show.
Tonight's debut, which the mistress of ceremonies, Alison Stewart, reports was winnowed from 8,000 calls, serves up a peppy potpourri:


IN PERFORMANCE: DANCE
Manlessness and Romance, Explored Carefully, Very Carefully  Ballet Long Island Merce Cunningham Studio
"Unconfined Ballet" was what Ballet Long Island called the program it presented on Friday night.
That title proved wildly optimistic, for the evening was dominated by a sense of constraint.
The choreography was tame and the dancing careful, often lacking vivacity.


After the Funeral, a Staff Ponders Its Fate Without New York Newsday
All of a sudden, they did not have a New York City newspaper anymore, except a shadow of one in Queens.
So the people of New York Newsday -- the famous ones whose pictures were on the sides of buses, as well as the ones who were just newspaper people -- started to think about the future yesterday.
"I've been talking to people for three days," said Mark Toor, an editor who was sending reporters out on assignment yesterday, "and I haven't talked to anyone yet who isn't worried about something."


Turnpike Dispute Goes to Court
The New Jersey Turnpike Authority will go to court today seeking to make permanent a temporary back-to-work order issued July 3 when toll collectors walked off their jobs.


Spurned by Industry, V-Chip Retains Some Mighty Friends
The anti-regulatory, pro-industry tide that swept into Washington with the new Republican Congress last year has recently been overtaken by a powerful anti-smut, anti-violence, pro-family tide, at least if legislation over a microchip to block out certain television programs is any indication.
The so-called V-chip -- the 'V' stands for violence -- has been loudly denounced by television industry lobbyists and some conservatives, like Bob Dole, as a form of censorship.
But last week legislation requiring V-chip devices on new television sets passed in the Senate, and a similar bill has been introduced in the House of Representatives.


CHRONICLE
Comings and goings in the world of crafts: KENNETH R. TRAPP, curator of decorative arts at the Oakland Museum in California, has been named curator-in-charge of the Renwick Gallery, the division of the Smithsonian Institution's National Museum of American Art that is dedicated to American crafts.
He takes over in October.
Mr.
Trapp is not new to the Renwick.
He oversaw the 1993 exhibition "The Arts and Crafts Movement in California: Living the Good Life," which was organized by the Oakland Museum and shown in the Renwick.


Brajendra Singh, Ex-Maharajah, 76; Built Bird Refuge
Brajendra Singh, the last Maharajah of Bharatpur, who was a sportsman and conservationist, died on July 8 in the former princely state of Bharatpur, now part of Rajasthan State in northwestern India.
He was 76 and lived in his former principality.
His death was reported on Friday by the British newspaper The Independent.


Budget Slashes Could Close Hospital
If there is a tangible symbol of Big Government, and of its ideal of providing sophisticated services to all, it might well be the Los Angeles County-University of Southern California Medical Center.
The sprawling hospital is by some measures the largest in the nation and serves most of the county's poor, its trauma victims, AIDS sufferers and serious burn victims.
It trains more medical residents and nurses than any other hospital in the country.
It treats 500 people with leprosy.
The vast majority of its patients are indigent or receive public assistance, and just 1 percent have commercial health insurance.


Squatters Have to Live by the Same Rules as Everyone Else
To the Editor:
The July 12 article on the conflict between City Hall and the squatters on East 13th Street in Manhattan states that the "buildings first became planned for low-income apartments last summer." This is not true.
Last September, Community Board 3 reaffirmed a vote taken in 1990 to place the buildings on 13th Street into the Local Initiatives Support Corporation's Enterprise program, which rehabilitates buildings for low-income housing.
Prior to 1990, the then residents applied to New York City's Homesteading Program and were turned down.


In America; Tabloid Troubles
"CURTAINS," exulted the Daily News headline. New York Newsday had fallen.
What Newsday never understood, and The Daily News still doesn't get, is that the great tabloid newspaper era is over.
The last great tabloid story in this town was the Son of Sam terror, when readers scoured the newspapers for every bit of information about the crazed killer with the big gun who prowled the boroughs in search of fresh young targets.
Girls would read that the latest victim was blonde, and suddenly they were drenching their hair with the darkest hues they could find.
Reporters and editors were studying the phases of the moon, looking for patterns that might help them solve the case before the police.
David Berkowitz wrote to Jimmy Breslin, one madman to another, and the story shifted into an even higher gear.


Economic Calendar
Listed below are the scheduled release dates for major economic indicators this week.
Monday
Inventory-Sales Ratio May  Tuesday
Balance of Trade May  Wednesday
Housing Construction June  Thursday
Weekly Jobless Claims  Friday
None


A New Rock Festival Opens, In New York and on Line
Some institutions in New York remain institutions even after they collapse.
Last summer, the New Music Seminar, a 15-year-old music-industry smorgasbord of informational panels, live performances and business-card trading, closed its doors in the face of debt and unpaid employees.
This year, some Manhattan clubs have banded together to create a new music gala, the Macintosh New York Music Festival, which begins tonight and ends on Saturday.
It could be the first time that a rock festival is taking place simultaneously in clubs and on computer screens, with its own site on the Internet's World Wide Web.
There won't be informational panels or as much business-card trading at the new festival.
The concept is that with a $75 pass, anyone can hop around 15 clubs where more than 350 bands, from local rockers to nationally known alternative groups, will play over six days.


Leaving Hiroshima To Future Historians
To the Editor:
Now that the Enola Gay exhibit has been mounted at the Smithsonian, confrontation continues.
I write as an ambivalent observer in that my outfit, like so many, was scheduled for the invasion of Japan in August 1945; but after the first flush of relief at being spared, again like so many, I became an opponent of nuclear bombs.
There is not likely to be a last word for years.
If there were one comment to make at this time, it might be that given by Golo Mann, the German historian, in a 1959 interview in Switzerland.


World Bank Plans Small Loans to Poor
The World Bank is leading a drive to raise more than $200 million from international donors to provide small loans to help poor people start their own businesses in developing countries.
Donors met on June 27 and 28 at the World Bank in Washington and created a group to oversee the program, which would provide the money to local banks that specialize in loans, training and advice to help poor people achieve self-sufficiency.


Beaux-Arts on a Beautiful Sunday


For Jarrett and Crew, Pocono Race Is a Gas
Dale Jarrett, whose team was running on an empty tank emotionally, found an extra lap's worth of gasoline when he needed it most today and scored a victory in the Miller Genuine Draft 500 Winston Cup race at Pocono International Raceway.
Jarrett held off Jeff Gordon, a driver who has had most everything go his way this year, even though the engine in Jarrett's Ford Thunderbird sputtered and almost shut off about halfway through the 200th and final lap of the race.
Jarrett had been having such a lousy season up until today that he was preparing to climb out and push.


Tracking a Storm on a Real-Life Weather Map


For Infant Ears, a New, Early Test of Health That Takes Just a Minute to Do
Less than 9 hours old, Lisa had just passed an important test with flying colors, and her parents, Ruth and Richard Minkoff, could not have been more pleased.
"Now we know Lisa's as perfect as she looks," Mr.
Minkoff, a computer specialist from Forest Hills, said.


Snead Defeats Nicklaus With Birdie to Capture Playoff
Making a curling four-foot birdie putt after a 5-iron approach from 182 yards yesterday, J. C. Snead beat Jack Nicklaus on the first hole of a playoff in the Senior Players Championship in Dearborn, Mich.
Snead, who had a four-stroke lead with six holes to play, shot a three-under-par 69 and Nicklaus had a 67 for 16-under 272 totals.
That sent them back to No. 18, where both players had four pars in regulation.


Remembering a Teen-Ager in Chinatown


A Worthy Competitor
After 10 valiant years, New York Newsday has closed its doors.
Its relatively brief turn on the city's stage unfortunately produced $100 million in losses.
Despite staff opinion that a turnaround was possible, the paper's corporate bosses at the Times Mirror Company in Los Angeles decided on Friday to shut the paper down.
This may have been a sound economic call, but it was a sad outcome nonetheless.
Mayor Rudolph Giuliani lamented a further loss of the "diversity of opinion" needed in a city as diverse as this one.
He noted further that competition from a variety of newspapers produces strong journalism.


RESULTS PLUS
AUTO RACING  Herbert Avoids Collision and Wins
Johnny Herbert won the British Grand Prix in Silverstone, England, yesterday after a collision between the world champion, Michael Schumacher of Germany, and the defending champion, Damon Hill, sidelined the leaders.
On lap 46 of the 61-lap race, Hill, of Britain, tried to overtake Schumacher's Benetton Renault on a left turn.
When the German held his line, the front right wheel of the British driver's Williams Renault struck the left side of Schumacher's car and both spun off the circuit onto the gravel.


Innovator Is Leaving the Shadows for the Limelight
Bolt Beranek &amp; Newman has been the Forrest Gump of high technology, playing an obscure but crucial role in many key events since its founding in 1948 by two professors and a graduate student from M.I.T.
But recent deals have put the company in the spotlight, and it now seems poised to cash in on the enormous growth of the Internet.


As Germany Enters the Fray, Two Pilots Reflect an Altered Military
Beyond their training as pilots of the Luftwaffe, Hans-Georg Batcher and First Lieut.
Peter-Georg Stutz have little in common -- and much history dividing them.
Mr.
Batcher, 81, was a bomber pilot in World War II, a hero of the Third Reich decorated personally by Hitler.
He flew a staggering 658 combat missions -- a world record -- and was shot down twice, but survived to fly his last mission in February 1945, attacking a column of Allied troops entering the near-defeated Germany from the Netherlands.


A Small Town in the South Prepares to Try a Neighbor
As people down here like to say, it's all over but the shoutin'.
A jury of nine men and three women -- seven whites and five blacks -- is in place for the capital murder trial of Susan Smith, clearing the way for opening statements this week.
The jury will hear a polished, soft-spoken, Ivy League lawyer argue for her life with a plain-spoken young prosecutor who has gone against a rising community sympathy to demand her death.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  Federal National Mortgage Association, known as Fannie Mae, is selling $50 million of medium-term notes due in 1998 through Goldman Sachs.
Callable in one year, the issue is priced at par to yield 6.3 percent.
Norwest Corp., Minneapolis, filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission to sell as much as $3 billion of securities.


G.O.P. PROPOSING GREATER CHOICES ABOUT MEDICARE
House Republicans have begun drafting proposals to make immense changes in Medicare, by imposing annual limits on spending in the program and by giving elderly people a choice of private health insurance plans as alternatives to the standard Federal program.
Confidential documents prepared by Republicans on the House Ways and Means Committee describe numerous options that would increase costs for Medicare beneficiaries who stay in the standard program, under which the Government pays separately for each doctor's visit and each hospital admission.
More than 90 percent of the 37 million Medicare beneficiaries receive care through such fee-for-service arrangements.


What France Risks With Nuclear Tests; Overkill Response
To the Editor:
The French Navy's raid on the Greenpeace ship Rainbow Warrior II (news article, July 10) is a fitting prelude to France's coming nuclear tests in the South Pacific.
Paris has shown disdain for protests against setting off thermonuclear explosions in a part of the world often described as a paradise on earth.
How in character that the French respond to the presence of a rickety protest ship with tear gas and helmeted commandos.


The Mover Who Shook Newsday
For the 800 or so employees of New York Newsday who are asking why their newspaper had to die, the answer may lie in a speech delivered last month by Mark H. Willes, the recently appointed chief executive of Newsday's parent, the Times Mirror Company.
Mr.
Willes, who was addressing an audience of journalists and academics at the University of California at Los Angeles, said that Times Mirror needed to be "relentless in pursuing discontinuous change." If the company was really serious about improving its fortunes, he said, "you can't do it in small steps; you must take big, discontinuous steps to get there."


An Heir Apparent At Thompson
After months of speculation, the J. Walter Thompson Company has clarified who is most likely to become its next chief executive by designating as heir apparent Chris Jones, who has been executive vice president and managing director for multinational accounts in London since 1993.
"Chris has had a sterling record," said Burt Manning, 64, chairman and chief executive of Thompson, a unit of the WPP Group.
Mr.
Jones, who joined Thompson in 1984, is being named to the new post of co-president, joining Peter A. Schweitzer, 55, who last year declined the designation to remain in Detroit, where he is also the global business director on the Ford Motor Company account.


Iraq Frees 2 Americans After 4 Months
Two Americans who had been imprisoned since they crossed into Iraq four months ago were released today by President Saddam Hussein in what American officials said was an effort to persuade the United Nations to lift economic sanctions against his country.
Secretary of State Warren Christopher said, however, that the United States had promised nothing in exchange for Iraq's sudden decision to release the two men, William Barloon, 39, and David Daliberti, 42.
Mr.
Hussein released them after Representative Bill Richardson, a New Mexico Democrat, appealed to Mr.
Hussein in a one-hour meeting this morning to free them on humanitarian grounds.


Edward Gray, 78, United Auto Workers Official
Edward F. Gray, a former union official who began his career recruiting factory workers in New Jersey and ended it by organizing the elderly in New York, died on Thursday at the Cabrini Hospice in Manhattan.
He was 78 and lived in Manhattan.
The cause was complications of Parkinson's disease, said his wife, Lois.


Squatters Have to Live by the Same Rules as Everyone Else; The 'Day Job' People
To the Editor:
Your July 12 article misrepresents the people who are squatting in buildings on East 13th Street in Manhattan.
You state they are "largely white, well-educated and employed." Most of them are indeed educated, but in the fine and creative arts.


In Chicago, Week of Swelter Leaves an Overflowing Morgue
They came like a parade of death: police truck after police truck, delivering the bodies to the Cook County morgue, until finally there was no more room for the dead.
Wicked heat is being blamed for hundreds of deaths across the eastern half of the country, and perhaps 300 deaths in Chicago alone, said Edmund Donoghue, the medical examiner for Cook County, where refrigerated trucks are being used to store the overflow from the morgue.


Abroad at Home; Lessons Of Disaster
Two days after the fall of Srebrenica, Gen.
Philippe Morillon, a member of the French General Staff, said: "We have to declare war on General Mladic or get out." Ratko Mladic is the commander of Bosnian Serb forces, the architect of the assault on Srebrenica and the ethnic cleansing that followed.
General Morillon's words pithily summed up one lesson of Bosnia for the Western alliance: To intervene in a conflict and pretend there is no difference between the aggressors and the victims is not only dishonorable but ineffectual.


U.S. to Auction One-Year Bill This Week
The Treasury's schedule of financings this week is confined to the bills market, beginning with today's regular weekly auction of three- and six-month bills.
On Thursday, the Treasury will auction a one-year bill.
By the close of the New York cash market on Friday, traders said, the rate on the outstanding three-month bill was 5.41 percent and a six-month bill was 5.35 percent.
The rate on a one-year bill was 5.21 percent.


The Serenity of the Spa Meets the Blare of Change
Joe H. Palmer, a college professor and classicist who used to write newspaper columns about horses, said it best: "A man who would change Saratoga would stir champagne."
For the 127th year in its tranquil history, starting Friday, they will stage racing at the old Saratoga Race Course in the serene and stately village snugged into the foothills of the Adirondacks.
And while nobody is planning on stirring the champagne, the new team of executives running the New York Racing Association is mixing some change into a racing jewel that has resisted change for a century while outperforming its sister tracks at Belmont and Aqueduct downstate.


Another Proposed Pathmark and Another Debate
WELCOME to Pathmark II. Or is it Pathmark Too?
First came Pathmark I, the proposed supermarket in East Harlem so controversial that after years of planning, it's still on hold.
Now come plans for another Pathmark megastore, this one in Springfield Gardens, Queens.
And New York being New York, its fate is shaky too, even though the idea goes back six years, originated with a community organization, has the approval of the local Congressman, the Mayor, the City Planning Commission, the Borough President and half of an evenly split community board.


5 Famous Men and What They Learned at Annapolis
THE NIGHTINGALE'S SONG  By Robert Timberg  Illustrated. 544 pages.
Simon &amp; Schuster. $27.50.
The idea that moved Robert Timberg to write "The Nightingale's Song" seems to have been to take five famous graduates of the United States Naval Academy and show how their training at Annapolis imbued them with values that subsequently made them military heroes: Senator John McCain, John M. Poindexter, Robert C. McFarlane, James Webb and Oliver L. North.
He would then dramatize the sense of betrayal these men felt when America turned against the Vietnam War and spell out the tragic consequences of their feelings.
In light of his own background as a graduate of the Naval Academy and a Marine veteran of Vietnam, he would write in a spirit of indignation over what he saw as the American middle class's abandonment of the country's patriotic heritage.


CHRONICLE
When JANE MARSH steps onto the Summerstage platform in Central Park on Wednesday to sing the lead in Verdi's "Due Foscari," she may seem to many a new face and voice.
But longtime opera connoisseurs will remember her.
In 1966, when she was 24, Ms.
Marsh, a soprano, burst into international prominence when she won the first vocal prize at the International Tchaikovsky Competition in Moscow.


In the World of Women Who Live by Their Bodies
Rosie, an aging tart in Yorkshire, puts it this way: "We don't matter. We're just scum. Cockroaches!" Rosie, born Rosemary Christine Garrity, is one of the prostitutes figuring prominently in "Band of Gold," a six-hour Granada TV mini-series that had hordes of Britons glued to their television sets earlier this year.
Getting there before public television, HBO snapped up the series, which, beginning tonight, will be shown on three successive Mondays.
Rosie has the enormous advantage of being portrayed by Geraldine James, the gifted actress perhaps best known for her shimmering turn in "The Jewel in the Crown."


Faith of Our Mothers
To the Editor:
It is heartening to read of John Paul II's support for women's liberation in his letter to the United Nations conference (news article, July 11).
It is disheartening to hear again that this good man will tolerate "no change in the church's position barring women from the priesthood."


What France Risks With Nuclear Tests
To the Editor:
I commend you for calling on the French President, Jacques Chirac, to show courage and statesmanship by canceling France's proposed nuclear tests in the South Pacific (editorial, July 5).
His announcement has caused outrage in Australia and other South Pacific countries and is provoking a response from organizations around the world from Greenpeace to the European Parliament.


Take a Stand, but Please Stop Telling Us About It
Sometimes it seems that Major League Baseball, with its capital letters and boldly underlined issues, is at once "War and Peace," "As The World Turns" and every comic opera all in one.
In other words, it seems like life and death, that is until a life-and-death situation takes place, forcing one to step back from The Game.
And when that happens, then you are forced to disconnect to an extent, staying tuned only through the proverbial umbilical cords.
The radio.
The newspapers.
The fans.


Funds for Fighting Drugs
Thirty-one housing authorities in New Jersey received Federal grants of $11.2 million Wednesday to fight drugs in public housing.
The money from the Department of Housing and Urban Development can be used to hire security guards, set up tenant patrols, install lighting gates and other security equipment, and set up drug education and treatment programs.
Newark's housing authority will receive the most money: $2.7 million.
TERRY PRISTIN


Pending Execution of Former Radio Reporter Divides Organization of Black Journalists
The scheduled execution of Mumia Abu-Jamal, a black former radio reporter convicted of killing a police officer, has intensified debate among black journalists over how, or even whether, their national association should deal with the case.
Mr.
Abu-Jamal, 41, is to be executed by lethal injection on Aug. 17 for the fatal shooting of a white Philadelphia policeman in August 1981.
His 1982 conviction was upheld by the Pennsylvania Supreme Court, and the United States Supreme Court refused to review the case.
His lawyers filed another court appeal, which is pending.


What Goes On?; Why You Still Can't Buy A Flaming Pink Computer
They have infiltrated our offices and our homes, those computers.
They dominate the omnipresent technological landscape.
They come in many varieties with a myriad of performance speeds, accessories and price tags.
Yet one constant remains -- their color.
Computers have been relegated to the gray zone.
Putty gray, to be precise -- if you're talking about most personal computers.
The designers of Apple computer cases, however, call their color snow white.


New Plant Means More Clams
The number of clams available from the Raritan Bay-Sandy Hook area tripled last weekend and the number of people working to harvest them more than doubled with the opening of a new cleaning plant, said Richard Pomasan of the Baymen's Protective Association, which operates the Highlands plant.
The new plant and a smaller one in Sea Bright will process 360 bushels of clams a day, compared with 120 bushels when the smaller plant was operating alone.
The clams will be available locally and also shipped to other areas of the country and Europe, Mr.
Pomasan said.
The cleaning process involves exposing the clams to ultraviolet light for 48 hours.


Bosnian Refugees' Accounts Appear to Verify Atrocities
As rebel Serbs moved in on a second United Nations protected area in eastern Bosnia, Muslim refugees from the so-called safe area the Serbs captured last week gave new, detailed accounts today of the killing and rape of civilians.
Reconstructing precisely what happened in the safe area of Srebrenica is almost impossible at this point because of the chaos among the thousands of refugees here and the fact that many seem traumatized and disoriented.


'Farewell My Concubine' Lives Again as Opera
You've seen the movie; now catch the opera.
Chen Kaige spun his remarkable epic film of 1993, "Farewell My Concubine," around a thread of themes and images from the renowned Chinese opera of that name.
Now those tantalizing glimpses come together in a superb representation of the opera at the Taipei Theater, with Wei Hai-ming, a Taiwanese actress, in the title role.
No one who saw Ms.
Wei's exquisite rendition of "The Tipsy Concubine" three years ago at the Taipei Theater will need to be reminded of her ability to command the stage, or persuaded to renew the acquaintance, though this "Concubine" is, to be sure, a tale of a different sort.
Here, too, the heroine imbibes freely, this time with her lord, the historic King Hsiang Yu, who is impossibly trapped by his warring enemies.
But far from finding oblivion, she reaches the clear-headed conclusion that she constitutes one burden too many on the caring King's overwrought mind and slits her throat with his sword.


Collins Is Humbled by Millionaire Status
Hours after signing a contract that could pay him more than $23 million over the next seven years, a humble KERRY COLLINS began the task of trying to live up to the Carolina Panthers' expectations.
The rookie quarterback from Penn State agreed to a long-term deal Saturday night and took part in the team's first workout of training camp yesterday morning at Wofford College in Spartanburg, S.C.
Then, he tried to put into perspective how it felt to become a multimillionaire.


Jean Bony, Art Historian, 86
Jean Bony, a French-born art historian who taught at the University of California, Berkeley, from 1962 to 1980, died on July 7 in Australia.
He was 86.
His death was reported on Saturday in Le Monde.


Julian Schnabel Revisits The 80's, Directing
The weekend heat wave was enough to bring on hallucinations, and there was a good one Friday night on White Street in lower Manhattan.
Outside No. 77, site of the legendary Mudd Club, the brass stanchions and velvet ropes were set up once again.
And just as in days of yore, the hip were being separated from the unhip by Joey Arias, the club's very first doorman, hard to miss in a foot-high Little Richard quiff and pencil mustache.
Julian Schnabel, the painter, wandered over to the stanchions, conferred with a member of his film crew and obtained an adjustment in the distance between the stanchions.
Satisfied, he returned to the director's chair and the cameras began to record another scene in the life of Jean-Michel Basquiat.


The Internet battles a much-disputed study on selling pornography on line.
HELL hath no fury like an Internet scorned. Just ask Martin Rimm.
Last year, as an undergraduate studying electrical and computer engineering at Carnegie-Mellon University in Pittsburgh, Mr.
Rimm wrote a research paper called "Marketing Pornography on the Information Superhighway."


Most Wanted; 'Pocahontas' Has Some Company
"Pocahontas" is not the only movie that is enchanting children this summer.
The Disney animated film earned a mere $8 million this weekend, but that was enough to pass the magic 100-million-dollar mark: in its fifth week, the Disney film's gross sales are $106.2 million.
"Casper," though not in the top ten this week, has topped $85 million, "Mighty Morphin Power Rangers" has earned $30.5 million, and "Indian in the Cupboard" took in $7.8 million this weekend, its first.
And that's not counting "Batman Forever" ($164.5 million) and "Apollo 13" ($90.6 million).


Heat Ebbs but 11 Are Dead in New York City
The heat wave that scorched much of the Northeast with record-setting 100-degree temperatures killed at least 11 people in New York City, who died of causes like hyperthermia and heat stroke, city officials said yesterday.
Officials were only beginning to assess the impact of Saturday's withering heat spell, which caused several power failures outside the city, damaged roads that buckled under the fierce sun and led thousands to seek emergency medical help.


Waco Witness Says N.R.A. Consultant Posed as a House Aide
A child welfare worker subpoenaed to testify at Republican-led hearings into the Government's actions at Waco, Tex., said today that she was summoned to testify after being interviewed by a National Rifle Association consultant posing as a House committee staff member.
The witness is Joyce Sparks, who was a supervisor at the Texas Department of Protective and Regulatory Services and who had extensive contact with members of the Branch Davidian sect before Federal agents tried to dislodge them from their compound near Waco.
She said in a telephone interview today that she had been contacted by a woman who said she was part of the "Waco hearing team" and who asked her about her dealings with David Koresh, the Davidian leader.


Gold Hunters, Defying Beijing, Mine Vast Areas of Rural China
A frenzied and chaotic gold rush is under way across vast expanses of rural China, where newly wealthy "gold lords" and the peasants who toil and fight for them are challenging the authority of the state.
Here in the far western province of Qinghai and in other parts of China, modest gold deposits, long under the exclusive control of the Communist Party and state mining combines, are being overrun by a wave of entrepreneurial and well-armed private miners.


World News Briefs; Attacks on Diplomats Strain Egypt-Sudan Ties
Relations between Egypt and the Sudan, already tense over Cairo's allegations that Khartoum was involved in an assassination attempt on President Hosni Mubarak last month, were further strained today as the countries traded accusations of assaults on each other's diplomats.
A Sudanese Embassy spokesman said three diplomats were attacked as they left their homes this morning by gangs of up to 15 men who beat and kicked them.


Market Place; The Tech Stocks Defy Gravity and Rewrite Conventional Wisdom
Conventional wisdom has it that the second quarter brings a slump to the producers of computers, software, semiconductors and disk drives.
Not so this year.
With a few exceptions, the companies that have reported second-quarter results have met or exceeded Wall Street analysts' estimates, sending already lofty prices of technology stock to new highs on an almost daily basis.


Squatters Have to Live by the Same Rules as Everyone Else; News Management
To the Editor:
The New York Press Club shares the concerns expressed by Joanne Collier (letter, July 10) about the squatter incident the night of July 4.


In Possible Signal, China Releases an Ailing Dissident
China freed a prominent dissident this weekend, and human rights advocates are taking his release as a signal that Chinese leaders may be willing to take a softer stand in their diplomatic dispute with the United States.
Yang Zhou, 51, the best-known dissident in Shanghai, was allowed to return to his home on Saturday, apparently because he is in poor health.
Mr.
Yang said today that prison doctors had diagnosed a tumor in his throat but that he did not know if it was cancerous or benign.


Equity Offerings Scheduled for This Week
The following equity and convertible debt offerings are expected this week:


For Infant Ears, a New, Early Test of Health That Takes Just a Minute to Do
Less than 9 hours old, Lisa had just passed an important test with flying colors, and her parents, Ruth and Richard Minkoff, could not have been more pleased.
"Now we know Lisa's as perfect as she looks," Mr.
Minkoff, a computer specialist from Forest Hills, said.


Patents; Books provide lively insights into how patents and trademarks help shape business strategy.
DON'T look on the best-seller lists for books about intellectual property.
In fact, it's hard to find books about patents and copyright anywhere but in stores that specialize in business and law, and those are usually volumes with titles like "World Patent Law and Practice," "The Mechanics of Patent Claim Drafting" or "Understanding Copyright Law."
So it's worthwhile to note two recent books that take a comprehensive and entertaining look at a broad subject: the new role that patents, copyrights and trademarks play in the economy, in culture and in corporate business strategy.
Both are available at popular bookstores.


Charges for Japanese Cult
The police served arrest warrants today on 12 members of the Aum Shinrikyo religious cult for murder in connection with a nerve gas attack a year ago in Matsumoto in central Japan.
The 12 were already in prison on other charges, mainly in connection with the gas attack on the Tokyo subway in March, when a dozen people were killed and 5,000 injured.


Bringing the Murder Rate Down
The astonishing decline in New York City crime rates, especially for murder, has been attributed to everything from demographic changes to the freezing weather of two winters ago.
But Mayor Rudolph Giuliani and the Police Department seem entitled to claim that, despite its discipline and corruption problems, the city's law enforcement machinery must be doing something right.
Police crackdowns on drugs and illegal possession of guns are surely among the factors that helped make New York City safer.
There have been improvements in crime rates in the past, but each time the lulls were followed by surges in violent crime.
Some 10 years ago criminologists were hopeful that a decline in the young adult populations would lead to safer streets.
Then along came crack cocaine and an explosion in crime in the late 1980's.
Many experts say now that a coming bulge in the population of young adults will lead to growth in crime in the next several years.


Essay; News About Jews
Jewishness in America is not a growth industry.
Fifty years ago, there were about five million Jews in the U.S.
Today there are a half million more, about a 10 percent increase -- while the total U.S. population has doubled, from the postwar 130 million to today's 260 million.
That means the percentage of Jews in America has declined from nearly 4 percent to 2.3 percent.


People
Paul Spencer, a copywriter, was named to the new position of co-creative director at the New York office of Hill, Holliday, Connors, Cosmopulos, sharing those duties with Kevin Kearns, an art director.
Mr.
Spencer, most recently a freelancer, previously held creative posts at agencies including the DDB Needham New York unit of the Omnicom Group.


Metro-North Braces for Strike 'at Any Time' After Talks Fail
Metro-North workers could strike at any time, leaders of the railroad's labor unions warned yesterday after contract talks broke off despite significant movement by management on wages and work rules.
Preparing for a walkout, the railroad will have 400 buses ready this morning to ferry riders, if need be, from counties north of New York City and Connecticut to take them to subway and bus stops in the Bronx, Donna Evans, a spokeswoman for the railroad, said.


Rap Performer Is Victim Of Carjacking in Harlem
Queen Latifah, the rap star and television actress known for her lyrics denouncing violence, was a victim of a carjacking early yesterday in Harlem in which her boyfriend was shot and critically injured.
The carjacking took place about 2:45 A.M., shortly after Queen Latifah had parked a green 1995 BMW 740i at the northwest corner of Martin Luther King Jr.
Boulevard and Frederick Douglass Boulevard, in front of a Kentucky Fried Chicken restaurant, the police said.
Also in the car were the rapper's boyfriend, Sean Moon, in the front passenger seat, and a close friend, Lynn Mayo, in the back seat.


Distant but Loyal: Little Sicily in Queens; Immigrants Congregate in Astoria But Leave Their Hearts in Castrofilippo
The giant onion of Castrofilippo went unnoticed in Rome and Naples, and barely got a mention in the towns near the tiny Sicilian village where it was grown.
But it was news this summer in Astoria, Queens.
"Six pounds," marveled Salvatore Marino, an Astoria resident for 26 years.
"That is a big, big onion."


Accounts
Phoenix Home Life Mutual Insurance Co., Hartford, to Emmerling Post, New York, as the first agency to handle its account.
The billings were estimated at $2 million to $4 million.
Citterio USA, Long Island City, Queens, a unit of Citterio S.p.A., to the Ad Store, New York, to handle advertising for the specialty meat company, previously handled by Armando Testa, New York, which closed.
The billings were estimated at more than $3 million.


New York City Water
Searing heat reached New York City at a bad time for the water system.
Rainfall has been minimal in the watershed since spring, and the upstate reservoirs that supply city water have been well below normal all year.
On July 5 a drought warning was declared, urging voluntary water conservation in New York City and Westchester.


INSIDE
Stephen Spender Dies
Sir Stephen Spender, the British poet, critic and essayist who came to prominence in the 1930's, died in London at the age of 86.
Page B8.


Interactive Media Begins Samplenet
There were several developments last week involving interactive media.
Interactive Media Works in Overland Park, Kan., is introducing Samplenet, a software package intended to offer computer users free access to the World Wide Web through home pages sponsored by advertisers.
As part of efforts to sign Samplenet sponsors, Interactive has opened an office in New York and named Lawrence D. Ostrow, a former CBS sales executive, as Eastern managing director.


Apple Computer to Offer 2 New Macintosh Models
Apple Computer Inc. will introduce two Macintosh models today in its consumer-oriented Performa line, offering aggressive pricing and advanced multimedia features.
The machines play to Apple's strengths in the publishing, education, multimedia and consumer markets.
The two models, together with software and services aimed at specific market segments, will help Apple regain market share this year and next, Michael Spindler, Apple's president and chief executive, said at a news briefing.
Rather than compete across the board with PC clones of dubious quality, Mr.
Spindler said, Apple will focus its efforts.
Though its overall market share is about 8.3 percent, in certain markets the Macintosh has a dominant share, and this can be increased, he said.


For Sale: Memories Of a Camelot Wedding
To the public, who has seen it in photographs, Hammersmith Farm is where Jack and Jackie Kennedy held their wedding reception on the lawn in 1953, and where the bride tossed her bouquet from the staircase.
To Hugh D. Auchincloss 3d, whose family owned the estate for four generations, it was his boyhood summer home, a place where his crush on Jackie Bouvier deepened into friendship soon after his father, Hugh Auchincloss Jr., married Jackie's mother, Janet Lee Bouvier, in 1942.


Serbs Close In on 2d Bosnian 'Safe Area'
Bosnian Serb troops, supported by tanks and artillery and facing light resistance from Bosnian Government forces, advanced to the edge of the Muslim-held town of Zepa today, pressing an attack to capture the second of three enclaves in eastern Bosnia designated as "safe areas" by the United Nations.
"Bosnian Serb infantry, supported by tanks and heavy mortars, are within 1,500 meters of Zepa," said Alexander Ivanko, a spokesman for the United Nations in Sarajevo.
Bosnian Serb troops, who reached the outskirts of the town late in the morning, were reported to be pressing their assault from the Zepa River in the west, but appeared to have halted their advance by late this afternoon, Mr.
Ivanko said.


You Push; I'll Navigate


Editorial Notebook; The Not-So-Mysterious East
Old Asia hands who revisit the Far East in search of the past inevitably come down with a bad case of nostalgia-shock.
The visitor realizes, with some sadness, that progress has exacted a price, imposing architectural and commercial conformity on what was once a collection of endlessly variable destinations.
Almost nothing is familiar.
Bangkok, once one of Asia's most charming cities, is self-destructing.
The water-filled klongs that crisscrossed the city and gave it much of its charm were long ago filled with concrete to create gridlocked streets.
Elevated highways are sprouting above the streets, part of the city's plan to cut down travel time between the airport and Bangkok's plush hotels.


Harnisch Stays in Command and Helps Mets' Luck Turn
If there was any one pitch that Pete Harnisch might have liked to have back yesterday, it probably would have been a fourth-inning offering to Mike Kingery.
But the pitch didn't even hurt the Met right-hander.
Ryan Thompson ran down Kingery's fly ball deep in the right-field corner, and just looking at the box score would never reveal that the play could have meant something.
But the very fact that the ball stayed in the park meant a whole lot to Harnisch.


By the Sea, by the Sea, By the Cool, Noisy Sea
At 3:30 A.M. on the night after New York's hottest day this summer, Frances Nimmons and her four children finally cooled off.
The temperature hovered at a merciful 79 degrees, down from 102, and a gentle breeze lifted their bedsheets.
"This almost feels like heaven," Ms.
Nimmons said.
The only problem was the noise.
"With the waves crashing here in front and the roller coaster behind us, I don't think we're going to get any sleep tonight," she said.


Melbourne Journal; Crown Is Wobbly, but Long Live Betty Windsor!
It is 4 in the afternoon, teatime in this most Anglophilic of Australian cities.
At a corner table in a tea shop heavy with chintz and etched glass, Nancy Neish, an 82-year-old retired clerk, daintily brushed away crumbs of buttered cinnamon toast from her lips as she explained why she would always feel loyalty to a monarch half a world away.
"Oh, what a wonderful woman," Miss Neish said of Queen Elizabeth II, who is -- at least for the moment -- still the head of state of Australia, a nation that began its modern history as a land of British castoffs and convicts.
"I am an Australian and I am loyal to my Queen. When she talks, you know she's talking from the heart."


Sports of The Times; Evert Is Reunited With Her Doubles Partner in Chief
AFTER all these years, there is yet another view of Chris Evert, competitor.
This one comes from George Herbert Walker Bush, a retired public servant who used to invite Evert to play doubles with him.
Rank, he was soon to learn, had few privileges.
" 'Bend your knees, cover behind me, get up to the net,' " he mimicked her orders.
"As President, people would give me long putts, or if I put up a lousy lob, people would give me a kinder, gentler return. Chris Evert never understood that."


Florida Gets $100 Million in Insurer Failure
Merrill Lynch &amp; Company, Coopers &amp; Lybrand and a law firm have agreed to pay the State of Florida $100 million to settle charges involving the biggest failure of an insurance company in Florida's history.
Merrill, the nation's largest brokerage house, will pay $45 million of the settlement.
Coopers &amp; Lybrand, the accounting firm, will pay $50 million, and the New York law firm of Shereff, Friedman, Hoffman &amp; Goodman will pay $5 million, Florida officials announced Friday.
The three firms will be severed from a trial that is to begin in September.


Newark Schools Chief Embraces a Daunting Test
Dr.
Beverly L. Hall slid into a student desk at Stuyvesant High School in Manhattan and began helping two seventh graders work through a series of reading puzzles.
Within minutes, she spoke up.
"We won," she said to the teacher.
"We won. We finished."
Dr.
Hall, 47, has long been driven to win.
But today, as she assumes the post of acting superintendent of the Newark schools, she faces turning around a system that has been collapsing for decades, marked by falling test scores, poor attendance and crumbling buildings.


The Draw Was Only First Step For Pacer
Last Tuesday, John Campbell won a lottery.
But the million-dollar payoff didn't come until Saturday night, when Campbell captured the Meadowlands Pace with David's Pass.
Campbell and David's Pass, who teamed to win the Pace by three-quarters of a length over the hard-charging Kinney Hanover, had an even-money chance of not even starting in harness racing's most prestigious pacing event.


IN PERFORMANCE: THEATER
Seduction, Fire and Flight, Enacted to African Rhythms  'Shango de Ima' Nuyorican Poets Cafe
Amid throbbing drums, emotion-packed dancing, alluring song, deadly battles and naked passion, a mythic, epic tale is unfolding these summer nights.


Rivera Pitches a Claim For Spot in the Rotation
There seldom passes a day in the life of Buck Showalter when he is not asked about the progress of a power hitter by the name of Strawberry in Columbus.
It's odd, of course, because what the Yankees need to cultivate is pitching, and lots of it.
Yesterday, Showalter's Yankees did get to reap some of what they need most.
Mariano Rivera, the young right-hander whose entrance into the 1995 season was not the most smashing, turned in a third straight impressive outing.
The 25-year-old threw six-plus innings of one-run ball against the Minnesota Twins to earn a 5-1 victory.


Dividend Meetings
Following is a partial list of dividend meetings this week:


Disarming Must Precede Irish Peace Talks
To the Editor:
Peter Martin (letter, July 11) suggested that the British Prime Minister set a date for all-party talks in Northern Ireland.
A good idea.
But I would like to make four points:
(1) The British Government has been working toward all-party talks.
But these will not happen simply by naming a date.
Sinn Fein must deliver some movement on decommissioning first.
Other parties will not sit at a negotiating table with Sinn Fein while the I.R.A. reserves the option to revert to violence.


F.C.C. Chief Urges Repeal Of Network Prime-Time Limit
The chairman of the Federal Communications Commission said over the weekend that a 25-year-old commission rule limiting the amount of network programming that television stations can broadcast at night was "a mistake going back as long as 10 years." The chairman, Reed E. Hundt, added, "It's high time the commission stops this mindless meddling with prime-time programming."
The F.C.C. regulation, known as the prime-time access rule, has kept the networks from supplying their programs during the highly watched 7 to 8 P.M. time period in the East and West, and the 6 to 7 P.M. period in the Midwest.
The rule, which was intended to diversify programming, has made hits out of syndicated programs like "Wheel of Fortune" and "A Current Affair."


65 M.P.H. Limit Favored in Poll
A majority of New Jersey's drivers want the speed limit on the state's highways increased to 65 miles per hour, and 75 percent admit they drive that speed or faster, the Asbury Park Press reported yesterday.
The poll showed that 58 percent of those responding thought the speed limit should be raised on interstate highways in New Jersey; 56 percent thought it should be increased on the state's three toll roads.
Under Federal law, New Jersey could increase the speed limit to 65 m.p.h. on hundreds of miles of highways.
But Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman has said the increase would lead to more highway fatalities.


METRO DIGEST
HEAT TOOK 11 LIVES IN NEW YORK CITY
The steamy heat wave that scorched much of the Northeast with record-setting 100-degree temperatures killed at least 11 people in New York City.
They died of heat-related causes like hyperthermia and heat stroke, city officials said.
Officials were only beginning to assess the impact of the withering spell, which caused several power outages outside the city, damaged roads that buckled under the fierce sun and led thousands to seek emergency medical help.
And as temperatures cooled to the mid-80's, weather-beaten residents of the region emerged from the icy zones of air conditioners to share grim tales of survival and relief that the record heat had ended.
"It was like being smacked with a baseball bat," said Kenny Anderson, 34, a construction worker from Poughkeepsie, which reported the highest temperature in the state -- 106.
"I laid under a tree with wet towels over me. It became too much work, every half hour changing towels. They dried right out. I lost five pounds yesterday just from the sweating."  [ Page A1. ] NEW YORK CITY RAP PERFORMER IN CARJACKING
Queen Latifah, the rap star and television actress known for her lyrics denouncing violence, was a victim of a carjacking in Harlem in which her boyfriend was shot and critically wounded.
The carjacking took place shortly after Queen Latifah had parked a BMW at the northwest corner of 125th Street and Eighth Avenue, in front of a Kentucky Fried Chicken restaurant, the police said.  [ B3. ]
ANOTHER PATHMARK, ANOTHER SPLIT
Welcome to Pathmark II.
First came Pathmark I, the proposed supermarket in East Harlem so controversial that after years of planning, it's still on hold.
Now come plans for another Pathmark megastore, this one in Springfield Gardens, Queens.
And New York being New York, its fate is shaky too, even though the idea goes back six years, originated with a community organization, has the approval of the local Congressman, the Mayor, the City Planning Commission, the Borough President and half of an evenly split community board.
Metro Matters by Joyce Purnick.  [ B3. ]
A COOL IDEA IN CONEY ISLAND
Scattered along the beach at Coney Island like so many confused sunbathers, Frances Nimmons, her two sisters from Brooklyn and their 11 children had joined about a dozen other families who sought refuge from the oven heat of their apartments by bedding down instead with the sand and surf.
Some people escaped the weekend's heat by going to malls; others packed movie theaters.
But perhaps among the most adventurous were the beach sleepers of Coney Island, who found that returning to nature was preferable to their saunalike apartments.  [ B5. ] REGION HOW DEEP THE INKWELL?
All of a sudden, they did not have a New York City newspaper anymore, except a shadow of one in Queens.
So the people of New York Newsday -- the famous ones whose pictures were on the sides of buses, as well as the ones who were just newspaper people -- started to think about the future.
For the stars, like Mike Lupica, the sports columnist, whose salary is said to be in excess of $500,000, job security was not the issue; most of them have contracts with the paper's parent, Long Island Newsday, which will continue publishing, and their writing is syndicated to many other papers across the country.
But for others, it may not be so easy.
Executives have said 700 to 800 of the 3,200 employees at New York Newsday and its Long Island parent will lose their jobs under a system based on seniority.
[ B3. ]
FOR INFANT EARS, AN EARLY TEST OF HEALTH
Less than 9 hours old, Lisa had just passed an important test with flying colors, and her parents, Ruth and Richard Minkoff, could not have been more pleased.
The baby girl, the Minkoffs' first child, is one of an estimated 5,000 newborns whose hearing will be checked in a free minutelong test over the next year at the Long Island Jewish Medical Center in New Hyde Park, Queens, on the Nassau County border.
The federally financed four-month-old program, being instituted at seven hospital centers throughout New York State, is aimed at the early detection of diminished hearing in the hope of averting learning and development problems.  [ B4. ] Chronicle B6


Cuts May Affect Princeton Lab
The main funding source for the Princeton Plasma Physics Laboratory in Plainsboro would be slashed under a spending bill passed last week by the United States House of Representatives.
The bill, which reflects the House's disappointment over the progress of fusion research in the last four decades, would reduce Federal financing for it by 38 percent, to $229 million.
The bill does not specify how cuts would be distributed.


U.S. Is Urged To Repay Some in Radiation Tests
A draft report prepared for a Presidential panel says that the Federal Government should compensate some of the thousands of people who were made unwitting subjects of radiation experiments by Government researchers during the cold war era and should issue a blanket apology to all subjected to the tests.
The report also states that the panel found evidence that the Government covered up several experiments, perhaps illegally, to prevent embarrassing publicity, and it warns that the nation still lacks sufficient safeguards to prevent similar abuses in research practices.


4 Injured in Shootout in Upper Manhattan
Four men were injured, one seriously, in a shootout between two men in upper Manhattan last night, the police said.
The incident began when two men started shooting at each other shortly after 10:30 P.M., near Broadway and West 149th Street, said Officer Valerie St.
Rose, a police spokeswoman.
One of the two gunmen and three bystanders were struck by gunfire, Officer St.
Rose said.


A Debate Over H.I.V. Testing of Newborns Raises a Congressman's Profile
In his 12 years in Congress, Representative Gary L. Ackerman, a Queens Democrat, has been known as much for his flamboyance as for his legislative record.
The plump and affable Mr.
Ackerman sports a white carnation boutonniere each day and lives on a houseboat on the Potomac River that he named the Unsinkable II (after the Unsinkable I sank).
While his colleagues walk or take the subway two blocks to the Capitol from the Rayburn House Office Building, Mr.
Ackerman cruises over in his Aunt Chachi's clunky 1966 Plymouth Valiant.
Before strolling into the House chamber to vote, he stops to give a security guard a crushing bear hug.


Taking In the Sites; Photographs and Memories: A Century of Americana Images
Hiding behind a deceptively bland home page lurks one of the World Wide Web's most intriguing sites, a place where serendipity is the rule and surprises abound.
American Memory, a rapidly expanding site owned by the Library of Congress, is a fascinating repository of thousands of images from the 1850's through World War II, and its portfolio is growing.
For New Yorkers, especially, this site is a trove of wonders.


Fantasies Deteriorating Into a Battle of Wills
James Edwin Parker's unsettling drama "Two Boys in a Bed on a Cold Winter's Night" is by no means the first play to depict the driving force in New York gay life as the quest for an unattainable fantasy.
But this two-character dialogue at the Theater Off Park is one of the first plays to analyze the dynamics of the hunt in sexually explicit terms.
In doing so, it displays a nasty, critical acuity.
The touching but flawed drama, which runs just over an hour, is a 5 A.M. postcoital conversation between two men who have met in a Manhattan bar and gone home together.
The getting-to-know-you banter between Daryl (Robert Gomes) a desperately lonely 36-year-old graphics designer, and Peter (Michael Curry), a cocky jack-of-all-trades who is the same age, is conceived as an archetypal gay male pas de deux in the age of AIDS.
Roles are discussed, first sexual experiences recalled, H.I.V. statuses questioned and lies exposed in an edgy conversation that turns into a hostile battle of wills.


Saberhagen to Miss a Start
After re-evaluating Bret Saberhagen's condition yesterday, the Mets confirmed that their ace right-hander has a strained muscle in his lower left side and that he will miss his scheduled start on Thursday in St.
Louis.
Saberhagen, who was forced to leave Saturday night's 5-4 loss to the Colorado Rockies in the third inning after experiencing pain, will be evaluated again in four to five days.
And Dave Mlicki will probably make the start on Thursday.


Shrinking Gap Between Church and Polish State
As Poland has worked during the last four years to write a new constitution, the Roman Catholic Church has become intimately involved in the process, wielding decisive influence on some important provisions.
The church has an official observer on the drafting commission, mobilizing the bishops into action on potential problems.


Open Title Confirms Career Move
The future of women's golf arrived today wrapped in a black ribbon.
Annika Sorenstam, by way of Stockholm, the University of Arizona and a tennis backboard, seized the 50th United States Women's Open at the expense of a mortified Meg Mallon.
Mallon, the third-round leader, lived in the rough, the bunkers and the water this afternoon, but she snorkeled her way out and nearly forced a Monday playoff.
Her 20-foot putt on the steep 18th green at Broadmoor dribbled straight toward the hole, detoured away and left a 24-year-old Swede dazed.


Chirac Affirms France's Guilt In Fate of Jews
Barely two months after taking office, President Jacques Chirac today publicly recognized France's responsibility for deporting thousands of Jews to Nazi death camps during the German occupation in World War II.
His statement put an end to decades of equivocations by successive French Governments about France's wartime role.


Sorry, Orville, but Redenbacher's new look emphasizes youth.
ORVILLE REDENBACHER is inexorably being Betty Crockered.
For the first time, the avuncular Mr.
Redenbacher is absent from advertising for a popcorn product bearing his name, just as Ms.
Crocker, the mythical homemaker, is no longer visible in campaigns for the food and baking items named after her.


Not a Laugh Riot: Comedy Writers in Short Supply
Just as professional sports teams struggle to find enough quality players to fill each position during an expansion year, the number of television comedies has grown so much this year that television executives say they are worried that there will not be enough quality comedy players -- in this case, writers -- to go around.
This summer in Hollywood, 59 comedies are going into production, up from about 45 last year.
The demand has been increased because of the addition of two new would-be networks -- WB and UPN -- and the growing interest among cable networks in producing original comedy programs of their own.
In addition, aggressive moves to develop a base of comedy shows are being made by new production studios like Dreamworks and Brillstein-Grey Entertainment.


New Chapters of Whitewater and Waco
Hoping to unearth politically embarrassing revelations, Congressional Republicans will begin hearings this week on two of the most sensitive issues that have confronted the Clinton Administration: the Whitewater affair and the Government's assault on the Branch Davidian sect near Waco, Tex.
Although preparations for the hearings have produced no major revelations, the proceedings are expected to prove highly distracting for the White House because it is already dealing with Bosnia, the budget and a re-election campaign in which the President's character is certain to be challenged.


New Charges in Shooting
Prosecutors have dropped murder charges against a man who had been accused of killing a retired police chief from Hanover, N.J., saying they had arrested another suspect.
On Saturday, Willie E. Drewery, 20, of Newark, was charged with murdering the former chief, John Deventer, 65, who was shot while trying to help two elderly friends who had been set upon by robbers during a visit to a cemetery.


Bank Picks Agency, As Does Blockbuster
Two marketers have changed agencies on their accounts.
Blockbuster Entertainment in Fort Lauderdale, Fla., a unit of Viacom Inc., named Foote, Cone &amp; Belding in Chicago to handle the account of its Blockbuster Music retail chain, which had been handled by D'Arcy Masius Benton &amp; Bowles in St.
Louis for the last two years as part of the overall Blockbuster account.
The billings were estimated at $35 million.
Foote, Cone, part of True North Communications, was awarded the music stores account after a four-month review that was narrowed to that agency and the New York office of Young &amp; Rubicam Inc.


Mordechai Gur Is Dead at 65; Army Chief and Entebbe Planner
Deputy Defense Minister Mordechai Gur, a former army Chief of Staff and the general who led the capture of the Old City of Jerusalem in the 1967 Arab-Israeli war, killed himself today, weary of a long battle with cancer.
He was 65.
The Israeli police said Mr.
Gur had shot himself in the head with his pistol in the garden of his home in Tel Aviv.
He left a note saying he did not want to be a burden to his family.
Mr.
Gur had undergone cancer treatment in recent years, and although he continued working, he was visibly weakened by the disease.


Disarming Must Precede Irish Peace Talks; British Bad Faith
To the Editor:
Reports from Belfast (July 6, 7 and 9), following the freeing from prison by the British Government of Pvt.
Lee Clegg, carried allegations that Sinn Fein was behind the street disturbances after his release.
Such allegations are extremely serious in the context of the peace process.
They are also untrue.


No Headline
The ambitious Republican campaign to undo major environmental programs reaches full force this week on several fronts in both the House and Senate.
One of this year's most significant environmental votes is set for Monday evening, when Republicans will try to cut off debate in the Senate so they can force through a measure to change the way regulatory decisions are made.
The bill is sponsored by the majority leader, Senator Bob Dole.


Stephen Spender, Poet of Melancholic Vision and Social Conscience, Dies at 86
Sir Stephen Spender, the British poet, critic and novelist, died yesterday at St.
Mary's Hospital in London.
He was 86.
He had been taken to the hospital after collapsing at his home in north London, a spokesman for the hospital said.


4 Injured in Shootout in Upper Manhattan
Four men were injured, one seriously, in a shootout between two men in upper Manhattan last night, the police said.
The incident began when two men started shooting at each other shortly after 10:30 P.M., near Broadway and West 149th Street, said Officer Valerie St.
Rose, a police spokeswoman.
One of the two gunmen and three bystanders were struck by gunfire, Officer St.
Rose said.


Companies Use Web Hoping to Save Millions
The Internet's World Wide Web -- that great repository of data -- has yet to become that great market.
But right now a number of innovative service-oriented companies are using the Web not to make money but to save some -- and not nickels and dimes either, but possibly millions of dollars.
For companies ranging from overnight package deliverers to banks, the Web is the place to offer technology-savvy customers a new convenience: automated customer service.
In the process, these companies are finding that a Web site is a lot cheaper than operating customer phone banks.


Six Virtues, Enlightenment, Very Zen
At the beginning of her new work, "Paramita," Sun Ock Lee, a Korean-born choreographer, offers an invocation to Buddha with a throaty, roaring chant.
At the end, she and her five acolytes -- all women -- plunge into a percussive symphony, beating batons against a group of hanging drums.
Suspended above them, sculptured instruments -- part chimes, part mobiles -- move in the air.
Along the way, the women have occasionally sunk into stillness with meditative force and a man has painted calligraphic brush strokes on their bodies.
Another man whose martial-arts display seems to come from another world is nonetheless included in the choreographed bows taken at the close by the dancers and the musicians.


A Debate Over H.I.V. Testing of Newborns Raises a Congressman's Profile
In his 12 years in Congress, Representative Gary L. Ackerman, a Queens Democrat, has been known as much for his flamboyance as for his legislative record.
The plump and affable Mr.
Ackerman sports a white carnation boutonniere each day and lives on a houseboat on the Potomac River that he named the Unsinkable II (after the Unsinkable I sank).
While his colleagues walk or take the subway two blocks to the Capitol from the Rayburn House Office Building, Mr.
Ackerman cruises over in his Aunt Chachi's clunky 1966 Plymouth Valiant.
Before strolling into the House chamber to vote, he stops to give a security guard a crushing bear hug.


Helping Dreams Come True
Grants of $570,000 have been awarded to 20 arts organizations around the state by the Arts Challenge Fund, a group of 21 corporate and private foundations.
Among the groups receiving awards were the Nai-Ni Chen Dance Company in Fort Lee ($25,000), the Montclair Art Museum ($25,000) and the Stageworks Touring Company in Gloucester ($10,000).


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-7 IRAQ FREES AMERICANS  Two Americans who were imprisoned in Iraq for illegal entry were released in what American officials called an effort to win good will to persuade the United Nations to lift economic sanctions.
A1  FACING FRANCE'S WARTIME ROLE  President Jacques Chirac acknowledged France's responsibility for deporting thousands of Jews to Nazi death camps during the German occupation.
A1  TRAUMA IN BOSNIA  Refugees from the Muslim enclave the Serbs captured last week gave detailed accounts of the killing and rape of civilians.
A1  SERB FORCES MOVE IN  Bosnian Serb troops advanced to the edge of Zepa in a bid to capture the second of three United Nations "safe areas" in eastern Bosnia.
A6  GERMANY'S CAUTIOUS COMMITMENT  The legacy of World War II casts its shadow as Germany prepares to send warplanes over Bosnia to support United Nations forces.
A6  GOLD DIGGERS OF CHINA  A frenzied gold rush is under way across vast expanses of rural China, where newly wealthy "gold lords" are challenging state authority.
A1  China freed a prominent political dissident.
A4  CHURCH AND STATE IN POLAND  As Poland has worked over the last four years to write a new constitution, the Roman Catholic Church has become intimately involved in the process.
A3  World Bank seeks to help the poor start businesses.
A7  Melbourne Journal: Australians question ties to the Queen.
A2 National A8-11, B6 REVISING MEDICARE  House Republicans are drafting immense changes in Medicare, by imposing annual limits on spending and giving elderly people a choice of private health insurance plans as alternatives to the standard Federal program.
A1  G.O.P.
TACKLES ENVIRONMENT  The ambitious Republican campaign to undo major environmental programs reaches full force this week in the House and Senate.
A1  HEAT WAVE TAKES ITS TOLL  Wicked heat is being blamed for hundreds of deaths across the eastern half of the country.
In Chicago, refrigerated trucks store the overflow from the morgue.
A1  CHALLENGE TO A JURY  Most of the jurors in the trial of Susan Smith, who confessed to drowning her young sons, are friends or acquaintances of witnesses, but all say they can set aside their feelings and friendships.
A8  FOR SALE: A PIECE OF CAMELOT  Hammersmith Farm, the estate in Newport, R.I., where Jack and Jackie Kennedy held their wedding reception in 1953, is for sale.
A8  TRIAGE, BY THE NUMBERS  Financial pressures at Los Angeles County-University of Southern California Medical Center have prompted a debate over how many people the county will allow to go without proper medical care.
A9  REVISITING WHITEWATER AND WACO  Congressional Republicans will begin hearings on two sensitive issues for the Clinton Administration: the Whitewater affair and the assault on a sect near Waco, Tex.
A10  HEARINGS' PROPRIETY CHALLENGED  A Congressman asserted that the National Rifle Association was involved in preparing for hearings on the assault near Waco, Tex.
A10  A CALL TO MAKE AMENDS  A draft of a staff report to a Presidential panel urges compensation for people who became unwitting subjects of radiation experiments during the cold war.
A11  DEBATE AMONG BLACK JOURNALISTS  The impending execution of a former journalist has divided the National Association of Black Journalists, whose members are debating how, or whether, their organization should take a position.
B6 Metro Digest B1 11 DEATHS FROM HEAT WAVE  The steamy heat wave that scorched much of the Northeast with record-setting 100-degree temperatures killed at least 11 people in New York City, who died of heat-related causes such as hyperthermia and heat stroke.
A1  Arts/Entertainment C11-14  Julian Schnabel makes a film about Jean-Michel Basquiat.
C11  A new rock festival opens in clubs and on the Internet.
C11  Theater: "Two Boys in a Bed on a Cold Winter's Night." C13  Music: "Farewell My Concubine," at the Taipei Theater.
C12  Dance: Son Mu Ga.
C14  Books: "The Nightingale's Song," by Robert Timberg.
C13  Television: "Band of Gold."C11  "MTV News Unfiltered." B8  Obituaries B8-9  Sir Stephen Spender, British poet, critic, and essayist.
B8  Mordechai Gur, deputy Defense Minister of Israel.
B9  Edward F. Gray, former union official.
B9  Business Digest D1  Sports C1-9  Auto Racing: Jarrett wins Pocono 500 with nothing to spare.
C3  Baseball: Nomo is hard to hit and hard to know.
C1  Mets and Yanks win.
C5  Columns: Vecsey on Evert.
C2  On Baseball.
C5  Golf: Sorenstam makes U.S.
Women's Open her first victory.
C1  Nicklaus loses in playoff.
C9  Racing: A changed Saratoga.
C1  Sports People C7  Editorials/Op-Ed A12-13  Editorials  Bringing the murder rate down.
A worthy competitor.
James L. Greenfield: Asia.
Letters  Anthony Lewis: Lessons of disaster.
Bob Herbert: Tabloid troubles.
William Safire: News about Jews.
Alan Stone: Time to explain Waco.
Bridge B8 Chronicle B6 Crossword C12


For Infant Ears, a New, Early Test of Health That Takes Just a Minute to Do
Less than 9 hours old, Lisa had just passed an important test with flying colors, and her parents, Ruth and Richard Minkoff, could not have been more pleased.
"Now we know Lisa's as perfect as she looks," Mr.
Minkoff, a computer specialist from Forest Hills, said.


Old distinctions blur. Advertising on line now involves audience consent.
IN the beginning, magazine publishers viewed on-line publishing as a dubious experiment that was simply an electronic extension of their publications.
The formula was fairly simple: recycle the content, add some related information, set up a way for readers to make comments, and put it all on line.
That was last year.


Aquarium Gets a Bonus
The Campbell Soup Foundation has increased its contribution to the newly remodeled New Jersey State Aquarium, adding $100,000 to its initial donation of $500,000.
The foundation also pledged to give up to $150,000 more if the aquarium is able to lure additional visitors to its tanks, which used to specialize in New Jersey fish but now display more exotic breeds.
On Friday, the foundation presented its check to Governor Whitman, and she got a look on Friday at the aquarium's $3.75 million makeover.


History Catches Up With Sony Music
The king of pop has been dethroned by a cartoon princess.
And that's hardly good news for Sony Music Entertainment.
Only three weeks after the release of Michael Jackson's long anticipated new album, "HIStory" on Sony's Epic label, it has been bumped from the top of the charts by the soundtrack from "Pocahontas," the Disney animated film about the Indian princess who was the daughter of Powhatan.


Bridge
Far back in the mists of bridge history, it became the habit to lead king from an A-K combination, or from a K-Q combination.
This traditional treatment is still standard in many circles, but the ambiguity often creates problems for the leader's partner.
A slightly better method, long popular in Britain, is to lead the ace from an A-K holding, reserving the king for a K-Q combination.
However, there is still some ambiguity, for the lead of the ace may or may not indicate the king.


When Two Buildings Reached for the Sky
To the Editor:
Donald Trump made an understandable error (news article, July 12) in stating that 40 Wall Street once "was the tallest building in the world." Not quite.


IN PERFORMANCE: THEATER
A Tale of Suffering That Ends in Salvation  'La Vida Es Sueno' Repertorio Espanol
In the new Repertorio Espanol production of "La Vida Es Sueno" ("Life Is a Dream"), the director, Rene Buch, draws from this strange story a tempest of personal suffering and passion that could leave playgoers dazed.
But they might miss many of the magnificent lines by Pedro Calderon that have put this work at the center of Western philosophical discussion for generations: arguments about the moral triumph of personal responsibility over all received wisdom and authority.


Rookie Gets First Victory After 12 Years in Minors
Brewers 6, White Sox 1
Brian Givens, who pitched more than 1,000 innings and underwent five elbow operations during 12 seasons in the minors, earned his first major league victory yesterday, leading the host Milwaukee Brewers past the Chicago White Sox, 6-1.
Givens (1-2) gave up three hits in eight innings as the Brewers completed their first four-game sweep of the White Sox since July 1982.


No Headline
These dark hours forever sully our history and are an insult to our past and our traditions.
Yes, the criminal folly of the occupiers was seconded by the French, by the French state. -- PRESIDENT JACQUES CHIRAC at ceremonies marking the anniversary of the mass arrests of Jews in Paris. --  [ A1:4. ]


Once Again, Pantani Withstands the Climb
Marco Pantani does not wear the polka dot jersey of the best climber of the Tour de France, but he proved again today that he deserves the title.
Respect the man, not the uniform.
The Italian rider for the Carrera team followed his victory Wednesday at Alpe d'Huez, the last of two stages in the Alps, with a runaway triumph today at Guzet Neige, the first of three stages in the Pyrenees.


Compensation Urged For Radiation Tests
A draft report to a Presidential panel urges that the Federal Government compensate some of the thousands of people who were unwitting subjects of radiation experiments in the cold war and that the Government issue a blanket apology.


Nomo Hard to Hit Or Know
Hideo Nomo, rookie pitcher and sudden icon, sat before his locker thumbing through a Japanese paperback, headphones plugging his ears, and succeeded, once again, in sealing himself from the mounting frenzy around him.
Upstairs in Dodger Stadium, young men and small children in Nomo T-shirts and Nomo caps hurried past pockets of middle-aged Japanese tourists who hovered close to their tour guide, getting directions to their seats.
In this desultory baseball season, the personality of the moment is Nomo, who is the first Japanese pitcher in 30 years to pitch in the major leagues and who, in a scant two months, has forever destroyed the image of the male Asian athlete as a slight and polite young man who can win by smarts but never by strength.
The Dodgers may love Nomo for packing the house, and Japanese may adore him for showing what a local boy can do against the big leaguers.
But for Japanese-Americans like Brian Niiya, Nomo is the best thing to come along since Bruce Lee martial arts movies -- even if Nomo remains aloof.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Settlement Reached In Big Insurance Case  Merrill Lynch, Coopers &amp; Lybrand and a New York law firm have agreed to pay the state of Florida $100 million to settle charges involving the biggest insurance-company failure in the state's history.
Florida officials said that Merrill, the nation's largest brokerage house, will pay $45 million; Coopers &amp; Lybrand, the accounting firm, will pay $50 million, and the law firm of Shereff, Friedman, Hoffman &amp; Goodman, $5 million.  [ Page D2. ] Remaking Environmental Law  The drive by Republicans in Congress to change major environmental programs is expected to reach full force this week.
Tonight, Republican Senators will try to pass a measure that changes how regulatory decisions are made.
And a House committee is scheduled to vote tomorrow on cutting Environmental Protection Agency spending by one-third.  [ A1. ] Challenging an F.C.C.
Rule  A 25-year-old Federal Communications Commission rule that limits how much television programming the networks can broadcast at night is "a mistake going back as long as 10 years," Reed E. Hundt, the F.C.C. chairman, said.
Peter H. Lewis: On the Net.  [ D5. ] First, Obscurity.
Now, Success?
Bolt Beranek &amp; Newman designed the first modem, chose the @ symbol for electronic-mail addresses and built the computer network from which the Internet evolved.
Stuart Elliott: Advertising.  [ D9. ]


International Briefs; Smith New Court Soars On Talk of Takeover
Shares of Smith New Court P.L.C. recorded a new 52-week high yesterday as speculation grew that the company, Britain's largest independent stockbroker, would announce by Thursday that it has accepted a takeover bid.
Shares reached 538 pence ($8.58) before closing at 529 pence, up 13.
Smith New Court is in takeover talks with both Merrill Lynch &amp; Company and Commerzbank A.G. of Germany.


Travel Ports of America Inc. reports earnings for Year to Apr 30


Sports of The Times; There's Room For Son in Thurm's Den
THE widowed mother wished for her son to recall his father as a human being, not a baseball god.
That wasn't always easy, for the boy grew up with a videocassette player and a stack of highlight tapes.
One of Michael Munson's favorites was the 1978 American League playoffs, the home eighth inning of Game 3.
His father, the Yankees' scruffy catcher, caught hold of a Doug Bird pitch with a man on and his team trailing Whitey Herzog's Kansas City Royals by a run.
Thurman Munson was no Reggie Jackson, except on this day, when his right-handed swing produced a majestic drive to the bullpen in left-center field, sending the Yankee Stadium crowd into a frenzy and his team on its way to a 2-1 playoff edge and eventually a triumphant World Series.


U.S. Seeking Deal With Cuba to End a 26-Year Ban on Each Other's News Bureaus
The Clinton Administration plans to end a longstanding policy and allow American news organizations to establish news bureaus in Cuba, Administration officials said today.
After months of debate, Administration officials said they are finally close to announcing the move, which would also permit Cuban news organizations to establish bureaus in this country.


Baldor Electric Co. (BEZ,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jul 1


Slain Teen-Ager's Family Sues the Police
The family of a Brooklyn teen-ager shot to death in a struggle with a police officer while holding a pellet gun filed a lawsuit yesterday accusing the city of negligence and the Police Department of prejudice toward Asian-Americans.
The suit was filed in Federal Court in Brooklyn on what would have been the 17th birthday of Yong Xin Huang, who was shot in the head by Officer Steven Mizrahi on March 24 in the driveway of a home in Sheepshead Bay.


Round and Round Go the Racing Logos
Anyone can watch a Nascar Winston Cup race, like Sunday's Miller Genuine Draft Pocono 500, for the usual reasons: love of speed, anticipation of crashes, stirring comebacks, great drafting, or how to get a pit crew to come to your house and change your tires and spark plugs in 19.8 seconds.
But to me, the Pocono 500, like virtually any other race, is about corporate logos, a constant and remarkable parade of symbolic might visible to any viewer or fan.
Shameless, excessive, effective mercantilism!


Russell Corp.(RML,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jul 2


International Briefs; France Plans to Sell More State-Held Assets
The French Government will sell the aluminum maker Pechiney S.A., the shipping company Compagnie Generale Maritime and a further stake in the car maker Renault in the next wave of state asset sales, the Finance Ministry said yesterday.
Renault and Pechiney will be sold in public offerings, and Generale Maritime will be sold in a private transaction.
No sale dates were set.


Pataki Leads G.O.P. Surge In Campaign Contributions
Gov.
George E. Pataki raised $1 million in campaign contributions during his first six months in office -- an amount believed to be unprecedented for a new governor, according to campaign contribution reports made public today.
In the clearest sign of how the state's political landscape has changed in just one year, Mr.
Pataki and other Republican state leaders raised more than $4 million between January and early July -- almost triple what their Democratic counterparts raised during the same period, the records show.


U.S. to Investigate Whether Agents Attended Racist Event
Expressing outrage at the possibility that Federal firearms agents may have attended a country picnic with blatant racist and anti-Semitic themes, Treasury Secretary Robert E. Rubin today ordered two top officials to report to him on the matter within 120 days.
Mr.
Rubin said, "We condemn as totally abhorrent the participation of law-enforcement officials" in the activities at the event in Tennessee in May.
The annual weekend gathering, "The Good Ole Boys Roundup," was open to white law-enforcement officers and featured things like the sale of licenses to hunt blacks, who were repeatedly referred to by a racial epithet.


American Standard Cos.(ASD,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Muslim Refugees Slip Across Serb Lines
Some 3,000 to 4,000 Bosnian Muslims who were considered by United Nations officials to be missing after the fall of the Srebrenica enclave have made their way through enemy lines to Bosnian Government territory.
"We don't know for sure, but we estimate that about 3,000 people crossed last night," one relief official said today, while Kris Janowski, spokesman for the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, said some 4,000 people, including women, children and Bosnian Government troops, crossed some 30 miles through forests to safety.


Richardson Electronics Ltd. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


May Sarton, Poet, Novelist and Individualist, Dies at 83
May Sarton, poet, novelist and the strongest of individualists, died on Sunday at the York Hospital in York, Me., the town in which she had lived for many years.
She was a stoical figure in American culture, writing about love, solitude and the search for self-knowledge.
She was 83.
The cause of death was breast cancer, said Susan Sherman, a close friend and editor of her letters.


Inland Steel Industries(IAD,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Butler Manufacturing Co.  (BTLR,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


TRANSACTIONS
Auto Racing
CHARLOTTE MOTOR SPEEDWAY -- Named Jerry Gappens and Karen Woodruff co-public relations directors.
Baseball  American League  BALTIMORE ORIOLES -- Activated Kevin Brown, pitcher, from the 15-day disabled list.
Placed Chris Hoiles, catcher, on the 15-day disabled list.
BOSTON RED SOX -- Placed Reggie Jefferson, designated hitter, on the 15-day disabled list.
Recalled Mark Whiten, outfielder, from Pawtucket of the International League.
Signed Andy Yount, pitcher.
CALIFORNIA ANGELS -- Placed Shawn Boskie, pitcher, on the 15-day disabled list, retroactive to July 6.
CHICAGO WHITE SOX -- Recalled Matt Karschner, pitcher, from Nashville of the American Association.
CLEVELAND INDIANS -- Recalled Chad Ogea, pitcher, from Buffalo of the American Association.
Activated Dave Winfield, designated hitter, from the 15-day disabled list.
Optioned Alan Embree, pitcher, to Buffalo.
Designated Gregg Olson, pitcher, for assignment.
DETROIT TIGERS -- Placed Kevin Wickander pitcher, on the 15-day disabled list, retroactive to July 14.
Recalled Buddy Groom, pitcher, from Toledo of the International League.
MINNESOTA TWINS -- Activated Jerald Clark, outfielder, from the 15-day disabled list.
Sent Rich Robertson, pitcher, to Salt Lake City of the Pacific Coast League.
TEXAS RANGERS -- Purchased the contract of Steve Buechele, third baseman, from Oklahoma City of the American Association.
Sent Luis Ortiz, third baseman, to Oklahoma City.
TORONTO BLUE JAYS -- Signed Matthew Gourlay, Jonathan Herring and Chad Needle, pitchers, to one-year contracts.
Signed Jeffrey Maloney, shortstop, and Jeremi Rudolph, outfielder, and assigned them to the Blue Jays of the Gulf Coast League.
National League  PHILADELPHIA PHILLIES -- Activated Andy Van Slyke, outfielder, from the 15-day disabled list.
Placed Gary Varsho, outfielder, on the 15-day disabled list.
International League  OTTAWA LYNX -- Sent Tony Barron, outfielder, to Harrisburg of the Eastern League.
Eastern League  HARRISBURG SENATORS -- Placed Rod Henderson, pitcher, on the disabled list.
Football  National Football League  ARIZONA CARDINALS -- Signed Ed Cunningham, center, to a one-year contract, and Frank Sanders, wide receiver, and Sebastian Barrie, defensive tackle.
CHICAGO BEARS -- Signed Jeremy Lincoln, cornerback, to a three-year contract; Kevin Miniefield, defensive back, and Ryan Wetnight, tight end, to two-year contracts; and Mike Faulkerson, fullback, and Raymond Roberts, tight end.
CINCINNATI BENGALS -- Signed Melvin Tuten, offensive lineman, to three-year contract.
CLEVELAND BROWNS -- Released Reginald Jones, cornerback.
DALLAS COWBOYS -- Signed Dana Howard, linebacker.
Released Lincoln Coleman, running back.
GREEN BAY PACKERS -- Signed William Henderson, fullback; Jeff Miller, offensive tackle; and Jay Barker, quarterback.
NEW ORLEANS SAINTS -- Agreed to terms with Lorenzo Neal, fullback, on a one-year contract.
NEW YORK JETS -- Signed Kyle Brady, tight end, to a three-year contract.
PITTSBURGH STEELERS -- Signed Kordell Stewart, quarterback, to a four-year contract.
Agreed to terms with Brenden Stai, guard, and Lethon Flowers, cornerback.
ST. LOUIS RAMS -- Signed Zach Wiegert, offensive tackle, to a three-year contract.
SAN DIEGO CHARGERS -- Signed Ron Middleton, tight end; Don Sasa, defensive tackle; Preston Harrison and Chris Cowart, linebackers; Troy Sienkiewicz, offensive tackle; and Omar Ellison and Brandon Harrison, wide receivers.
Agreed to terms with Aaron Hayden, running back.
SAN FRANCISCO 49ERS -- Signed Elvis Grbac, quarterback; Adam Walker, running back; Tim Hanshaw, guard; and Antonio Armstrong and Dave Hoffman, linebackers.
SEATTLE SEAHAWKS -- Signed Christian Fauria, tight end, and Jason Kyle, linebacker, to three-year contracts.
Signed Orlando Watters, defensive back; Bob Spitluski, linebacker; and Michael McCrary, defensive end.
Agreed to terms with Eddie Goines, wide receiver, on a two-year contract.
Waived Beno Bryant, running back, and Bill Hitchcock, guard.
Canadian Football League  CALGARY STAMPEDERS -- Signed Anthony McClanahan, linebacker.
OTTAWA ROUGH RIDERS -- Named Stephen Jones director of business development.
WINNIPEG BLUE BOMBERS -- Agreed to terms with Blaise Bryant, running back.
Hockey  National Hockey League  CALGARY FLAMES -- Named Pierre Page coach.
DALLAS STARS -- Signed Mike Kennedy, left wing, to a one-year contract.
ST.
LOUIS BLUES -- Named Jim Pappin director of pro personnel.
International Hockey League  CHICAGO WOLVES -- Signed Rob Brown, right wing.
Colonial Hockey League  FLINT GENERALS -- Signed Kevin Kerr, right wing-assistant coach, to a two-year contract.
Roller Hockey International  ORLANDO ROLLERGATORS -- Traded Dmitri Alekhin, defenseman, to Detroit for Kyle Reeves, right wing.
Soccer  Continental Indoor Soccer League  SAN JOSE GRIZZLIES -- Signed Chris Afarian, forward-midfielder.
College
METRO ATLANTIC ATHLETIC CONFERENCE -- Named Karin Torchia director of championships.
MID-AMERICAN CONFERENCE -- Named Kelly Groddy assistant commissioner for sports programs and championships and Paul Palian director of marketing.
CAMPBELL -- Named Chip Smith baseball coach.
CATAWBA -- Named Richard Kent assistant football coach and defensive coordinator.
COLGATE -- Named Ron Rohn women's interim basketball coach.
CREIGHTON -- Announced the resignation of Bob Warming, men's soccer coach, to become athletic director at Furman.
Named Ira Philson women's soccer coach.
KEAN -- Announced the resignation of Craig Spencer, wrestling coach.
LSU -- Named Jim Schwanke assistant baseball coach.
METHODIST -- Named Karen Gray women's golf coach and assistant director of the school's pro golf management program.
PALM BEACH ATLANTIC -- Named Randy Lee men's assistant basketball coach.
REDLANDS -- Named Mickey McAulay, assistant athletic director and women's basketball coach, acting athletic director.
TAMPA -- Named Terry Rupp baseball coach.
TRENTON STATE -- Named Steve Dolan men's and women's track and cross-country coach.
TULANE -- Signed Kevin White, athletic director, to a five-year contract extension.
WESTERN CAROLINA -- Named Thad Matta and Orlando Early men's assistant basketball coaches.


Medical Errors Bring Calls For Change
A FEW hours after the chief neurosurgeon at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center in New York City operated on the wrong side of a patient's brain on May 26, hospital officials knew he had made a horrendous error.
The doctor had operated on the healthy part of the brain after looking at another patient's X-rays.
Two weeks later, on June 10, after an initial inquiry, the cancer center suspended the doctor, Ehud Arbit, from his surgical and administrative duties.
On June 21, and only in response to a reporter's inquiries, the hospital publicly acknowledged the error.
People going into hospitals expect to be made better, not worse.
Yet a large number of preventable errors occur in the nation's hospitals, and the mechanisms for quality control are not firmly enforced.
Critics say that the main hospital accrediting agency, the Joint Commission on Accreditation of Healthcare Organizations in Oakbrook Terrace, Ill., is an unaggressive watchdog that announces most of its visits in advance and rarely bites anyone hard enough to leave a mark.


Geon Co.(GON,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


CHRONICLE
New York's Lieutenant Governor, ELIZABETH P. McCAUGHEY, a Republican, has called off her engagement to WILBUR L. ROSS JR., a wealthy Wall Street investment banker and a Democrat, The Associated Press reported yesterday.
"I am no longer engaged to be married," Ms.
McCaughey said in a telephone interview.
"It's a very personal decision, and it was made obviously after considerable thought. We'll remain friends."


Orangina Chooses Wunderman Cato
Orangina USA, which is owned by Groupe Pernod Ricard in Paris, said yesterday that it had selected Wunderman Cato Johnson in New York to handle strategic, creative and media assignments including the general advertising account, which were previously handled by various agencies on a project-by-project basis.
The billings were estimated at $3 million to $5 million.
Wunderman Cato, the direct-response unit of Young &amp; Rubicam Inc., was chosen after a two-month review that was narrowed to that agency and three undisclosed shops.


Witness Says Abortion Doctor Neglected Patient Who Died
On the first day of testimony in the trial of a Queens doctor accused of murdering a patient who died after a failed abortion, a prosecution witness described the doctor as a greedy man who ignored the patient for more than an hour as she bled to death in his storefront clinic.
The witness, Maria Cabrera, 22, of Jackson Heights, Queens, was working as a receptionist at the clinic, Metro Women's Center, in Corona, Queens, when Guadalupe Negron died there on July 9, 1993.
Yesterday, she told prosecutors in State Supreme Court in Jamaica, Queens, that her boss, Dr.
David Benjamin, knew that Ms.
Negron was about 20 weeks pregnant, not 13 weeks, as his lawyers have maintained.


Juan Manuel Fangio, 84, Racer Who Captured 5 World Titles
Juan Manuel Fangio, the Argentine who was the first great race driver of the postwar era, died yesterday morning in Buenos Aires.
He was 84.
Fangio, the sport's only five-time world champion since the modern Formula One series began in 1950, died at a hospital where he was admitted last Friday after contracting pneumonia, said Marcelo Gaffoglio, who represented Fangio in the United States.
He had been suffering from kidney failure for several months, Gaffoglio said.


Crab Warnings Are Ignored
Warnings of unsafe dioxin levels in blue crabs caught in Newark Bay have not stopped people from catching them, eating them and selling them, a scientist said yesterday at a meeting sponsored by the Coast Alliance, an environmental group.
Angela Cristini, a biology professor at Ramapo College, said she recently saw hundreds of people in a Bayonne waterfront park crabbing, The Associated Press reported.
For years, officials have issued warnings about blue crabs, which feed on animals that absorb dioxin from contaminated sediment.
TERRY PRISTIN


Bates Is Added To Coca-Cola Roster
The Coca-Cola Company has further broadened its agency roster by awarding Bates Indonesia in Jakarta its account there, which was previously handled by Grafik McCann-Erickson in Jakarta.
The billings were not disclosed.


John Nuveen Co.(JNC,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Newark School Chief 'Appalled'
Dr.
Beverly L. Hall started her first day as the state-appointed Superintendent for the troubled Newark school district by inspecting three schools yesterday.
She said she found conditions worse than any she had experienced during 25 years as a teacher and administrator in New York City.  [ Page A1. ]


It's a Wash As Yankees Tie Chicago In the Rain
Don Mattingly's line drive soared through the pouring rain toward the left-field bleachers last night.
Soaring with the wet baseball were the Yankees' hopes that Mattingly would carry them to a victory.
Forget it.
Although the ball glanced off David Martinez's glove for a double, Mattingly was left stranded on second base after the game was called a few minutes later in the bottom of the seventh inning because of rain.
The Yankees and White Sox played to a 1-1 tie and so the game will be replayed entirely today as part of a doubleheader beginning at 4:05 P.M.


Steel Technologies Inc.(STTX,NNM) reports earnings for 3d qtr to June 30


Wabash National (WNC,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


A Festival Undeterred by Rain
The annual Aix-en-Provence summer music festival opened punctually at 9:15 P.M. one evening early last week, but not as planned.
A thunderstorm suddenly emptied the outdoor courtyard at the Archbishop's Palace of audience and orchestra alike, leaving Louis Erlo, the festival's longtime director, staring angrily at the sky.
It was not a good omen.
Last year, France's oldest music festival barely escaped closing, able to offer only eight performances of a single opera.
This year, for its vaunted "rebirth," the festival scheduled three operas to be performed six times each.
And now the opening night looked certain to be canceled.


Flames Turn to Page
PIERRE PAGE, the former coach of the Minnesota North Stars and Quebec Nordiques, was hired yesterday as coach of the Calgary Flames.
He signed a multiyear contract and becomes and Flames' fifth coach in five seasons.
He inherits a club that failed to get past the first round of the playoffs for the sixth straight year.


Myers Industries(MYE,A) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Perelman Wins Victory in Delaware in Technicolor Purchase Suit
The Delaware Supreme Court, whose decisions on business law are closely watched by corporate lawyers and directors across the country, handed the New York financier Ronald O. Perelman a sweeping victory yesterday in a case stemming from his 1983 acquisition of Technicolor Inc., a deal that laid the foundation for his fortune.
The court upheld a decision by the Delaware Court of Chancery that Mr.
Perelman's deal for Technicolor was "entirely fair" to the company's shareholders.


Sidus Systems reports earnings for 2d qtr to May 31


TRAVELERS GROUP INC. (TRV,N)
The Travelers Group Inc. surprised analysts yesterday by reporting second-quarter profits that were well above Wall Street expectations.
The earnings were driven by strong gains at the company's Smith Barney brokerage unit and solid performances by its other businesses.
The insurance and financial services company said net income for the quarter climbed nearly 27 percent, to $405.9 million, or $1.22 a share, from $320.5 million, or 93 cents a share, in the second quarter of 1994.


Sheriff Says Prayer and a Lie Led Susan Smith to Confess
Nine days after the big lie, the one that had people across the nation praying for the lives of her children, Susan Smith bowed her head in a church gymnasium, took the hands of the county sheriff and confessed to God and man.
The Union County Sheriff, Howard Wells, who held her and prayed with her that afternoon of Nov. 3, told a hushed courtroom today how he had tricked Mrs.
Smith into a confession with a small lie of his own.


CPC International Inc.(CPC,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Finning Ltd. reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Pointing Up Bach's Virtues
Contrary to popular misconceptions, Johann Sebastian Bach was not a fuddy-duddy out of touch with his time; nor was he some servile functionary with no ego.
Making these points was one of the accomplishments of the superb period-instrument musicians from Aston Magna, a festival ensemble based in the Berkshires, in their concert on Sunday evening at the air-conditioned Corpus Christi Church.
The performance of Bach's Sonata in E major for Flute and Basso Continuo, written late in his life, demonstrated that the old master was well aware, thank you, of what was going on around him.
The music has a minimum of complex counterpoint and a prevalence of tune-and-accompaniment texture, then the rage.
The clarity was enhanced by the use of a crystalline fortepiano instead of a harpsichord.
We now know that Bach was so taken with this emerging instrument that he became the Leipzig sales representative for a fortepiano maker.


A Top Officer Is Leaving Bear Stearns
One of Wall Street's best-paid executives, John C. Sites Jr., an executive vice president and director of the Bear Stearns Companies, resigned yesterday, saying he wanted to devote more time to his family and to charity work.
Mr.
Sites, 43, who was earning more than $14 million a year, built up Wall Street's largest mortgage-backed securities business for Bear, Stearns &amp; Company, the company's brokerage unit, and was a co-head of the firm's taxable fixed-income group.


A Vote to Trim School Day And Allow Larger Classes
Saying they have few places left to cut, members of the Board of Education yesterday endorsed a plan by Schools Chancellor Ramon C. Cortines to allow local school districts to shorten the school day and increase class size for some elementary school students as a way to save money.
The proposals were widely criticized by Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani, the school unions and parent groups as harmful to children.
But board members said that, faced with the latest budget cut of $250 million by the city, they had no choice but to give superintendents the flexibility to increase class size in first, second and third grades to 27, from 25, and to reduce the number of hours of weekly instruction in elementary schools to 26 hours, from 27 and a half.


First Interstate Bancorp (I,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Kollmorgen Corp.(KOL,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Moore Medical Corp.(MMD,A) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jul 1


Those Wonder Years Don't Start Before 60
NEW PASSAGES Mapping Your Life Across Time By Gail Sheehy 498 pages. Random House. $25.


Noland Co. reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Westinghouse Is Said to Be Discussing a Takeover of CBS
The Westinghouse Electric Company has indicated to the chairman of CBS, Laurence A. Tisch, that it is interested in buying the company for about $80 a share, or about $5 billion in cash, two people with knowledge of the talks said yesterday.
Shares of CBS surged yesterday after Dan Dorfman said on the CNBC financial news cable channel that Westinghouse was planning to offer $83 a share for CBS.
The stock closed up $4.125, or 6 percent, at $69.75, on a trading volume more than three times its daily average during the last three months.
Both CBS and Westinghouse declined to comment on the report.


TNT Freightways Corp.(TNTF,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jul 1


Northern Trust Corp.(NTRS,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Sealright Co.(SRCO,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Teradyne Inc.(TER,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jul 2


The Hardest Hole in Golf
This is the hardest hole in major championship golf, 461 yards of sheer misery.
It has brought strong men to their knees, put weak men on their backs and brought tears to the eyes of many a British Open pretender.
This is the Road Hole, the 17th at the Old Course at St.
Andrews.
It is a par-4 graveyard, a pitiless stretch of bumpy ground, cavernous bunkers and high weeds.
And that's the easy part.
Miss the drive to the right, toward the Old Course Hotel, and it's out of bounds.
A wayward second shot is on the road to the right, or in the Road Hole bunker to the left, a deep hole that resembles a grass-bricked prison cell minus the bars.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article yesterday about a group created to provide loans to the poor in developing countries omitted its name, and referred incompletely to the involvement of the World Bank.
The new organization is the Consultative Group to Assist the Poorest.
It is nominally independent but will have its headquarters at the World Bank; the bank is its most prominent donor.


Corrections
An article in Business Day on July 1 about the announced sale of a 50 percent stake in Bolivia's state-owned electricity company to three United States companies referred incorrectly to the ownership of one company, Energy Initiatives Inc.
It is a subsidiary of the General Public Utilities Corporation, not independent.


Q&amp;A
Tiny Bubbles
Q.  How do they get all that shaving cream into an aerosol can?


Officials Shift Their Tactics On Housing
Frustrated by high costs, community opposition and an inability to find public housing sites in white neighborhoods, city and Federal officials have all but abandoned an effort to build any new public housing in New York City.
Instead, the Federal Government will allow the city to spend $230 million earmarked for new housing to rehabilitate existing units.


Swift Transportation Co. reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Home Port in New York
To the Editor:
Bruce Rosen is incorrect (letter, July 12) in stating that "Not a single major marine . . . company any longer calls New York City home." McAllister is one of the largest tugboat companies in the United States.
Its headquarters are in Manhattan; it has been based in New York since 1864.
BRIAN A. McALLISTER  Chairman, McAllister Brothers Inc.
New York, July 13, 1995


Jefferson Smurfit Corp.(JJSC,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Progress in Turnpike Talks
Signaling progress in their negotiations, officials of the New Jersey Turnpike Authority and its toll collectors' union backed away yesterday from a threatened court showdown.
Local 194 of the International Federation of Professional and Technical Engineers dropped plans to ask Judge J. Norris Harding of Superior Court in New Brunswick to lift the order he issued on July 3 that ended the collectors' eight-hour strike, and the turnpike authority temporarily set aside plans to seek fines to offset the loss of about $500,000 in toll revenue.


Boston Subway Cars Crash, Injuring 32 and Closing Line
A subway trolley car rammed into another that was stopped at a platform here this morning, injuring 32 people and halting service on one subway line through the evening rush.
No one was killed, but the driver of one car was critically injured.
A spokeswoman for the Massachusetts Bay Transit Authority, which runs the subway, said the cause of the crash was unknown.


Lost Japanese Sub With 2 Tons of Axis Gold Found on Floor of Atlantic
LONGER than a football field, the Japanese submarine I-52 was carrying more than two tons of gold and hundreds of tons of other metals and raw materials to the Nazi war machine when she was sighted on June 23, 1944, by allied forces in the Atlantic.
An American bomber swept out of the midnight sky and dropped a torpedo.
The pilot, listening to undersea sounds radioed by acoustic buoys, heard an explosion and a metallic groan as the submarine lost air and sank with more than 100 men.
Debris found floating the next day included fragments of silk and a Japanese sandal.
For half a century the warship lay hidden in the depths of the Atlantic.
No diver, submersible or robot ever uncovered her grave, the exact location of which was a mystery.


Key Returns To Dugout as Adviser Only
Jimmy Key talked about the future and the past, about pitching again and not pitching again and about pitching like the old Jimmy Key and pitching like an impostor.
A shoulder injury that the Yankees realized last year could get worse is preventing Key from throwing another changeup this season and is forcing him to think and think some more.
Sporting a fresh three-inch scar where his left rotator cuff had been repaired on July 5, Key returned to the Yankees' clubhouse for the first time yesterday since having surgery and Manager Buck Showalter immediately tried to insert him into the rotation.
Not really.
Showalter could only dream that Key will return.
It surely will not be before next spring training, if at all.


Ex-Paratrooper Drilled a Company Into Sale Shape
When Albert J. Dunlap took the podium with Wayne R. Sanders at a Manhattan news conference yesterday to announce the $7 billion merger of the Scott Paper Company and the Kimberly-Clark Corporation, one analyst, speaking sotto voce, dubbed them "the odd couple."
Indeed, the 48-year-old Mr.
Sanders, the chairman and chief executive of Kimberly, was precise, tall, blond and deliberate, quite a contrast to the stocky, graying Mr.
Dunlap, who at 57 still looks every inch the tough-talking former paratrooper who dropped into Scott Paper 15 months ago.


When Contenders Climb, Cyclist Hopes to Be There
Big Mig has goals, such as winning his fifth successive Tour de France.
So does Little Mig, such as completing the three-week race and maybe, just maybe, crossing a finish line in the mountains with the main group.
Big Mig is Miguel Indurain, the Spaniard who rides for the Banesto team and wears the overall leader's yellow jersey.
Little Mig is Miguel Arroyo, the Mexican who rides for the Chazal team and wears the Chazal jersey.
Guess who was closer to fulfilling his goals today, a day off for the riders?


Repair of Bridge Is Planned
Some travelers headed out of Manhattan on the George Washington Bridge can expect delays for the next three months beginning late Friday, when three of the four westbound lanes on the upper level will be closed for repaving, the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey said yesterday.
Work will go on Monday through Thursday from 9 P.M. to 6 A.M., and between 11:59 P.M.
Friday and 6 A.M.
Saturday.
Workers will clear the roadway after each shift to reopen the lanes.


Guerlain Is Seeking To Unify Its Image
Guerlain S.A., the fragrance and cosmetics company that markets brands like Shalimar, said yesterday that it was seeking to unify its image by consolidating the creative portion of its worldwide account, now handled by various agencies including Weiss, Whitten, Stagliano in New York.
Though the billings were not disclosed, Adweek estimated they could reach as much as $100 million by 1997.


Tyranny of 10
Why do Asian students do better in mathematics than American students, finishing first in international exams while Americans aren't even close?
Over the years, the question has received many different answers, and now yet another has emerged.
Not long ago, Albert Shanker, president of the American Federation of Teachers, cited an article in a London weekly, the Times Educational Supplement, which blamed the English language.
The article suggested that the reason Asian students do better is that their languages more clearly reflect the structure of our common 10-based number system.


With Hollywood Money, Trust Someone Under 30
Nearly 10 years ago, Michael DeLuca, in his senior year at New York University, dropped out to take a full-time job at the Manhattan office of New Line Cinema.
He never graduated.
"I was shy only four credits," Mr.
DeLuca said the other afternoon.
"I called N.Y.U. recently and asked them if I could get my degree. Given everything that's happened since I left college, they said O.K." He grinned.
"I'm getting my diploma next month."


Goodrich (B.F.) Co. (GR,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


CHRONICLE
The torch is passed: since 1978, PAT BUCKLEY has been chairwoman of the Metropolitan Museum of Art Costume Institute benefit, a linchpin of the New York social season.
This year, the event, a black-tie dinner and dance on Dec. 4, will be headed by two stalwarts of the benefit world, ANNA WINTOUR, the editor in chief of Vogue magazine, and ANNETTE DE LA RENTA, the vice chairwoman of the museum's board, along with a relative newcomer, CLARISSA BRONFMAN, the wife of Edgar O. Bronfman Jr., the president and chief executive of Seagram's, which recently bought 80 percent of MCA, the entertainment conglomerate.
Ms.
Wintour said yesterday that she was only too happy to welcome Mrs.
Bronfman, 33, aboard.
"Clarissa is a stunning young woman who obviously loves fashion," she said.
"She is stunning looking, loves clothes, wears Leger and Armani and looks fabulous. With her recent marriage to Edgar, this was the event she felt was right for her. Bringing in a new and attractive presence can bring in a whole new cast of characters."


BUSINESS DIGEST
Koreans Buying Zenith, Last American TV Maker The last American-owned television manufacturer, Zenith Electronics, gave up its battle to survive on its own and agreed to sell a controlling interest to LG Electronics, the South Korean manufacturer that sells products under the Goldstar name.
LG said it would pay $10 a share, or more than $350 million, to lift its Zenith stake to 57.7 percent from 3.8 percent.  [ Page A1. ] Westinghouse Shows Interest In $5 Billion Bid for CBS  Westinghouse Electric has indicated to Laurence A. Tisch, chairman of CBS, that it is interested in buying the company for about $80 a share, or $5 billion in cash, two people with knowledge of the talks said.
Although Mr.
Tisch has repeatedly said CBS is not for sale, he is still believed to be willing to accept at least $80 a share.  [ D4. ] Nasdaq Index Breaks 1,000  A surge in technology stocks lifted the Nasdaq composite index 6.57 points, to 1,005.89, the first time it has closed above 1,000.
That is the smallest advance since a rise of three-tenths of 1 percent in December 1994.
They were right, but for many it turned out to be a losing bet.
Yesterday's offer was below Scott's recent trading level.
Market Place.  [ D10. ] Astronomers Cite Mobile Phones  The European Science Foundation warned that if the multibillion-dollar mobile telephone industry continued to expand without safeguards, radio astronomy would be swamped by a sea of radio interference.  [ C10. ]


Hutchinson Technology Inc.(HTCH,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 25


Boise Cascade Corp.(BCC,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


U.S. Sees French Plan Taking It to War's Brink
Senior American military officials have concluded that a French plan to mount an aggressive defense of besieged enclaves in Bosnia would bring the United States and its allies to the brink of war with the Bosnian Serbs.
American commanders said they could agree to fly thousands of French troops to besieged Muslim enclaves only if gunship escorts blasted Bosnian Serb air defenses and NATO warplanes hunted Bosnian targets at will, without the United Nations approval they now require.


By Design; Cool, Easy Whites
White made a somewhat surprising but effective appearance in many fall collections, so it seems destined for year-round wear.
Nothing looks better in the summer than white, especially at night.
One can look dressed up at a casual dinner in white pants with a lacy sweater, a crisp shirt or a sheer tunic.
There are plenty of choices for dressier evenings.
Norma Kamali has a group of satin separates that are summery enough for July but tailored enough to make the transition to fall.
Bloomingdale's has Ms.
Kamali's fitted four-button jacket ($315) and soft trousers ($175).
Saks Fifth Avenue has her one-button satin blazer ($305) and matching slim skirt ($165).
Saks also has a double-breasted satin blazer by DKNY ($365) and a crepe jacket in a 1940's fitted style by Parallel ($278).


Reporter's Notebook; Commuters Hop Trains and Hold Breath
Henry Posner's neat beige suit and pressed blue shirt belied his inner turmoil as he strode toward Track 33.
He had missed the early train home and had one more chance to get back to Yonkers before his daughter's day-care center closed -- the 5:14 P.M.
"If I don't pick her up by 6, she's out on the street," Mr.
Posner said.
Echoing sentiments expressed by a variety of commuters in the crisscrossing streams flowing home through Grand Central Terminal last night, Mr.
Posner said he did not appreciate the possibility that the northward rush of trains might screech to a halt at any moment.


Arts Phase-Out Stays on Course in House
Advancing toward a vote that would end all Federal financing for the national endowments for the arts and the humanities in two years, the House of Representatives tonight turned aside efforts both to extend that time frame and to shorten it.
After four hours of debate, Republicans and Democrats agreed to continue talking tonight on about a dozen amendments but to delay a vote on them and the final bill until Tuesday.
But members left little doubt that the final outcome would be to adhere to a decision reached last week to finance the endowments at $99.5 million a year for 1996 and 1997 and then cut off all Federal money.


Harry Guardino, 69, an Actor In Romantic and Gangster Roles
Harry Guardino, the tough-talking actor who supported himself by working at odd jobs before establishing a career in movies and television and on the stage, died yesterday at Desert Hospital in Palm Springs, Calif.
He was 69.
The cause was lung cancer, said Lee Snellings, Riverside County's supervising deputy coroner.


Rockwell International Corp.(ROK,N) reports earnings for 3d qtr to Jun 30


United Cos. Financial Corp.(UCFC,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Observer; How the Going Got Bad
Good manners are breaking down on the Internet.
Rudeness, even savage insults filling the E-mail.
Assorted species of porn flourishing.
The good fellowship of the nerds poisoned, souring into the bad fellowship of the electronic jungle.
It makes me glad I resisted when everybody was saying it was the future, and the train was leaving the station, or the rocket was leaving the pad, or the bauds were leaving the modem, or whatever, and not being on it would leave you stranded.


Mugunga Journal; A Refugee Camp Hums With the Spirit of Home
In the haze of cooking fires, crowded roads and back-to-back thatch huts, "Chez JoJo -- Hotel -- Bar -- Boutique" sticks out pristine white, bigger than almost any other structure here, except perhaps the huge tanks that provide clean drinking water to this sprawling refugee camp.
Its large rectangular frame is covered with a white plastic tarpaulin stamped across the roof with the blue emblem of the United Nations refugee agency.
And it even has a front patio, its dirt floor swept clean and separated from the noisy, dirty road by another piece of tarpaulin, this one cut in thin long strips.


Dole Food Co. (DOL,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 17


International Briefs; Commerzbank U.S. Deal
Commerzbank A.G., Germany's third-largest bank, said yesterday that it planned to buy a 60 percent stake in Boston-based Martingale Asset Management L.P.
Financial terms were not disclosed.
The bank plans to raise its stake in Martingale to 70 percent by 1998.
Martingale's current management will be retained and will own the remaining stake. (Dow Jones)


Jumping the Age Barrier


Belmont's Reviews Are Mixed
Belmont Park ended its 57-day spring-summer season yesterday and the massive move to Saratoga for five and a half weeks in the country started.
But racing will begin upstate on Friday with the same uncertain business trends of the past few years: Attendance and betting at the track continue to slip, while betting away from the track continues to gain.
Depending on how you looked at it, business was either booming or shrinking at Belmont.
And the New York Racing Association chose boom over bust.


Vote on Regulatory Powers Thwarted
Senate Democrats, struggling to preserve Federal regulatory powers against a bill that would sharply limit them, turned aside a Republican effort to cut off debate tonight and force a vote on the measure.
The vote set the stage for an intense tug of war between the sponsor of the bill, Senator Bob Dole of Kansas, the Republican leader, and hisDemocratic opponents.
The Democrats seek fundamental changes in the bill, especially in provisions that reopen existing regulations to review and that provide new avenues for industry to appeal costly environmental, health and safety regulations.
Mr.
Dole and his allies, including some conservative Democrats, will seek to win enough Democratic votes to pass the bill without altering the measure too much.


Fashion That Hasn't a Clue
There is a reason couture draws so many retailers, who don't buy it.
There is a reason the showings of men's wear draw so many women's magazine fashion editors, who don't feature it.
There is a reason every major fashion magazine attends couture, while so few have readers who can afford it.
It is because those collections have usually offered clues for the next women's ready-to-wear season.


Corrections
An article in Business Day yesterday about a strike against the joint operating company that prints The Detroit Free Press and The Detroit News referred incorrectly to the status of 2,800 newspaper carriers, whom the company wants to make independent contractors.
They are independent carriers; they are not represented by a striking union, the Teamsters.
The union opposes the company's plan, saying that a number of district managers, who supervise the carriers and are members of the union, would lose their jobs as a result.
The article also misstated the share of profits each newspaper receives under the joint operating agreement.
It is 50 percent; The Detroit News does not receive 60 percent.


Clues on Faltering Memory in Aging
People lose their ability to memorize and recognize new things as they grow older, and researchers say this appears to be due to an age-related decrease in activity in certain areas of the brain.
Tests measuring blood flow to areas of the brain while people perform memory tasks indicate that younger people exhibit more activity in different areas of the brain when encoding new information than do elderly people.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-7  FRANCE ISOLATED ON BOSNIA  France's effort to get its allies to join in using military force to stop Serbian attacks on Muslim enclaves in Bosnia is being undermined by British reluctance to go to war and American hesitancy in the face of European division.
A1  American military officials see a risk of war with the Serbs.
A7  Muslims missing after Srebrenica's fall made their way to safety.
A7  LESSONS FROM JAPAN'S SCHOOLS  As Americans dissatisfied with their own educational system look at alternatives, Japanese schools stand out for their discipline, safety and training in the basics.
A1  GINGRICH TAKES ON THE WORLD  The Speaker of the House who captivated much of Congress and the country with his domestic politics is having trouble making sense of foreign policy issues he did not have to consider before.
A1  END OF AMERICAN TV MAKERS  Zenith Electronics, the last American-owned television manufacturer, has given up its battle to survive on its own, agreeing to sell a controlling interest to a South Korean industrial giant.
A1  FRIENDLY PERSUASION  Representative Bill Richardson, the New Mexico Democrat who helped free two Americans held in Iraq, has become an unofficial emissary working to extricate fellow citizens from trouble.
A3  OPENING CUBA TO U.S.
MEDIA  The Clinton Administration plans to drop the longstanding ban on American news organizations establishing bureaus in Cuba.
A6  Mugunga Journal: Refugee camp in Zaire is a Rwandan transplant.
A4  National A8-10, D23  JACKSON'S ROLE IN '96  Jesse Jackson, who says that he has registered millions of Democratic voters, more than anyone else, has emerged as the President's most nettlesome election problem.
A1  SMITH CONFESSION REVEALED  A county sheriff in South Carolina testified at the murder trial of Susan Smith how with the help of a small lie he got her to confess to the killing of her two sons.
A1  SUBWAY WRECK IN BOSTON  A Boston subway car rammed into another that was stopped at a platform, injuring 32 people and halting service on one subway line through the evening rush.
A8  SIMPSON FITNESS TAPE VIEWED  Prosecutors played portions of an exercise video O.J.
Simpson made two weeks before Nicole Simpson and Ronald Goldman were killed, seeking to show that he was physically capable of killing.
A8  INQUIRY ON AGENTS' PICNIC  Expressing outrage at the possibility that Federal firearms agents may have attended a picnic with blatant racist and anti-Semitic themes, the Treasury Secretary ordered an investigation.
A10  DRUGS CALLED TOP THREAT  A survey said American adolescents see drugs as the greatest problem they face -- far outranking their concern about crime, social pressure, grades or sex.
A8  VENUE CHANGE SOUGHT IN BOMBING  Timothy McVeigh, one of two suspects arrested in the Oklahoma City bombing, should not be tried in Oklahoma, his lawyer said.
A8  HEAT TOLL RISES  Chicago's official death toll from the recent heat wave increased, but hundreds of bodies were yet to be examined.
A10  FLOOR FIGHT ON ARTS MONEY  House Republicans opened the final floor fight over Government aid to the arts and humanities.
D23  Capitol Sketchbook: Democrats rallied in the arts fight.
D23  DELAY ON REGULATION CURBS  Senate Democrats, struggling to preserve Federal regulatory powers, turned aside a Republican effort to cut off debate and force a vote on the issue.
D23  Official portraits of George and Barbara Bush were unveiled.
A10  Metro Digest B1  SOME COMMUTERS AVOID TRAINS  With unions and management still locked in a standoff on the first weekday after a strike deadline, the Metro-North Commuter Railroad ran on schedule, but one-third of the riders, fearful of being stranded, stayed away from the trains.
A1  Business Digest D1  Science Times C1-12  Range of hormone replacements under study for the elderly.
C1  Military science finds Japanese treasure submarine.
C1  What can be done about medical errors?
Accreditation at issue.
C1  Fashion Page B8  Arts/Entertainment C13-22  A festival unafraid of rain.
C13  "Jazz in July" returns.
C13  New Line's production chief.
C13  Music: Aston Magna.
C14  Dance: From Pilobolus.
C16  Books: "New Passages." C22  Television: MTV's bottom-line formula.
C22  Sports B9-14  Obituaries B6-7  Editorials/Op-Ed A12-13  Editorials  Old questions, new hearings.
Mr.
Chirac honors the truth.
A Pathmark for Queens.
Letters  Russell Baker: How the going got bad.
Robert Kagan: The risk of U.S. inaction.
John Allen Paulos: Tyranny of 10.
Orrin G. Hatch and John Kyl: Stop the regulation machines.
Chronicle B2  Chess C11  Crossword C22


Teco Energy Inc.(TE,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Why Such Resentment of Public Employees?
To the Editor:
Perhaps I am not alone among readers of New York City news media in failing to understand the increasing enmity expressed toward municipal workers and their unions.
In "The Bond Rating Can't Be Ignored" (Op-Ed, July 12), Ester R. Fuchs calls on Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani to "reduce wages and benefits of municipal employees."


Adolescents Say Drugs Are Biggest Worry
American adolescents overwhelmingly see drugs as the greatest problem they face, far outranking crime, social pressure, grades or sex, according to a survey released yesterday by the Center on Addiction and Substance Abuse at Columbia University.
Thirty-two percent of the young people aged 12 to 17 who were surveyed named drugs as the greatest problem for people their age, more than double those who mentioned crime in school, the next most common worry.


New York City Toll Is Increased to 14
The death toll in New York City from the recent heat wave rose to 14 yesterday as city medical officials attributed 3 more deaths to the record-breaking heat.
Ellen Borakove, a spokeswoman for the city's Medical Examiner, said autopsies yesterday revealed that 3 more people had died of heat-related causes like hyperthermia and heatstroke during the weekend, in addition to the 11 cases already identified.


Couples Is a Question Mark
Now that Fred Couples has withdrawn from this week's British Open because of recurring back problems, he can expect a call from Lanny Wadkins.
Wadkins, the captain of the United States team for this year's Ryder Cup matches, said he wants to find out just how bad Couples's back problems are, and whether he should consider Couples for a spot on the team.
The first 10 places on the roster are earned on a points basis, but the captains of each team can fill two more at-large berths with golfers of their choice.
The matches will take place Sept. 22-24 at the Oak Hill Country Club in Rochester, N.Y.


Corrections
An article yesterday about the scheduled execution of a former radio news reporter in Pennsylvania referred incorrectly in some editions to a columnist for The Philadelphia Inquirer who believes the National Association of Black Journalists should be supporting the condemned man.
He is Acel Moore, not Axel Moore.


Prosecutors Play Simpson Exercise Tape, Seeking to Show His Physical Ability
Prosecutors today began playing portions of an exercise video O. J. Simpson made two weeks before Nicole Brown Simpson and Ronald L. Goldman were slain, seeking to show that anyone lithe enough to perform exercises akin, as Mr.
Simpson can be heard to say on the sound track, to "doing the Watusi" was also capable of killing.
As outtakes from the video were played, Mr.
Simpson's voice, breathless but jocular and resolute, resonated throughout Judge Lance A. Ito's courtroom for the first time in five months, when a very different Mr.
Simpson could be heard on the tape of a 911 call made by his former wife.
The jurors watched raptly as Mr.
Simpson, an exercise coach and others went through their cardiovascular paces, running in place and doing pushups and body bends.


Thomas Industries(TII,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Novellus Systems Inc.(NVLS,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


NBD Bancorp (NBD,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Mosinee Paper Corp.(MOSI,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


MTV's Low-Cost Way of Business
Talk is cheap.
And increasingly so is television talent.
Talk shows have long been luring pathetic souls, eager to spill their guts in a national forum, with little more reward than a limousine ride from the airport, and not necessarily round trip.
Then came "reality" shows, offering everything from cops on the beat to what is billed as America's funniest videos.
In effect, reality equals cheap talent.
These formats don't have to deal with actors demanding bigger salaries as the show climbs the ratings charts.
Who needs the ego trips of a David Caruso?
Get nobodies for virtually nothing, and today's bottom line salivates.


An Exploration of Interaction? Or Noble Savagery?
Pilobolus Dance Theater has fully regained its old air of intimacy and collaboration this season.
And that spirit breathed extra life into "Pyramid of the Moon," an intriguing new duet presented on Friday night at the Joyce Theater.
Set to atmospheric music by Patrick Smith, "Pyramid of the Moon" was choreographed in typical Pilobolus fashion by two of the company's four directors and early dancers, Alison Chase and Michael Tracy, and the performers of the piece, Adam Battelstein and John-Mario Sevilla.
In the piece, Mr.
Battelstein is dressed in a formal frock coat, shirt, tie and pants.
Mr.
Sevilla, who enters perched on Mr.
Battelstein's shoulders, wears only an abbreviated dance belt.
The next few moments are taken up with each man climbing down and up the other's body.


Stop the Regulation Machine
President Clinton has said that the efforts in Congress to change the way Federal regulations are made "would let polluters delay and sometimes even control the rules that affect them." Such scare tactics have clouded real debate about how to whittle away the excesses of bureaucracy without sacrificing public health and safety.
In the Senate, the proposal sponsored by Bob Dole, the majority leader, would simply make sure that agencies undertake cost-benefit and risk-assessment studies so that the regulations the Government adopts are sensible -- that they save lives and protect the environment without imposing needless costs on business and the consumer.


179 Dead in Chicago Heat Wave As National Toll Reaches 360
The confirmed death toll exacted by a brief but brutal heat wave here increased to 179 victims today, but hundreds of bodies were yet to be examined.
Edmund Donoghue, the Medical Examiner for Cook County, estimated that the total number of deaths caused by the heat could reach 300 or more.
The heat wave, which began last Wednesday with a temperature of 97 and peaked at 106 on Thursday, was finally breaking.
Temperatures fell to the mid-80's today, with cooler weather expected for Tuesday.


FlightSafety International Inc.(FSI,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


KLLM Transport Services Inc.(KLLM,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


ValuJet Airlines Inc.(VJET,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Two Teen-Agers Arrested in Carjacking Involving Rap Star
Two teen-agers were arrested yesterday and charged with trying to murder the boyfriend of the rap star Queen Latifah and stealing her BMW in a carjacking Sunday in Harlem, the authorities said.
Queen Latifah, who has often denounced violence in her lyrics, yesterday identified the two suspects, Ricardo Rodriguez, 18, of Edgemere, Queens, and Rashin Fortune, 16, of Bedford-Stuyvesant, Brooklyn, in a lineup at the 28th Precinct station house in Harlem, the police said.


Richmond Approves Monument to Ashe
The Richmond City Council voted early today to enshrine the tennis pioneer Arthur Ashe on his hometown's grandest boulevard, rebuffing complaints from both blacks and whites that the statue did not belong among the bronze Confederate generals that now line the avenue.
The city's Planning Commission had voted last month to place a 24-foot likeness of Mr.
Ashe on Monument Avenue, where five memorials honor heroes of Dixie.
But the City Council intervened after hundreds of calls of opposition.


First Chicago Corp.(FNB,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Of Computer Language
THERE are those among us who speak a different language, which only resembles English.
Of course, language changes, and many speakers and writers who communicate with large audiences are reluctant to change their language as rapidly as their language itself changes.
Tuesday's fashionable word or phrase may become Thursday's 23 Skiddoo.
No one disputes that the word "computer" now refers to a device, not a person who computes, calculates, or reckons, as it once did.
These days, a computist (another old word) might well hack, a word that has evolved in a decade or two.


CHRONICLE
He'll be just one of the guys, for the weekend at least.
House Speaker NEWT GINGRICH is set to attend the annual Bohemian Grove men-only retreat, which began on Saturday in Monte Rio, Calif., The Associated Press reported.
The Speaker will be a few days late.
His office said yesterday that he would arrive on Friday at the secretive gathering at which, on its busiest days, some 2,000 men gather to eat camp food and put on shows (some of them reportedly in drag), listen to speakers and bond on a 2,700-acre compound near the Russian River in Monte Rio.


National City Corp.(NCC,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


U.S. Bancorp (USBC,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Simpson Industries(SMPS,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Microsoft Has Strong Profit For Quarter
After its shares had closed at an all-time high yesterday, the Microsoft Corporation reported revenues and earnings for the quarter that were stronger than expected.
The stock jumped $5.375, or 5 percent, to $109, in heavy Nasdaq trading following the company's confirmation late Friday that it had sent its often-delayed Windows 95 operating system to manufacturing plants.


Let's Define Prayer Before We Debate It
To the Editor:
As I read the President's memorandum on religious expression in schools (text, July 13), it appears to me that it is hardly possible to reach an agreement in our society or even to know what the real issue is, without giving a clear definition of "prayer" and "religion." Both words are often misinterpreted and in most contexts, including the President's speech, used in an undifferentiated, ambiguous manner.


Teleflex Inc.(TFX,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 25


Old Questions, New Hearings
When the matter now known as Whitewater first arose during the 1992 Presidential campaign, candidate Bill Clinton called it no big deal.
But he and his staff, in the campaign and later at the White House, stonewalled on the details that would have revealed whether he and Mrs.
Clinton were telling the truth about their finances.
Today's renewed Senate hearings on Whitewater are the bitter fruit of those original evasions.
For reasons known but to them, the Clintons have offered tricky answers that brought confusion rather than clarity to their land deals with a high-rolling Arkansas banker and campaign supporter named Jim McDougal.


Qualcomm Inc.(QCOM,NNM) reports earnings for 3d qtr to Jun 25


How a Flat Tax Can Be Middle-Class Friendly
To the Editor:
In "The Gephardt Tax Plan" (editorial, July 11) you argue that pending major Republican plans for tax restructuring "twist the code against middle- and low-income families." And in "The 10% Solution" (Op-Ed, July 13) the House Democratic leader, Richard A. Gephardt, makes the same argument, claiming a flat tax "would raise taxes for everyone who earns less than $200,000 and cut them for all earning more than that." This is not so.


Last U.S. TV Maker Will Sell Control to Koreans
In the early 1950's, more than 90 American companies made television sets.
Today, the last American-owned television manufacturer, the Zenith Electronics Corporation, gave up its battle to survive on its own and agreed to sell a controlling interest to a South Korean industrial giant.
LG Electronics Inc., the South Korean manufacturer whose products sell under the Goldstar name, announced with Zenith that it would lift its stake in that company to 57.7 percent from the current 3.8 percent.
It will gain control by paying $10 a share, or more than $350 million, for a combination of newly issued and existing Zenith common stock.


U.S. Aids Bolivia in Trampling Rights
To the Editor:
"Defying U.S. Threat, Bolivians Plant More Coca" (news article, July 11) fails to mention one critical aspect of the United States role in that country: its deep and direct involvement in human rights abuses.


A Reunion at the White House


How a Flat Tax Can Be Middle-Class Friendly; At Expense of States
To the Editor:
"The Gephardt Tax Plan" (editorial, July 11) hedges by concluding much of the plan "should be scrapped," while applauding its "proving" that the Federal tax base can be progressively broadened while lowering rates for everyone.


Nationsbank Corp.(NB,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


To Our Readers
Beginning today, The Times is revising its tables of company earnings to accommodate the quarterly financial results of more companies more promptly.
To increase the number of quarterly reports, the tables will omit cumulative sixth-month and nine-month results, which include historical data already reported.
In a company's fourth quarter, the tables will continue to list the annual financial results.


Pentair Inc.(PNTA,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Cavalier Homes (CAV,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


L.A. Gear Inc.(LA,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr May 31


Lee Enterprises (LEE,N) reports earnings for 3d qtr to Jun 30


Castle (A.M.) (CAS,A) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Ridership Falls As Metro-North Keeps Running
With unions and management still locked in a standoff on the first weekday after a strike deadline, the Metro-North Commuter Railroad ran on schedule yesterday, but one-third of the riders, fearful they could be stranded at any moment, stayed away from the trains.
During the day, 17 of the railroad's unions and its management agreed to resume negotiations -- which on Sunday had broken off -- at 10 A.M. today.
But with the unions still refusing to rule out a strike or a slowdown, the uncertainty that plagued commuters yesterday seemed likely to hang over them again today.


Chase Manhattan Corp.(CMB,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


British Punish Hurdler
British track officials, angry that COLIN JACKSON pulled out of an event here Saturday only to compete elsewhere the next day, yesterday left the world-champion hurdler off the team for next month's world championhips in Sweden.
The British Athletic Federation, however, said Jackson could be reinstated if he proves his "competitive fitness" in time for the Aug. 4-13 championships in Goteborg.


Battling Anorexia, and Worrying About Who Will Pay the Bills
AT just 14, Angie Melnyk has been dieting furiously for two years.
If she doesn't learn to start eating again, she could die.
Two weeks ago, she was admitted to Schneider's Children's Hospital here for the second time, emaciated, starved and dehydrated.
She weighs 82 pounds.
At 5 foot 6, doctors say she should weigh 128.


Store Project In Queens Has Backing In Council
Despite opposition from some neighborhood merchants, several members of a key City Council subcommittee yesterday said they would support plans to construct a 65,000-square-foot Pathmark supermarket in Springfield Gardens, Queens.
After hours of testimony in a packed Council chamber from residents, religious leaders, politicians and others, Council leaders said a vote on the issue would be put off until today.
But the statements of support from several Council members suggested that it would be difficult for opponents to derail the plan, which has deeply divided the middle-class Queens community.


Formality vs. Beasts at Play
Order and disorder were the subtexts when the summer series Dances for Wave Hill opened on Wednesday at the lush environmental center in the Bronx.
There was a sense of neat formal elegance to "Distant Voices," created by Aspassia Yaga, Daniel Tai and their choreographic cooperative, Kipos, to music by Glen Velez and Enzo Rao.
But the five dancers in Victoria Marks's "Slow Maple Round," danced to music by Guy Klusevcek, could have been cheerful beasts at play in the wilds.
Facing out over the Hudson River and waiting for "Distant Voices" to begin, one gradually became aware of a woman sitting with her back to the audience in one of the center's handsome Adirondack chairs.
One body lay on a nearby stone bench, another on a balustrade.
Suddenly the piece began, but behind the audience, as a dancer oozed and twisted through a rooted solo that gave her the look of a bit of garden statuary.


New Conversion Spin: Military Contractor Really Rocks
Kevin Falvey is the archetype of cool.
He spent 15 years playing keyboards for Joe Cocker.
His boots are still pointy-toed and black, and he looks like a man who would curl up and die if forced to wear a tie.
But his latest gig has a new twist: he gets to know Pentagon secrets.
At Sonalysts Studios, it's all in a day's work.
Sonalysts (pronounced SAHN-ah-lists), a submarine technology company founded in the early 1970's to exploit the intricacies of zero-tolerance underwater acoustics, is trying to mix top secret with Top 40.


Japan's Schools: Safe, Clean, Not Much Fun
It is the end of a school day, and Hiroyo Ikoma is laughing in the junior high bathroom, doing what 12-year-old girls in Japan normally do with their classmates at this time.
She's scrubbing the floors.


METRO DIGEST
METRO-NORTH THREAT DISSUADES RIDERS With unions and management still locked in a standoff on the first weekday after a strike deadline, the Metro-North Commuter Railroad ran on schedule.
But one-third of the riders, fearful they could be stranded at any moment, stayed away from the trains.  [ A1. ]
Commuters in the crisscrossing streams flowing home through Grand Central Terminal did not appreciate the possibility that the northward rush of trains might screech to a halt at any moment.
Reporter's Notebook.  [ B4. ] NEW YORK CITY  2 ARE ARRESTED IN CARJACKING OF RAPPER Two teen-agers were arrested and charged with trying to murder the boyfriend of the rap star Queen Latifah and stealing her BMW in a carjacking Sunday in Harlem, the authorities said.
Queen Latifah, who has often denounced violence in her lyrics, identified the two suspects in a lineup at the 28th Precinct station house in Harlem and later told reporters: "It's just stupid. It's just stupid."  [ B3. ] SIGNIFICANT GAIN FOR PATHMARK PLAN Despite opposition from some merchants, several members of an important City Council subcommittee said they would support plans to construct a 65,000-square-foot Pathmark supermarket in Springfield Gardens, Queens.
[ B2. ] REGION  NEW YORK G.O.P.
HAULS IN CASH Governor Pataki raised $1 million in campaign contributions during his first six months in office -- an amount believed to be unprecedented for a new governor, according to campaign contribution reports.  [ B5. ] BATTLING ANOREXIA AND THE INSURER At just 14, Angie Melnyk has been dieting furiously for two years.
If she doesn't learn to start eating again, she could die.
Two weeks ago, she was admitted to Schneider's Children's Hospital in New Hyde Park, L.I., for the second time, emaciated, starved and dehydrated.
She weighs 82 pounds.
Our Towns by Evelyn Nieves.  [ B5. ] NEW NEWARK SCHOOL CHIEF IS 'APPALLED' Dr.
Beverly L. Hall started her first day as the state-appointed Superintendent for the troubled Newark school district by inspecting three schools.
She said she found conditions worse than she ever experienced during 25 years working as a teacher and administrator in New York City.
"I was really appalled by what I saw," said Dr.
Hall, who stepped down as the No. 2 administrator in the New York City system to take the Newark post.  [ B4. ] Chronicle B2


No Trial for Pippen
Domestic battery charges against the Chicago Bulls star SCOTTIE PIPPEN were dropped yesterday after his former fiancee failed to appear for the trial.
Pippen, 29, was charged May 19 with two misdemeanor counts of domestic battery after his then-fiancee, YVETTE DeLEONE, told the police that Pippen had grabbed her arm and shoved her against a vehicle during a quarrel outside Pippen's suburban Chicago home.


Woman Who Was C.I.A. Chief Requests Criminal Investigation
A former Central Intelligence Agency station chief who won a settlement of sexual harassment charges has asked the Justice Department to open a criminal investigation of C.I.A. investigators who depicted her as a promiscuous drunkard.
The former station chief, 54-year-old Janine Brookner, said the charges brought against her by agency officials were "predicated on perjury" by C.I.A. officers.
Some of the charges were repeated in court papers filed when the agency tried to defend itself against Ms.
Brookner's lawsuit.


Buyout Offer For Legent Is Extended
Locked in negotiations with the Justice Department, Computer Associates International extended its $1.74 billion tender offer for Legent Corporation for a second time yesterday.
The offer, which was set to expire at midnight last night, was extended 48 hours, until midnight on Thursday.
The extension gives Computer Associates and the Justice Department more time to try to reach a settlement regarding the Government's concerns that Computer Associates' acquisition of Legent would enable the company to monopolize certain lines of computer software for mainframe computers.


Carlisle Cos. (CSL,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Equifax Inc.(EFX,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Yankees, White Sox Sing Pitching Blues
When Nardi Contreras arrived as the Yankees' new pitching coach the other day, he did not bring any 20-game winners with him.
He has none hidden in his equipment bag or stashed in his locker.
In fact, the coaches' room at Yankee Stadium is so small it doesn't even have room for equipment bags.
Lockers it has -- seven of them -- but they aren't big enough to hide a 20-game winner either.
The coaches' room has a small shower stall, but no established starting pitcher was sighted ducking behind the plastic curtain last night.


Blue Cross Changes Birth Policy
The state's largest provider of medical insurance announced a new policy yesterday that is designed to discourage Caesarean deliveries.
Blue Cross and Blue Shield of New Jersey said that from now on, Caesarean and vaginal deliveries will be reimbursed at the same rate.


Dana Corp.(DCN,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Sterling Electronics Corp.(SEC,N) reports earnings for 1st qtr to Jun 30


INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS: From Debacle to Desirable; Canary Wharf Is No Longer the Outcast of London
Paul Reichmann might have been forgiven if he never again visited Canary Wharf, the giant office building complex that he started on an isolated east London site eight years ago.
After all, the project had gone spectacularly bust in 1992 just after opening, helping bring down his Toronto-based company, Olympia &amp; York Developments, and costing him and his family billions of dollars.
But there was Mr.
Reichmann one day this past spring, inspecting Canary Wharf's 10 buildings and surveying the crowds that work in them.
At his shoulder was Laurence A. Tisch, chairman of CBS and one of the world's leading investors.
What they saw must have impressed them, because within weeks Mr.
Reichmann, with financial backing from Mr.
Tisch and others, was bidding to buy Canary Wharf back from the 11 British, American, Canadian and other banks that seized it three years ago.


Chess
It is a good idea to follow the example of the great players -- but not when they bluster.
After the Professional Chess Association's world champion, Gary Kasparov of Russia, lost a critical game to the French grandmaster Joel Lautier in mid-May, he blurted out that he forgot to play a move that would have won for him.
There were many players who were dubious about Kasparov's suggested replacement move, but one of his admirers, the Swedish grandmaster Jonny Hector, enthusiastically copied it anyway.
Hector also got zapped, even worse than his hero.
He was playing the newest English grandmaster, Matthew Sadler, in the Malmo International Tournament in Sweden in early June and he tried to show that his hero was right all along, that White's gambit should win.
The trouble was that Sadler had critically studied the Kasparov-Lautier game and decided that the champion had been only posturing, and that Black should win.
When they met in Round 8, Sadler scored a punishing victory.


Market Place; Man bites dog on Wall Street: a takeover stock's price falls.
TAKEOVER speculators have been piling into the Scott Paper Company's stock for weeks, betting that the Kimberly-Clark Corporation or a rival paper maker would make a play for Scott.
They were right, but for many of them it turned out to be a losing bet.
Yesterday's formal announcement of the widely rumored acquisition came at a price less than the level at which Scott shares traded for much of the last three weeks.


Radio Astronomers See Mobile Phone Threat
ASTRONOMERS say that if the multibillion-dollar mobile telephone industry continues to expand without safeguards, radio astronomy will be swamped by a sea of radio interference.
The warning was issued this month by the European Science Foundation from its headquarters at Strasbourg, France.


Cambrex Corp.(CBM,A) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Guardsman Products Inc.(GPI,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Patterns
Centralizing at Bally
Bally, the Swiss luxury-goods maker, is centralizing its design and promotions in an attempt to regain its cachet with affluent baby boomers in search of classic design.
The move is calculated to end the sort of local product development and marketing that helped make Bally's suede boots and signature sneakers the footwear of choice among Jamaican reggae stars.


DISUNITY IMPERILS FRENCH PROPOSAL FOR BOSNIA FORCE
France's effort to get its allies to join in using military force to stop further Serbian attacks on Muslim enclaves in Bosnia is foundering on British reluctance to go to war there and American hesitancy in the face of European division, American and European officials said today.
One French official described the round of diplomatic and military consultations held since President Jacques Chirac made his proposal for tougher action last week as "a failure" so far.


Regal-Beloit Corp.(RBC,A) reports earnings for 2d qtr to June 30


Dover Corp.(DOV,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Metro-North to Sacrifice Rider Comfort in Strike
To the Editor:
Metro-North management, instead of using the mediation tools available to keep trains running, is opting for misery on wheels for commuters.


Archer-Daniels-Midland Co.  (ADM,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Jun 30


Accounts
*
The billings were not disclosed.


People
*
Mary Ann Quick has rejoined the Leo Burnett Co., Chicago, in the new position of executive vice president, with global creative responsibilities.
She was previously chief creative officer at Bayer Bess Vanderwarker, Chicago; before that she was a senior vice president and group creative director at Burnett.
At Bayer Bess, Gary Bayer, chairman and chief executive, will assume Ms.
Quick's duties.


Trinity Industries(TRN,N) reports earnings for 1st qtr to Jun 30


New Star Scores Home Runs for the Democrats
Bill Richardson crossed his legs, and Saddam Hussein walked out of the room.
The Congressman from New Mexico had unwittingly insulted the Iraqi President with his body language.
He had shown his sole, an offensive gesture in some Arab cultures, and started off his negotiations to free two jailed Americans in Baghdad on the wrong foot.
"The vibes didn't connect early on," Mr.
Richardson said today in an interview from Amman, Jordan.
But the Iraqi leader soon returned, and "at the end he was starting to smile. It ended up being a warm meeting."


Islanders Ponder Future at Mini-Camp
General Manager Don Maloney and the Islanders' new head coach, Mike Milbury, sat poolside with 16 new players at the Radisson Hotel this afternoon and plunged right to the point.
"There are legitimately six guys here that could make this team, maybe more," said Maloney, speaking at a news conference.
"I don't think that's an exaggeration at all."


School Chief In Newark Is 'Appalled' At Problems
Dr.
Beverly L. Hall started her first day as the state-appointed Superintendent for the troubled Newark school district by inspecting three schools today.
She said she found conditions worse than she had ever experienced during 25 years as a teacher and administrator in New York City.
"I was really appalled by what I saw," said Dr.
Hall, who stepped down as the No. 2 administrator in the New York City system to take the post of acting superintendent here for at least one year.
"I have run schools in districts that are very similar to the districts in Newark. Never would you see the conditions that I saw today."


Weighing Run, Jesse Jackson Shrugs Off His Party's Label
Between stops at two churches, the headquarters of his Operation PUSH, Army and Lou's Restaurant on the South Side and, finally, his home in the shady Jackson Park neighborhood, Jesse Jackson guided the conversation back to his labors for the Democratic Party.
Never shy about claiming credit, Mr.
Jackson boasted that he had registered millions of Democratic voters, more than anyone else.
He also asserted that his efforts won back the Senate for the Democrats in 1986 and were instrumental in putting Bill Clinton in the White House six years later.


Roosevelt Financial (RFED,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


COMPANY BRIEFS
EQUIFAX INC., Atlanta, a consumer information service company, announced the acquisition of Infocheck Group, Britain, a provider of commercial on-line information, for undisclosed terms.
H.
J.
HEINZ CO., Pittsburgh, increased its shares in Kecskemeti Konzervgyar R.T., Kecskemet, Hungary, a food processor, from 48.5 percent to 97 percent, with the rest in the hands of local municipalities.
Financial terms were not disclosed.


Haight Street as Memory Lane
IT is probably safe to say that Haight-Ashbury in the 60's (for Windows and Macintosh, about $30) is the first multimedia production to come packaged in its own "collectible stash box." It is also safe to say that excerpts will not appear in a William Bennett CD-ROM of Virtues.
In the 1960's, the Haight-Ashbury district in San Francisco was the antithesis of everything the establishment saw as virtuous.
The heads in the Haight promoted sex, drugs, rock music and a libertinism that outsiders saw as threatening the very foundations of society but that insiders deemed the pathway to a higher consciousness.
This two-disk set, produced by Rockument Inc. and available in stores or by calling (800) 261-6109, illuminates the era with the fuzziness of a lava lamp.


Vallen Corp.(VALN,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Semi-Tech Corp. reports earnings for Year to Mar 31


Subways and Streets Are Flooded by Heavy Thundershowers
Heavy thunderstorms moving slowly across the New York City area last night and early this morning caused severe flooding that stopped subway service on at least seven lines, closed streets and highways and disrupted traffic throughout the metropolitan region.
The National Weather Service said that between two and three inches of rain fell between 11 P.M. and early this morning from a band of storms that rolled across northern New Jersey and New York City and through the western part of Long Island.


Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corp.(FRE,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Paternity Tests Unsully Wild Reputation of Faithful Gray Seal
HOW fitting that in the 1990's -- when "family values" is no longer a buzzword but a mandate, and adolescents march on Washington to publicly pronounce that they will remain virgins until marriage, and bitter terms like "shame" and "illegitimacy" have been retrieved from their Victorian tin and given broad airing -- biologists have discovered evidence of animal fidelity where they least expected it.
By all predictions, the gray seal, found throughout the North Atlantic, should be a classically polygynous mammal, a species founded on the principle of a harem.
Males haul themselves up onto breeding beaches where females abound and fight viciously to form a dominance hierarchy, the biggest, nastiest sandkickers monopolizing the greatest number of females.
Though under constant threat of overthrow by lesser bulls, the alpha males presumably get their payoff in siring the most pups.


Nolan Next for Sabres?
The Buffalo Sabres have called a news conference for this morning, presumably to announce that the Hartford Whalers assistant TED NOLAN will be named head coach.
Sabres officials have refused to discuss details of the news conference, but The Buffalo News reported last weekend that Nolan met with General Manager JOHN MUCKLER and has agreed to a contract.


Universal Health Services Inc.(UHS,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


The Schooling of Gingrich, The Foreign Policy Novice
Newt Gingrich created a storm the other day by saying the United States should recognize Taiwan as a free and independent country.
The Chinese ominously declared that they would not sit idly by in the face of such threats to world peace.


Lone Star Technologies Inc. reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Blending Bengali Style With Skips and Leaps
Ananda Shankar and His Troupe upheld family traditions on Sunday afternoon at the Colden Center of Queens College in Flushing.
Mr.
Shankar, a composer, is the son of two distinguished Indian dancers, Uday Shankar and Amala Shankar, and the nephew of the sitar virtuoso Ravi Shankar.
Uday Shankar, from the 1920's until his death in 1977, choreographed works that concerned modern life as well as Indian history and religion.


Snap-On Inc.(SNA,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to July 1


Somewhere Between Irony and Identification
"You keep telling me I'll have to change," Warren Zevon sang at Irving Plaza on Friday night.
"Baby, that would take a miracle." He wasn't exaggerating.
Since the 1970's, Mr.
Zevon has been writing and performing songs that constantly revisit the same territory.
His music is staunch and midtempo, with terse but memorable tunes carried by march rhythms, modal drones and twanging three-chord rock.
The words perch between irony and identification in sardonic tales of con men and mercenaries, bunkered paranoids and spurned lovers.
As his characters bounce from Sri Lanka to Monte Carlo, Johannesburg to Palestine, they leave behind carnage and deadpan wisecracks.


Kysor Industrial Corp.(KZ,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Pfizer Inc.(PFE,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jul 2


EMC Corp.(EMC,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr Jul 1


National Westminster Bancorp (NW,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.75
8.75
7.25
DISCOUNT RATE
5.25
5.25
3.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
5.75
5.68
4.23
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.46
5.41
4.31
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.40
5.35
4.71
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.22
6.15
7.18
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.67
6.60
7.50
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.56
7.48
8.29
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.05
6.08
6.39
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Corrections
An article yesterday about the making of "Build a Fort, Set It on Fire," a film based on the life of the artist Jean-Michel Basquiat, described the Basquiat paintings in the film incorrectly.
They are copies, not originals.


Scripps (E.W.) Co.(SSP,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


G.O.P. 'Wanted' Poster
To the Editor:
The Republican Party's "Wanted" poster for political opponents who happen to be predominantly black, women and Jews deliberately feeds the fires of racism, sexism and hate (editorial, July 12).


Temple-Inland Inc.(TIN,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


McVeigh's Lawyer Says He'll Try to Get Trial Moved From Oklahoma
Timothy J. McVeigh, one of two suspects arrested in the bombing of the Federal Building here, should not stand trial in Oklahoma, his lawyer, Stephen Jones, said in an interview today.
Mr.
Jones said that he would ask for a new location for the trial after Mr.
McVeigh was indicted and that he hoped to meet with the United States Attorney tomorrow to talk about other possible sites.


School Cuts Endorsed
Saying they have few places left to save money, members of the New York City Board of Education yesterday endorsed a plan by Schools Chancellor Ramon C. Cortines to allow local school districts to shorten the school day and to increase class size for some elementary school students.


Stephen Spender, Poet of Melancholic Vision and Social Conscience, Dies at 86
Sir Stephen Spender, the British poet, critic and novelist, died on Sunday at St.
Mary's Hospital in London.
He was 86.
He had been taken to the hospital after collapsing at his home in north London, a spokesman for the hospital said.


Haemonetics Corp.(HAE,N) reports earnings for 1st qtr to Jul 1


Mr. Chirac Honors the Truth
France's tricolor flag waves more proudly this week following President Jacques Chirac's acknowledgment that his country bore heavy responsibility for deporting tens of thousands of Jews to Nazi death camps during World War II.
That admission required the passage of more than half a century and the transfer of power from a conflicted and partially compromised wartime generation to younger political leaders.
Despite the delay, the admission is welcome.


Executive Changes
GERARD KLAUER MATTISON &amp; CO., New York, named Barry Willman director of research.
MELVILLE CORP., Rye, N.Y., named Gary Crittenden senior vice president and chief financial officer.
READER'S DIGEST ASSOCIATION INC., New York, said that James P. Schadt, its president and chief executive, had been named to the additional position of chairman, succeeding George V. Grune, who will step down Aug. 1.


INSIDE
Big Deal in Diapers and Paper
Kimberly-Clark, the maker of Huggies diapers and Kleenex tissues, has agreed to buy Scott Paper for $7 billion, creating a strong challenger to Procter &amp; Gamble.
Page D1.
Sunken Wartime Gold Found
Using advanced gear, a maritime researcher has found a sunken Japanese submarine carrying two tons of gold.
Science Times, page C1.
Racing Champion Dies
Juan Manuel Fangio, who was the first great race driver of the postwar era -- a five-time world champion in Formula One -- died yesterday in Buenos Aires.
He was 84.


Chess
It is a good idea to follow the example of the great players -- but not when they bluster.
After the Professional Chess Association's world champion, Gary Kasparov of Russia, lost a critical game to the French grandmaster Joel Lautier in mid-May, he blurted out that he forgot to play a move that would have won for him.
There were many players who were dubious about Kasparov's suggested replacement move, but one of his admirers, the Swedish grandmaster Jonny Hector, enthusiastically copied it anyway.
Hector also got zapped, even worse than his hero.
He was playing the newest English grandmaster, Matthew Sadler, in the Malmo International Tournament in Sweden in early June and he tried to show that his hero was right all along, that White's gambit should win.
The trouble was that Sadler had critically studied the Kasparov-Lautier game and decided that the champion had been only posturing, and that Black should win.
When they met in Round 8, Sadler scored a punishing victory.


New Head for Medical Board
Dr.
Robert L. Johnson, an expert in adolescent medicine at the University of Medicine and Dentistry in New Jersey, has been elected president of the State Board of Medical Examiners, the Attorney General's office announced yesterday.
The board has final authority to accept or reject findings of the Office of Administrative Law, which makes the initial determination of how a complaint against a doctor should be handled.
Last year, disciplinary action by the board included 38 license suspensions and 19 revocations, said Mark S. Herr, director of the State Division of Consumer Affairs.


Lands' End makes a midsummer foray into marketing.
CHRISTMAS in July?
In this heat, not a chance.
Yet it's beginning to look a lot like a certain day in December as Lands' End Inc., the mail-order catalogue giant, undertakes its first midsummer campaign and its largest devoted to a single theme.
This effort from Lands' End, which begins this week, peddles a redesigned version of the company's popular mesh knit polo shirt.
In the multimedia campaign, which includes an initial foray onto the Internet, the many changes being made -- from stronger buttons to a softer feel described in adspeak as "more cottony" -- are promoted as embodiments of the Lands' End philosophy that "we just couldn't leave well enough alone."


Truck Components (TRCK,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Cross-Border Taxes Complicate Trade
Transfer pricing -- what multinational companies charge their affiliates for goods and services moving across national borders -- is creating growing problems in world trade, a leading accounting firm says in a study published today.
"Transfer pricing is the most important international tax issue facing multinationals today," Ernst &amp; Young, the accounting firm, said after surveying 210 companies.


Stryker Corp.(STRY,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Standard Pacific Corp.(SPF,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Restoring Ebbing Hormones May Slow Aging
WHY do some people in their 80's look, act and feel vigorous and energetic while others need help just to get through the chores of daily living?
A good part of the answer may lie in their hormones.
If studies now under way bear out their initial promise, hormone treatments for people over 60 may help to turn back the clock and, though without extending life, greatly enhance its quality.
Researchers are exploring the rejuvenating effects of several hormones that are known to undergo rather striking declines with age.
These include, but go beyond, replacing estrogen, which declines sharply in women after menopause.
The safety of estrogen replacement, particularly with regard to the risk of breast cancer, is hotly debated and raises a cautionary note about the wisdom of replacing other hormones that fall with age.


Russia's Problems Don't Stop With Oil
To the Editor:
Re "Russia's Sleaze Sector" (Op-Ed, July 11): While Anders Aslund has worked to help Russia solve its economic problems, he does no one a service with his swipe at the energy sector.
The oil industry has big problems, one being corruption; but Mr.
Aslund is simplistic to suggest narrowing the spread between domestic and world prices is the solution.


Rainy River Forest Products Inc. reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Debate on the Arts Budget Turns to Talk of the 'Lurid'
"I have here a brochure," said the Congressman, his eye on wringing still more money from the Federal arts and humanities subsidies proposed for the next Federal budget by the Republican House majority.
"It just goes on and on with things that are just too lurid to talk about, even on a Monday night," said the Representative, Cliff Stearns, Republican of Florida.


A Pathmark for Queens
In East Harlem, neighborhood associations have been trying for 25 years to establish a Pathmark supermarket with the help of tax breaks and a contribution of city land.
The project has become bogged in racial politics, with black politicians supporting the store and Hispanic activists opposing it on behalf of small retailers.
Now, in Queens, another Pathmark drama is unfolding, without the racial overtones and the complications of public-sector involvement.
Pathmark wants to build a store in Springfield Gardens, where people have to travel to Long Island's Nassau County for decent grocery shopping.


No Headline
"I was up since 5 o'clock this morning. I didn't know what time I was going to get to work. I didn't know what time I was going to get home." ARQUE McCARTHY, who rides Metro-North to her job in White Plains.  [ A1:3. ]


Jets Sign Their No. 1 For 4 Years, $5 Million
The Jets signed Kyle Brady, their first choice in April's National Football League draft, to a four-year contract worth $5.035 million today.
It includes a $2.7 million signing bonus, the highest ever for a rookie tight end.
Brady, from Penn State, was the ninth choice over all in the draft.
He was a surprising selection for a team that was not looking for a tight end and could have filled a need by taking J. J. Stokes, the U.C.L.A. wide receiver, or Warren Sapp, the Miami defensive tackle.


Trooper Is Injured on Parkway
A state trooper who was injured when a bus slammed into the back of his police cruiser remained in critical condition yesterday at Jersey Shore Medical Center.
Trooper Michael Fantini had stopped to assist a stalled motorist on the Garden State Parkway on Sunday morning.
The bus driver, Richard N. Black, 45, of Hackensack, was issued a summons for careless driving.


Diebold Inc.(DBD,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Texas Industries(TXI,N) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Kimberly-Clark to Buy Scott Paper, Challenging P.&amp; G.
The Kimberly-Clark Corporation, maker of Kleenex tissues and Huggies diapers, agreed yesterday to buy the Scott Paper Company, maker of Scotties, Cottonelle and Viva paper products, for about $7 billion in stock.
The deal would make Kimberly-Clark a consumer-products giant, broadening its domestic-products line and opening the door to European expansion in competition with Procter &amp; Gamble.
The merged company would have annual revenue of $11 billion, second only to Procter, which has $30 billion, and which indicated that it would raise antitrust objections both in the United States and in Europe.


Olde Discount Officials Quit as Pressures Rise
Two top executives at the Olde Discount Corporation, which aggressively advertises for small investor accounts, left their posts at the company last week amid increasing regulatory pressure on the the Detroit-based discount brokerage firm.
James Freeman, 35, president, said he was resigning "to pursue other interests," said Peter Kerr, a spokesman for Olde at the public relations firm of Robinson Lake Sawyer Miller.


Reynolds Metals Co.(RLM,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Rookie Has Impressive Debut as Mets Win
There were no rookie jitters.
Not even a hint of opening-night stage fright.
From the moment he took the mound at Wrigley Field and delivered his first pitch as a major leaguer, Jason Isringhausen proved he was more than ready for the moment he had waited a lifetime for.
Unlike his friend and teammate Bill Pulsipher, who had a rocky baptism exactly one month ago at Shea Stadium, Isringhausen oozed confidence and poise in an impressive major league debut against the Cubs tonight.
The 22-year-old right-hander dazzled the Cubs and energized the Mets by allowing just two runs on two hits in seven innings of splendid pitching.


METROPOLITAN GOLF REPORT
New York State Open
Bruce Zabriski, a former regular on the PGA Tour and now an assistant at Winged Foot Golf Club in Mamaroneck, N.Y., is playing well at the right time and appears ready to challenge for the New York State Open, which starts today at the Concord Course known as the Monster.


Armstrong World Industries(ACK,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Back With Jazz and a Chuckle
For the last 10 years Dick Hyman has been waging a lonely war against the prevailing sentiment of seriousness in jazz.
Mr.
Hyman is a pianist and a founder of a series at the 92d Street Y called Jazz in July.
It features him and his friends, and they have a concept: When they play, the music has to be infused with wit and a sense of humor.
Mr.
Hyman is a throwback to an age when jazz was entertainment, when its mixture of virtuosity and crowd-pleasing exuberance exemplified one of the strongest strains to come along in American popular culture.


Beckman Instruments Inc.(BEC,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


For Group Homes, No Easy Victories; Year After Year, Communities Rebuff the Mentally Retarded
Here is what Edward Ledogar, a lawyer representing a band of nervous homeowners, had to say about the opening of a group home for the mentally retarded in Little Neck, Queens: It would bring in people and traffic and cause a decline in property values.
Here is what Brian Cavanagh had to say about a group home for the mentally retarded opening in his Cedar Grove neighborhood in Flushing, Queens: "The For Sale signs have gone up. People are fearful of the home and what it could do to their property values."


The Risk Of U.S. Inaction
The Bosnian Serbs are fairly prudent.
They have launched no attacks without first trying to gauge the American and allied response.
When they find weakness, they press forward; when they meet resistance, they stop and wait.
The Serbs let the United Nations hostages go in June because they feared NATO was about to strengthen its forces in Bosnia.
Then they watched to see when the new European rapid-reaction force would become operational.
When it became clear that Europe was moving slowly and that the force might not be very potent, they moved on Srebrenica and now Zepa.


Algeria Deplores Killing
To the Editor:
"Algeria Accused of Plotting Cleric's Killing" (news article, July 13) refers to a declaration accusing the Algerian Government of "orchestrating the killing" of Sheik Abdel-Baki Saharaoui in a Paris mosque on July 11.


Two Unions Reinstated at the Javits Center
Two unions that previously represented employees at the Jacob K. Javits Convention Center were authorized yesterday to return as collective-bargaining agents under new agreements with the center.
An arbitrator, Daniel G. Collins, ruled that the carpenters' union and the teamsters' union had won recognition rights, but that a third union representing exposition workers had been dropped.
State officials who have reorganized the hiring system at the center have asserted that officials in the three unions previously doled out many jobs to organized-crime members and ex-convicts.


Seles and Graf to Share No. 1
The WTA Tour is expected to confirm tomorrow that MONICA SELES, absent from the tour since she was stabbed in April 1993, will be co-ranked No. 1 in the world alongside STEFFI GRAF upon her return.
At the time Seles was attacked, she was ranked No. 1 ahead of Graf, who said 10 days ago after winning Wimbledon that she was fully in favor of sharing her ranking with Seles for the remainder of 1995.
"It's obvious that the tour needs her, and hopefully she's ready to need tennis again," Graf said.


Why the Wedding Is Off
A day after frenzied media speculation over what could have come between Lieut.
Gov.
Betsy McCaughey and her fiance, an investment banker, Ms.
McCaughey gave her answer yesterday: Wilbur L. Ross Jr. could not get a divorce before their Sept. 15 wedding day.
"My announcement yesterday that Wilbur Ross and I are no longer engaged to be married has provoked speculation," Ms.
McCaughey, 46, said in a statement.
"I made that announcement because he is not yet divorced. Although his divorce is in its final stages, it is not yet complete. Therefore I cannot plan for the future."


Brutality Suit Filed Against Police Officer
The widow of a security guard who died in a confrontation with a New York City police officer last December has filed a $48 million lawsuit against the officer, his colleagues, and the city.
The lawsuit against Officer Francis X. Livoti by Maribel Baez, the widow of Anthony Baez, announced last March but only filed Monday, accuses the city of being "careless, negligent and reckless" for failing to recognize a "pattern of conduct" by Officer Livoti that it calls "excessively confrontational."


N.C.A.A. Reduces Suspension
SCOTT MILANOVICH, the starting quarterback at the University of Maryland, had his National Collegiate Athletic Association suspension for gambling reduced to four games yesterday.
In one of the most severe penalties handed to a Division I athlete, the N.C.A.A. suspended Milanovich for eight games.
But after hearing his appeal, the N.C.A.A.
Eligibility Committee halved the punishment.


Bosnia Threatens U.N. Troops Unless NATO Jets Aid Defense
Bosnian Government troops defending the beleaguered enclave of Zepa said today that unless NATO warplanes flew to Zepa's aid they would use Ukrainian troops in the United Nations peacekeeping force as human shields against the advancing forces of the Bosnian Serbs.
The ultimatum presented the Western allies with one of the most difficult dilemmas in the Bosnian war: The Bosnian Serbs have already warned that at the first sight of NATO aircraft, they would kill eight peacekeeping soldiers they took captive in their assault on the enclave and target the 79 other Ukainians inside Zepa.


George W. Crane Dies at 94; Advised With 'Horse Sense'
Dr.
George W. Crane, a self-described "overeducated farmer," who dispensed modern advice to the lovelorn and old-fashioned horse sense to everybody else through a series of syndicated newspaper columns for some 60 years, died on Monday at his farm outside Hillsboro, Ind.
He had continued distributing such columns as "The Worry Clinic," and "Horse Sense," until shortly before his death at the age of 94.


General Electric Co. (GE,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Warsaw Journal; Sex Barely Gets a Foot in the Classroom Door
Slouched in their seats in the back row, their hair fashionably long, their T-shirts just-so baggy, the boys at one of this city's academically superior high schools rattled off the names of Western-made condoms to a murmur of giggles, along with advice that the cheap Polish kind were dangerously ineffective.
Two professional therapists, a man and a woman in their mid-30's who had been called in by the progressive principal to give a rare sex education lesson, were on new territory.
Should they applaud or ignore the streetwise savvy?
To insure a balanced approach, they decided to move quickly to the blackboard and the arithmetic of the rhythm method of family planning.


Tribune Co.(TRB,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Transactions
Baseball  American League
BALTIMORE ORIOLES -- Placed Jeffrey Hammonds, outfielder, on the 15-day disabled list.
Recalled Mark Smith, outfielder, from Rochester of the International League.


On Therapy And a Novel Called 'Therapy'
"Writing is a form of therapy," said Graham Greene, a quotation that David Lodge uses as an epigraph to his new novel, which, naturally, is called "Therapy." Mr.
Lodge said that as a novelist he "converts negative experience into something positive," and added about "Therapy," "I certainly feel better having written it." At the same time, he made it clear that a novel must "transcend the limits of a writer's own experience."
Then, to lighten the conversation, he quoted J. P. Donleavy: "Writing is a way of turning the unhappiest moments of your life into money," a statement that would be more applicable to Martin Amis than to David Lodge, whose career has been gradually ascending and paralleled by his own industrious work as a university professor.


Democrats Force the G.O.P. To Pull Anti-Regulation Bill
Senate Democrats today won a victory over a Republican proposal to limit Federal health, safety and environmental regulations, forcing Senator Bob Dole, the majority leader, to set the bill aside temporarily.
It was a stinging rebuff to Mr.
Dole on one of the central elements of the Republican agenda, but it left open a faint possibility of a compromise to break the deadlock.


Huizenga May Move Panthers
The billionaire H. WAYNE HUIZENGA, complaining about million-dollar losses with his Florida Panthers, said yesterday that he may move the team.
He said negotiations to build an arena in Broward County have collapsed.
A decision to relocate would come in three months unless someone comes forward to build a south Florida arena and, he said at a news conference, "I have my doubts that will happen."


Indictments Say Two Bronx Police Officers Let a Pair of Robbery Suspects Go
Prosecutors charged yesterday that two Bronx police officers let a couple of robbery suspects go free, apparently because the officers were too lazy to carry out the arrests, and that they then lied to a grand jury about the incident.
Prosecutors said it appeared that the officers, James Martin and Daniel Campbell, who were charged with perjury in an indictment yesterday, did not want to go through the lengthy hassle of booking the suspects on robbery charges.
Instead, investigators charge, they simply told the men to return the property to the victims and go home, and even gave the two suspects a lift to their homes in a patrol car.


Use of N.R.A. Is Criticized In Raid Case
In a letter that hinted at a rift in the ranks of Republicans on the eve of hearings about a Federal raid outside Waco, Tex., the chairman of the House Judiciary Committee said today that he was "outraged" that a National Rifle Association consultant misrepresented herself as a member of the committee staff to a potential witness.
Representative Henry J. Hyde, a Republican of Illinois, criticized the incident brought to light on Sunday by Representative Charles E. Schumer, a Democrat of Brooklyn.
The witness, a social worker from Texas, was subpoenaed after she was interviewed by a consultant for the rifle association who identified herself as a member of the "Waco hearing team."


Reebok International(RBK,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Mattel Inc.(MAT,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Julius Cohen, 81; Jewelry Designer Who Won Awards
Julius Cohen, a jewelry designer and the owner of the Madison Avenue shop and studio that bears his name, died yesterday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 81.
The cause was cancer, said his wife, Margo Feiden.


Growing Power of Jerusalem's Ultra-Orthodox Makes Other Jews Uneasy
In ever-embattled Jerusalem, Jews of different religious convictions are locked in a struggle over whose vision for the holy city will prevail.
Jews who define themselves as secular or modern Orthodox are increasingly at odds with fiercely traditional Orthodox Jews, known here as haredim and widely identified by their black suits and hats and modest dresses.


Personal Health
IN the 10 years since genetic engineering made it possible to synthesize large quantities of human growth hormone, endocrinologists have learned a great deal about what it can -- and cannot -- do.
Until so-called recombinant human growth hormone, or rhGH, was developed, so little of the natural hormone was available that only children with severe hormone deficiency could be treated.


Twist a Dial and Cab Fare Soars, Police Say
Thousands of people who rode taxis in New York City in recent months may have noticed that the drivers fiddled a lot with their CB radios.
What they didn't notice, the police said yesterday, was that sometimes as the radios got louder, the fares got higher.
The police arrested Mohammad I. Ahmed, a cab driver, yesterday and said they believe that in the last six months, he has rigged the meters in at least 500 yellow cabs, including his own, to overcharge passengers.


Sports of The Times; Finally, New Talent In Jersey
AS the head basketball coach for Cheyney State from 1971 to 1983, C. Vivian Stringer used to regularly take Rutgers apart on the court.
Now, 12 years later, she's attempting to lift the program to a higher level.
If the past is any indication, Stringer will achieve that level and finally lift the school from its athletic doldrums.
Unfortunately, in the five days since Stringer was introduced as the Rutgers coach, her hiring has been clouded by wrong-headed analysis that focused on salary and race rather than merit.
Stringer makes more than the school's football coach, the stories point out.
It didn't hurt, said others, that she was African-American and joining a university that was rocked by racial tension earlier this year.


Revolution in Treating Infertile Men Turns Hopelessness to Parenthood
ADVANCES in treating male infertility have made it possible for virtually any man who makes even the tiniest amount of sperm to become a father.
Even men who have no sperm at all or only dead sperm in their ejaculate or men whose sperm cannot swim or cannot penetrate an egg may be helped.
The most recent discovery builds on the finding that men who have no viable sperm in their semen often have at least a small number in their testes.
These sperm are unable to fertilize eggs on their own because they have not undergone maturation and biochemical changes that occur when sperm are transported from the testes through the epididymis, a coiled tube where sperm are stored.
They are barely moving because motility also develops during the passage through the epididymis.
But they can still fertilize an egg when they are directly injected into it.


OLYMPICS: One Year to Atlanta 1996; A Lot of Optimism But Hurdles to Leap
Exactly one year from the opening of the centennial Summer Olympic Games, the temperature is rising into the high 90's, dormitories at the athletes' village are sinking from unexpected settling and the financial forecast remains as hazy as a humid July morning.
If Billy Payne, the chief organizer, is sweating, however, it doesn't show.
He has promised the biggest and best Olympics ever, and he expects to deliver.
A year out, the track is being installed at Olympic Stadium, ticket sales have exceeded expectations, 5,000 athletes have begun arriving for pre-Olympic competitions and the economic impact of the Games has been projected at $5.1 billion.


I.B.M. Quarterly Earnings Double as Stock Falls 25
Continuing its strong turnaround, the I.B.M.
Corporation reported yesterday that earnings more than doubled in the second quarter from a year earlier, surpassing the highest forecasts made by Wall Street analysts.
But the results apparently did not impress investors, who drove down International Business Machines shares sharply in early trading.
The stock closed at $107 in heavy trading, down 25 cents on the New York Stock Exchange, on a day that the Dow Jones industrial average fell 50.01 points.


Fire at a Substation Closes 2 PATH Lines
A fire in a PATH train substation in lower Manhattan yesterday morning knocked out power to two lines, trapped three trains under the Hudson River for at least 90 minutes and disrupted the trips of thousands of commuters who use the service to shuttle between New Jersey and Manhattan.
The fire caused sufficient damage to the substation's power cables that officials could not say if service would resume today on the lines, between Hoboken Station and the 33d Street Station, at Herald Square, and between Journal Square Station in Jersey City and the 33d Street Station.
The interruption added to the general confusion of commuters to Manhattan who, in recent days, have also had to be concerned with a potential strike by the Metro-North Commuter Railroad.


Kroger Co.(KR,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 17


Nell Michel Sawyer, Volunteer, 50, Dies
Nell Michel Sawyer, a volunteer for the Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center and other New York institutions, died on Monday at Southampton Hospital on Long Island.
A lifelong resident of Manhattan and Southampton, she was 50.
The cause was breast cancer, her family said.


Once Again, It's No Deal On a Johnson Comeback
He would have traded in his bow tie, started at power forward and renewed his battle royal against Michael Jordan.
But it was his annual tease.


Yankees Go 0 for 2 Against Ex-Yanks
The Yankees had to be thankful that yesterday's doubleheader was not a tripleheader.
Otherwise Don Larsen might have pitched the third game against his former teammates.
What happened to New York was devastating enough.
Jim Abbott and Dave Righetti, the only pitchers to throw nine-inning no-hitters for the Yankees since Larsen's perfect game in the 1956 World Series, returned to Yankee Stadium yesterday.
Each was a winner as they led the Chicago White Sox to a 9-4 and 11-4 sweep that featured a combined total of 61 hits by the two teams -- and one insult by a Yankee pitcher that will surely not be forgotten anytime soon.


Volkswagen campaign presents driving as a metaphor for life.
UNTIL now, most efforts by Volkswagen A.G. to rebuild its reputation in North America by stressing the German engineering of its automobiles have failed faster than you can say "Fahrvergnugen." Now the company's United States and Canadian marketing unit is pinning its hopes on ambitious, almost audacious advertising -- the first from its new agency -- that seeks to present driving as a metaphor for life.
In an aggressive campaign that begins tomorrow, Arnold Fortuna Lawner &amp; Cabot in Boston tries to transform a phrase borrowed from classified advertisements, "Drivers wanted," into an assertive anthem.
The ads mock manifestations of modern technology like the Internet and high-tech offices with sealed windows as a way to chide rival automobiles as confining and soul-deadening.
The goal is to attract car buyers to join a kind of exclusive club of free-wheeling, fun-loving enthusiasts who take a stick-shift perspective in a world overrun by automatic transmissions.


To Our Readers
The Times has revised its tables of company earnings to accommodate the quarterly financial results of more companies more promptly.
To increase the number of quarterly reports, the tables will omit cumulative sixth-month and nine-month results, which include historical data already reported.
In a company's fourth quarter, the tables will continue to list the annual financial results.


White House Seeks to Halt Bosnia Bill
Administration officials scrambled today to head off Senate legislation they feared would force United Nations peacekeepers out of Bosnia and imperil their efforts to forge a new plan with the allies to stop Serbian aggression.
The bill would require the United States to break with the United Nations embargo against arming the Muslim-led Bosnian Government under certain circumstances.
But in a last-minute addition to ease some Democratic concerns, it would give the President leeway to delay carrying it out.


Sperm Bank Is Ordered Closed And Denied a License Hearing
The largest sperm bank in New York State was ordered yesterday to close its doors by next Tuesday, after a State Supreme Court justice found that the State Department of Health was justified in refusing to license the company.
The bank's owner, the Daxor Corporation, and its president, Dr.
Joseph Feldschuh, had gone to court to try to force the Health Department to conduct a hearing on its application to operate blood banks, tissue banks, clinical laboratories and semen banks in New York City.


International Briefs; Revamping by Sony Shifts Some Production
The Sony Corporation is shifting part of its electronic components' production overseas in a restructuring prompted by the strong yen.
It even plans to move part of the operation of its Tokyo headquarters overseas, the executive deputy president, Tamotsu Iba, said yesterday.


Earnings Dip at Citicorp; Chemical Has Jump of 27%
Buoyed by trading and its strong business in developing countries, Citicorp said yesterday that revenues surged 16 percent in the second quarter but that profits slipped 3 percent from a year earlier, when it benefited from a $200 million tax break.
At the Chemical Banking Corporation, in contrast, revenues were flat, but profits jumped 27 percent, to $453 million, mainly from securities gains and cost-cutting.


International Briefs; Hyundai in Vietnam
The Hyundai Motor Company said yesterday that it had formed a $200 million joint venture to assemble cars in Vietnam.
The venture with Vietnam's Corporation 990 Trading and Services will initially assemble 20,000 Hyundai cars a year.
Production is scheduled to begin next year, a Hyundai spokesman said.
Hyundai Motor will cover 65 percent of the venture's start-up costs, he said.
The Hyundai conglomerate of South Korea also makes ships, home electronics and semiconductors. (AP)


TIME WARNER INC. (TWX)
Time Warner Inc. posted a loss yesterday for the second quarter but said that it was narrower than the loss in the corresponding period a year earlier.
The loss shrank to $8 million, or 3 cents a share, from $20 million, or 6 cents a share, in the quarter a year earlier.
The per-share figures reflect the payment of preferred dividends.


Italian Rider Dies After High-Speed Crash
Fabio Casartelli, a 24-year-old Italian bicycle racer who was the reigning Olympic road race champion, was killed in the Tour de France today when he crashed on a steep and sinuous descent in the mountains and fractured his skull.
While Casartelli was being flown by helicopter to a hospital in Tarbes, his heart stopped three times.
He was revived by doctors aboard the craft after the first two attacks, but they were unsuccessful after the third and he could not be helped at the hospital either.


Polaroid Corp.(PRD,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jul 2


Deck Collapses Under Revelers
One woman was in the intensive care unit at Atlantic City Memorial Hospital and six others remained hospitalized yesterday after being injured when a deck collapsed at a summer home during a party.
An unknown number of guests, most of them in their 20's, were on the second-floor deck Monday night when it gave way, sending them 20 feet to the ground.
Sgt.
Al Gomber of the Avalon police said 25 people were treated in hospitals.


Faldo Blends In Among the Bunkers
Nick Faldo is padding about the home of golf these days as though it is his home, as though the old stone clubhouse is his castle and the Old Course his private province.
There is good reason for this.
Faldo, who turned 38 today, has been away for a while, over in the colonies honing his game for the past six months.
Now he is back, very much on his own turf and his own terms, back to the place where five years ago this week he effectively, if temporarily, silenced his critics and stated his case as the master of the majors.


Mets and Orioles Talking About a Deal for Bonilla
The Mets are playing their best ball of the season, and Bobby Bonilla has been at the center of it as the club's only .300 hitter and most consistent player.
But there's a chance Bonilla could join the Baltimore Orioles if the teams can reach an agreement on a trade before the non-waiver deadline of July 31.
The Orioles, in contention in the American League East, need a power hitter and are seeking the switch-hitting Bonilla in exchange for outfielder Jeffrey Hammonds.
The Mets also want the right-handed relief pitcher Armando Benitez.


We Paid a Terrible Price for Atom Bomb
To the Editor:
Richard Rhodes is no doubt correct in stating that the emergence of nuclear weapons 50 years ago "changed the conditions" for global war ("Echoes of the Big Bang," Op-Ed, July 15).
But we can't agree with his view of the bomb's enormous value as a peacemaker, past and future.
And Rhodes also ignores the terrible price we paid for embracing the bomb following the Trinity test.


A Trying Day
Record-breaking rains surged across the metropolitan area into the early hours yesterday, wreaking random havoc with transportation.
In eight hours, 3.36 inches of rain fell in Central Park.
Flooded subways and roadways delayed commuters.
Article, page B5.


U.S. Success Still Doesn't Bring Job Security for Interim Coach
Although the United States has convinced the world of its international soccer prowess this summer, Steve Sampson has not yet convinced officials that he deserves to be the permanent coach of the national team.
Sampson is making a great case for his elevation from interim status at the South American championships, or America Cup, where the United States has scored impressive victories over Mexico, Argentina and Chile.
Tomorrow, in the tournament's semifinals in Uruguay, the Americans will play Brazil, which defeated the United States, 1-0, in the second round of the 1994 World Cup.


USX Corp. reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Kodak Net Falls Short of Expectations
The Eastman Kodak Company reported a 42 percent increase in second-quarter earnings yesterday, but the results fell below the expectations of investors and analysts, pushing the stock price down sharply.
A flood of sell orders delayed the opening of trading in the stock.
By the end of the day on the New York Stock Exchange, Kodak's shares were down $3.75, or 5.4 percent, at $58.875.


Crab Meets Fresh Corn
THERE is nothing in the seafood world I await as eagerly as the appearance of soft-shell crab.
A close second is local corn, and no opportunity to combine the two is ever passed up.
Here they appear together with mangoes, which have been especially plentiful and sweet this year (the ones with a slight firmness and acidity are the best).


Deck Collapses Under Revelers
One woman was in the intensive care unit at Atlantic City Memorial Hospital and six others remained hospitalized yesterday after being injured when a deck collapsed at a summer home during a party.
An unknown number of guests, most of them in their 20's, were on the second-floor deck Monday night when it gave way, sending them 20 feet to the ground.
Sgt.
Al Gomber of the Avalon police said 25 people were treated in hospitals.


Richmond Council Endorses Statue Of Arthur Ashe
After a month of debate and an emotional hearing, the City Council voted early today to erect a statue of Arthur Ashe among the memorials to Confederate heroes on Monument Avenue, the city's grandest boulevard.
The unanimous decision came at 1 A.M., after the seven-hour televised hearing.
Some speakers said the statue of Mr.
Ashe, the black tennis pioneer who died in 1993, belonged on Monument Avenue beside the heroes of Virginia.
Others said it was insulting to Mr.
Ashe's memory to put a statue of him on the same street as Confederate memorials.


Whales and Boys in Risky Environments
Happy whale families might as well be all alike, at least in movies.
But unhappy whale families have the makings of an orca-size hit, one that is far more engaging than any pithy plot summary suggests.
To call "Free Willy" the heartwarming story of a boy and his pet orca might be accurate, but it would miss the savviness and rousing spirit of the 1993 film, in which Jesse, an abandoned 12-year-old, helps Willy escape a sideshow and head back to his mother.
"Free Willy 2: The Adventure Home," can't even be summarized in a pithy way.
Here Jesse learns that he has a half-brother, runs across Willy again and becomes a hero after an environmental disaster.
As strained and overloaded as it sounds, "Free Willy 2" is an even smarter and more endearing tale of family reconciliation than the original.
The film is sweet and sentimental but also fast and full of action, and shrewdly realistic about sibling hostility.
In a season crammed with films fighting for children's attention, "Free Willy 2" may be the ideal family movie.


In Hamptons, Lines in the Sand Ignite Tempers; Oceanfront Residents Try to Restrict Public Access to Beaches
From the edge of his beach towel on the sugar-soft sand of Fowler's Beach, Joseph Obermayer can see the rise of newly built ocean estates, which he scornfully derides as potato mansions inhabited by the territorial nouveau riche.
From the edge of eight-foot-high privet hedges bordering his oceanfront development on the old Henry Ford estate, Joern Brunvall can see Fowler's Beach bathers like Mr.
Obermayer, gauche summer tourists who litter country roads with beer bottles and lines of unsightly cars.


Smoking Lures Women in Japan
A BRIDE in a white wedding robe bolts out in the middle of the ceremony.
The groom runs after her as she drives away on a motorcycle.
In the next scene, another woman in jeans and a T-shirt is shown laughing as she dumps a guitar and some clothing on a young man.
The 15-second commercial for Virginia Slims, shot to the music of Cyndi Lauper's "Girls Just Want to Have Fun," carries the slogan "Be you." Tobacco commercials like this one, made in the United States, are aired in Japan and, some critics say, are helping to nurture a rapidly growing market among women for cigarettes.


A Midtown Procession


Corrections
A table in the "Most Wanted" feature in Business Day on Monday, listing last week's 10 biggest percentage losers among technology stocks, missplaced the minus signs that should have denoted the week's price change for each entry.
The signs should have appeared with the week's price change, not the closing prices.
A corrected table appears today on page D2


Ewing Answers Critics Of His Labor Stance
Patrick Ewing, the Knicks' All-Star center, who is part of a group of select players trying to decertify the National Basketball Players Association, criticized his detractors yesterday during an informal news conference at City Hall.
Ewing, who along with Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani kicked off the Hoop It Up 1995 World Tour on the steps of City Hall, said he was tired of hearing that a select group of agents are behind part of the league's unsettled labor problems.


Lowe Affiliate To Open in Brazil
The Lowe Group said yesterday that it had teamed up with agency executives in Sao Paulo, Brazil, to open the first shop in South America to be affiliated with Lowe.


Food Notes
Changes at Greenberg Desserts
William Greenberg Jr.
Desserts, a company that was founded by Mr.
Greenberg in 1946 and has long been known for its simple dark chocolate cakes, rich brownies and butter cookies, has been sold.
The company, which now has three stores and its own kosher bakery, was bought by Stephen Fass, who was a food buyer for Bloomingdale's and Macy's; Maria Marfuggi, who was in the cheese business, and Willa Abramson, who has mail-order experience.
Mr. Fass will be the president of the new company, which will keep the Greenberg name.


Heat's Deadly Toll Rises in Chicago


Investment Counselor Is Arrested
The former owner of two investment companies in Princeton was arrested yesterday in North Carolina and charged with defrauding investors in California by giving them false information.
The charge against Chuckles Kohli involves a loss of about $227,000, The Associated Press reported, but in court documents, the Federal Bureau of Investigation accuses him of bilking investors of $40 million through his companies, Sigma Inc., and the Savid Group.
Federal prosecutors said they hope to have Mr.
Kohli returned to New Jersey to face a grand jury.


2 Israeli Hikers Shot to Death In West Bank
Two Israeli hikers were shot to death today in a scenic West Bank canyon between Jerusalem and Jericho in an attack the army said was carried out by Palestinian militants.
An army spokesman said the Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine had taken responsibility, and Israel Radio reported that graffiti signed by the group were found at the scene.
The front, a radical leftist movement, opposes the self-rule accord between Israel and the Palestine Liberation Organization.


Knight-Ridder Inc.(KRI,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 25


Reviewing the Waco Raid
A heavy burden rests on the two House subcommittees that begin hearings today into the deadly 1993 Federal raid on the Branch Davidian compound near Waco, Tex.
The hearings ought to look at the tragic blunders of the raiders from the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms and the Federal Bureau of Investigation, and investigate the performance of their leaders at the Treasury and Justice Departments.
The hearings must not be allowed to degenerate into fodder for the militia fantasists and those who want to make David Koresh, the Davidian leader who died in the raid, into a gun-ownership martyr.
The House hearings will rehearse known mistakes.
They also have the potential to expose new ones.
But their main task ought to be finding ways to improve Justice Department oversight of the F.B.I. and to reform the A.T.F.


INSIDE
U.S. Trade Deficit Widens
The United State trade deficit widened in May, complicating efforts by the White House to portray a series of trade accords as its chief foreign policy success.
Page D1.
A Vote for Queens Pathmark
Plans to build a large Pathmark store were approved by a key City Council committee, virtually assuring the store will be built.
Page B1.
Italian Cyclist Is Killed
A 24-year-old Olympic champion crashed and became the third fatality in the history of the Tour de France, the first since 1967.
Page B9.


Yankees Go 0 for 2 Against Ex-Yanks
The Yankees had to be thankful that yesterday's doubleheader was not a tripleheader.
Otherwise Don Larsen might have pitched the third game against his former teammates.
What happened to New York was devastating enough.
Jim Abbott and Dave Righetti, the only pitchers to throw nine-inning no-hitters for the Yankees since Larsen's perfect game in the 1956 World Series, returned to Yankee Stadium yesterday.
Each was a winner as they led the Chicago White Sox to a 9-4 and 11-4 sweep that featured a combined total of 61 hits by the two teams -- and one insult by a Yankee pitcher that will surely not be forgotten anytime soon.


Twist a Dial and Cab Fare Soars, Police Say
Thousands of people who rode taxis in New York City in recent months may have noticed that the drivers fiddled a lot with their CB radios.
What they didn't notice, the police said yesterday, was that sometimes as the radios got louder, the fares got higher.
The police arrested Mohammad I. Ahmed, a cab driver, yesterday and said they believe that in the last six months, he has rigged the meters in at least 500 yellow cabs, including his own, to overcharge passengers.


Sports of The Times; Finally, New Talent In Jersey
AS the head basketball coach for Cheyney State from 1971 to 1983, C. Vivian Stringer used to regularly take Rutgers apart on the court.
Now, 12 years later, she's attempting to lift the program to a higher level.
If the past is any indication, Stringer will achieve that level and finally lift the school from its athletic doldrums.
Unfortunately, in the five days since Stringer was introduced as the Rutgers coach, her hiring has been clouded by wrong-headed analysis that focused on salary and race rather than merit.
Stringer makes more than the school's football coach, the stories point out.
It didn't hurt, said others, that she was African-American and joining a university that was rocked by racial tension earlier this year.


Texas Instruments Inc.(TXN,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


OLYMPICS: One Year to Atlanta 1996; A Lot of Optimism But Hurdles to Leap
Exactly one year from the opening of the centennial Summer Olympic Games, the temperature is rising into the high 90's, dormitories at the athletes' village are sinking from unexpected settling and the financial forecast remains as hazy as a humid July morning.
If Billy Payne, the chief organizer, is sweating, however, it doesn't show.
He has promised the biggest and best Olympics ever, and he expects to deliver.
A year out, the track is being installed at Olympic Stadium, ticket sales have exceeded expectations, 5,000 athletes have begun arriving for pre-Olympic competitions and the economic impact of the Games has been projected at $5.1 billion.


Turnpike Contract Talks Dissolve Into Name-Calling
A day after assuring a State Superior Court judge of their willingness to continue labor negotiations, the two sides in the New Jersey Turnpike's labor dispute reverted to name-calling today and bargaining fell apart.
The sudden hostilities dashed any good will established yesterday in Judge J. Norris Harding's courtroom here and appeared to doom prospects for a quick end to the contract dispute between the turnpike and its 1,500 toll collectors and maintenance workers.


German Transports Fly to Italy In Support of NATO in Bosnia
Germany began moving pilots and ground staff to bases in Italy today in preparation for support missions in Bosnia.
Transport planes carrying air crews and spare engines for Tornado fighter-bombers flew today to Piacenza, in northern Italy, as a prelude to the transfer of 14 Tornados whose mission will be to guard other NATO warplanes against missile attack over Bosnia.


Sun Microsystems Inc.(SUNW,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Jun 30


Fire at a Substation Closes 2 PATH Lines
A fire in a PATH train substation in lower Manhattan yesterday morning knocked out power to two lines, trapped three trains under the Hudson River for at least 90 minutes and disrupted the trips of thousands of commuters who use the service to shuttle between New Jersey and Manhattan.
The fire caused sufficient damage to the substation's power cables that officials could not say if service would resume today on the lines, between Hoboken Station and the 33d Street Station, at Herald Square, and between Journal Square Station in Jersey City and the 33d Street Station.
The interruption added to the general confusion of commuters to Manhattan who, in recent days, have also had to be concerned with a potential strike by the Metro-North Commuter Railroad.


Schwab (Charles) Corp.(SCH,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Lilly (Eli) (LLY,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Chemical Banking Corp.(CHL,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Some New Rhythms in a Musical Merger
When the Salsa Meets Jazz concert series closed down in 1993, the city lost one of its best parties.
Matching great Latin dance bands with jazz improvisers was a brilliant idea, and the concerts often produced thrilling music that was never repeated.
Since then, there have been several efforts to re-start the series, the most recent on Monday night at the former Club Broadway (at 95th Street), now refurbished and called Latin Quarter.
For this show, the Fort Apache Band played host to the formidable saxophonist Arthur Blythe.
It was a good match: Fort Apache has a chunky, rocking sound that's based on the triangle of Jerry Gonzalez on congas and trumpet, Andy Gonzalez on bass and Steve Berrios on trap drums.
Mr.
Blythe has a chilly, intense sound that in the upper register can slice through percussion; it drips with passion.


In House, Spending Bills Open Way to Make Policy
House Republicans took the unusual step today of using a spending bill to make policy, approving an appropriations measure that would revoke or substantially restrict nearly 20 environmental laws that have become anathema to big business.
The action was but one skirmish in a multifront budget battle in the House of Representatives and in committee, as House Republicans worked furiously to finish their 13 appropriations bills before the scheduled August recess.


Corrections
The Advertising column on Thursday, about a foundation established to honor Thomas J. Mosser, a Young &amp; Rubicam executive who was killed by a mail bomb, misstated his residence.
It was North Caldwell, N.J., not West Caldwell.


U.S. Appeals Panel Questions 6 Counts Against Rostenkowski
In a significant legal victory for Dan Rostenkowski, the former Chicago Congressman who is under indictment, a Federal appeals court today ordered a trial judge to reconsider whether 6 of the 17 corruption charges against Mr.
Rostenskowski should be thrown out in light of a recent Supreme Court ruling.
Although the ruling from the three-judge appeals panel did not order the outright dismissal of the charges, it appears almost certain that at least four will be thrown out.


METRO DIGEST
AFTER DECADE, CHILD-ABUSE CASE LIVES ON
In 1984, five men, including a Methodist minister, were sent to prison for raping and sodomizing more than a dozen preschoolers in the Bronx.
Since then, four of the convictions have been reversed.
The remaining man, the minister, is still in prison and is pressing his appeal in a case that provides a window for examining the dramatic changes in standards for investigating sexual abuse involving very young children.  [ Page A1. ] NEW YORK CITY


Predictions Of Deja Vu By Bochco
No show on television next fall will look more like the O. J. Simpson trial than ABC's forthcoming drama "Murder One." It will even have one of Mr.
Simpson's former lawyers, Howard Weitzman, making regular appearances as himself.
But Steven Bochco, the show's creator and executive producer, said at a news conference here today that the Simpson trial was not the inspiration for the new drama, which will trace the complications of a single murder trial for 23 episodes.
Rather, he said, he got the idea from his "L.A. Law," in which "complicated cases had to be boiled down to two or three episdoes."


Early Questions Reported on Top F.B.I. Aide
A top official at the Justice Department said today that she had raised questions about Larry A. Potts, the former Deputy F.B.I.
Director, in the weeks before he was demoted in a move that the bureau had portrayed as an independent step by its director.
Deputy Attorney General Jamie S. Gorelick said today that she and Attorney General Janet Reno began discussions in early June with the Director, Louis J. Freeh, about whether Mr.
Potts, Mr.
Freeh's friend and associate, could operate effectively as the No. 2 official at the bureau.
"There were discussions among us," Ms.
Gorelick said today.


Nolan Officially Takes Over As Head Coach of the Sabres
TED NOLAN knew he was headed for a hockey town when he met the United States Customs agents as he drove across the border into New York from Canada.
"Just wanted to check to see if you had any blood and guts in there," one agent told Nolan as he opened the trunk.
"That's what we want here in Buffalo."


High-Speed Ferry Service To Begin Across the Sound
The Foxwoods Casino on the Mashantucket Pequot Indian reservation near New London, Conn., thinks it has a sure bet: promoting the launching of the first high-speed ferry service across Long Island Sound.
The Long Island Rail Road also wants a piece of the action.
The new service, operated by Cross Sound Ferry Services Inc., is scheduled to begin on Wednesday morning, when a twin-hulled catamaran, Sea Ski 1, designed to carry 350 passengers, will make its maiden run to Orient Point, L.I., from New London.


Senate Opens Debate On Bosnia Embargo
The Senate began debate on legislation the Clinton Administration feared could force United Nations peacekeepers out of Bosnia and imperil efforts to forge a new plan with the allies to check Serbian aggression.


U.S. Petroleum Data
In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
July 14
July 7
July 15
1995
1995
1994
Gasoline production, daily
7.8
7.7
7.5
Distillate production, daily
3.2
3.1
3.3
Gasoline stocks
208.2
207.6
213.0
Distillate stocks
121.6
117.8
124.9
Crude imports, daily
8.1
6.5
8.6
Product imports, daily
1.9
1.4
1.6
Crude stocks
317.6
317.9
330.0
Crude production, daily
6.5
6.5
6.6
Refinery utilization (%)
95.1
94.1
95.7
Source: American Petroleum Institute


Foreign Affairs; Muffled Militants
During a visit to Turkey in May I met with a columnist for a leading Ankara newspaper and asked him in passing how circulation was.
"Great," he told me.
It was growing daily.
What was their trick?
I asked.
More sports?
Doonesbury?
Ann Landers?
No, no, he said, it's very simple.
"We are giving away commentaries on the Koran with every new subscription."
Not only in Turkey, where the Mayors of Ankara and Istanbul come from the Islamic party, but elsewhere in the Middle East, Islamic fundamentalism seems to be either going underground or going mainstream.
That is, fundamentalist groups are either engaging in more hard-core violence, and losing to the secular authorities, or playing by the rules of the game and being co-opted by the secular political systems.
But whether their approach is the M-16 or MTV, Islamic fundamentalists no longer seem quite so threatening, their power no longer quite so invincible, their victory march no longer quite so inevitable.
Indeed, for the moment -- and it may only be a moment -- the Islamic fundamentalist phenomenon has peaked.


Two Unions Reinstated at the Javits Center
Two unions that previously represented employees at the Jacob K. Javits Convention Center were authorized yesterday to return as collective-bargaining agents under new agreements with the center.
An arbitrator, Daniel G. Collins, ruled that the carpenters' union and the teamsters' union had won recognition rights, but that a third union representing exposition workers had been dropped.
State officials who have reorganized the hiring system at the center have asserted that officials in the three unions previously doled out many jobs to organized-crime members and ex-convicts.


Huizenga May Move Panthers
The billionaire H. WAYNE HUIZENGA, complaining about million-dollar losses with his Florida Panthers, said yesterday that he may move the team.
He said negotiations to build an arena in Broward County have collapsed.
A decision to relocate would come in three months unless someone comes forward to build a south Florida arena and, he said at a news conference, "I have my doubts that will happen."


Why the Wedding Is Off
A day after frenzied media speculation over what could have come between Lieut.
Gov.
Betsy McCaughey and her fiance, an investment banker, Ms.
McCaughey gave her answer yesterday: Wilbur L. Ross Jr. could not get a divorce before their Sept. 15 wedding day.
"My announcement yesterday that Wilbur Ross and I are no longer engaged to be married has provoked speculation," Ms.
McCaughey, 46, said in a statement.
"I made that announcement because he is not yet divorced. Although his divorce is in its final stages, it is not yet complete. Therefore I cannot plan for the future."


Regents Prepare for Storm on Affirmative Action
With an agenda of hotly contested proposals to eliminate affirmative-action policies at the University of California, the meeting of the university's governing board on Thursday will be a proving ground for a central social issue of the decade.
Gov.
Pete Wilson, using the dismantling of affirmative action as a cornerstone of his Republican Presidential bid, has announced he will exercise his right for the first time in years to preside over the meeting.
Jesse Jackson is coming to town on Wednesday to lead protests.
And the White House has announced that President Clinton will deliver an important address on the subject on Wednesday.
The 26 regents themselves appear to be sharply divided.


Eastman Kodak (EK,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Metropolitan Diary
DEAR DIARY:
It's petition-gathering time, and I'm collecting signatures for my populist challenger candidate for the City Council seat.
My first stop is an apartment that reveals a not uncommon Flatbush scene: mother, father and visiting daughter at the dinner table.
The father lets me in and asks my business.
"I'm collecting petition signatures for the City Council," I reply, "and your wife's an enrolled Democrat."


Westinghouse Offer for CBS Believed Near
CBS's stock jumped $1.25 yesterday to close at $71, as investors bet heavily that the Westinghouse Electric Company could arrange the financing for a $5 billion bid for the media giant.
One person with knowledge of the discussions said an offer might come within the next week and that the Westinghouse board was solidly behind its chairman, Michael H. Jordan, in favoring an acquisition of CBS.
A key question is whether Westinghouse, which is already heavily leveraged, can borrow the money for the purchase.
One executive close to the negotiations said yesterday that Westinghouse's bankers in the deal, J. P. Morgan and Chemical Bank, were optimistic.


Insect Imperils Hemlock Trees
Ecologists and forestry officials are becoming alarmed over the increasing menace posed by the hemlock woolly adelgid, an aphidlike insect that attacks hemlock trees, a source of shade for many animals and plants.
The pest has destroyed stands of these evergreens at the Delaware Water Gap and other Northeast parks.


USX-Marathon Group (MRO,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


A Midtown Procession


Judge to Reconsider I.R.S. Letter
Whether the Whitman administration will have to disclose a letter from the Internal Revenue Service about the state's use of $769 million in state pension funds to help balance the budget is now back in the hands of Judge Philip S. Carchman of State Superior Court in Trenton.


Once Again, It's No Deal On a Johnson Comeback
He would have traded in his bow tie, started at power forward and renewed his battle royal against Michael Jordan.
But it was his annual tease.


Berlusconi May Sell Some TV Holdings, Yet Maintain Control
Silvio Berlusconi, the Italian media magnate turned politician, has reached a complex agreement to sell more than half of his television business to banks and private investors, bankers and others familiar with the negotiations said today.
The deal, which is expected to be announced soon, would produce the equivalent of $2.2 billion for Mr.
Berlusconi's corporate empire, Fininvest, while allowing him to maintain management control of his television interests -- more than 40 percent of the Italian airwaves.
It is further intended to raise capital for television expansion.


Upjohn Co.(UPJ,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


In Hamptons, Lines in the Sand Ignite Tempers; Oceanfront Residents Try to Restrict Public Access to Beaches
From the edge of his beach towel on the sugar-soft sand of Fowler's Beach, Joseph Obermayer can see the rise of newly built ocean estates, which he scornfully derides as potato mansions inhabited by the territorial nouveau riche.
From the edge of eight-foot-high privet hedges bordering his oceanfront development on the old Henry Ford estate, Joern Brunvall can see Fowler's Beach bathers like Mr.
Obermayer, gauche summer tourists who litter country roads with beer bottles and lines of unsightly cars.


CHRONICLE
The surprise party in honor of FLO KENNEDY, a lawyer long in the forefront of civil rights and feminist causes, was a gathering of the clan, her immediate family and her spiritual one.
Three of Ms.
Kennedy's four sisters, GRAYCE KENNEDY BAYLES, JOY KENNEDY BANKS and FAYE KENNEDY, went to the celebration on Monday in the apartment of Judge EMILY JANE GOODMAN of New York State Supreme Court for their first reunion since since 1986.
Faye Kennedy lives in Hawaii, so it is difficult for them to get together.
The other sister, Evelyn Kennedy Woods, was not able to attend.


I.R.S. Is Preparing a Tough Audit For Groups of Unwary Taxpayers
Claimed you were married on that tax return you filed in April, did you?
Well, the Internal Revenue Service may come by your house demanding to see your marriage license.
And those two children you listed as deductions?
Better have birth certificates to prove when they were born and report cards to show they go to a school close enough to live with you.
Otherwise, kiss those deductions good-bye.
That is the kind of rigorous grilling that a few hundred thousand unlucky taxpayers can expect starting this fall.
They will be selected not because they are suspected of cheating but because the I.R.S. wants to know how accurately individual taxpayers fill out their forms.


How to Dine Out: Seminars With a Pro
Eric Weiss, who runs classes on restaurant service for professionals, is taking his message to the customer.
He has organized a series of four dinner seminars that will help restaurant-goers understand how to obtain better service, how to order wine, how to return a dish that is unacceptable and how to tip, among other subjects.


Investment Counselor Is Arrested
The former owner of two investment companies in Princeton was arrested yesterday in North Carolina and charged with defrauding investors in California by giving them false information.
The charge against Chuckles Kohli involves a loss of about $227,000, The Associated Press reported, but in court documents, the Federal Bureau of Investigation accuses him of bilking investors of $40 million through his companies, Sigma Inc., and the Savid Group.
Federal prosecutors said they hope to have Mr.
Kohli returned to New Jersey to face a grand jury.


Cypress Semiconductor Corp.(CY,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jul 3


Johnson Controls Inc.(JCI,N) reports earnings for 3d qtr to Jun 30


Rain Floods Roads and Rails, and Breaks a Record
Record-breaking rains, pelting from lowering skies creased with jagged veins of lightning and booming with thunder, surged across the metropolitan area into the early hours yesterday, wreaking random havoc with transportation and leaving a summer-sodden populace no cooler than before.
The ill wind blew so little good that even the city's reservoirs could not be expected to slake their thirst for fresh runoff and raise their levels from their current subnormal content, officials said.


U.S. Success Still Doesn't Bring Job Security for Interim Coach
Although the United States has convinced the world of its international soccer prowess this summer, Steve Sampson has not yet convinced officials that he deserves to be the permanent coach of the national team.
Sampson is making a great case for his elevation from interim status at the South American championships, or America Cup, where the United States has scored impressive victories over Mexico, Argentina and Chile.
Tomorrow, in the tournament's semifinals in Uruguay, the Americans will play Brazil, which defeated the United States, 1-0, in the second round of the 1994 World Cup.


Man Found Dead After Beating
A 76-year-old man was found dead yesterday after having apparently been beaten by someone who rifled through his belongings and then fled.
The police identified the man as Marvin Thomas of Elizabeth.


Faldo Blends In Among the Bunkers
Nick Faldo is padding about the home of golf these days as though it is his home, as though the old stone clubhouse is his castle and the Old Course his private province.
There is good reason for this.
Faldo, who turned 38 today, has been away for a while, over in the colonies honing his game for the past six months.
Now he is back, very much on his own turf and his own terms, back to the place where five years ago this week he effectively, if temporarily, silenced his critics and stated his case as the master of the majors.


Philip Morris Profits Climb On Strong Overseas Sales
The Philip Morris Companies announced strong second-quarter earnings gains yesterday, powered by explosive growth in the company's overseas tobacco revenues, even though the recent period had been a loser from a public relations standpoint, with a costly and embarrassing product recall as well as regulatory, legal and legislative assaults.
Philip Morris said its net earnings were up 14.4 percent, to $1.41 billion, or $1.67 a share, compared with $1.23 billion, or $1.42 a share, in the corresponding period of 1994, exceeding the estimates of some analysts.


COMPANY BRIEFS
ABB INC., said that it had acquired the business-related assets of Extrel Corp., Pittsburgh, a supplier of mass spectrometry instruments and components, for an undisclosed sum.
ALCO STANDARD CORP., Valley Forge, Pa., which markets and distributes office equipment products, said that through its two business units, Unisource Worldwide Inc. and Alco Office Products, it had acquired 12 companies that bring in approximately $61 million in annual revenues.


Citicorp (CCI,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Honeywell Inc.(HON,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jul 2


Correction: Technology Stocks
A table in the "Most Wanted" feature in Business Day on Monday, listing last week's 10 biggest jpercentage losers among technology stocks, missplaced the minus signs that should have denoted the seek's price change for each entry.
The signs should have appeared with the week's price change, not the closing prices.
A corrective table follows.


Nigerian Tragedy
Nigeria, richly endowed with oil and mineral wealth, should be one of Africa's most prosperous and successful countries.
But its curse is misrule, usually by generals.
Repressive, divisive and corrupt regimes have left Nigeria a shambles.
Now the secret trial, conviction and possible execution of some of the country's most respected political leaders threatens new domestic rancor and increased international isolation.
The present military regime, which seized power in November 1993, a few months after its predecessor had annulled democratic elections, is one of the worst Nigeria has known.
Dominated by Gen.
Sani Abacha, it has crushed elected governments at all levels, arbitrarily jailed political opponents, waged war against the Ogoni minority and driven the Nobel laureate Wole Soyinka into exile.


Whitman Burdens New Jersey Municipalities
To the Editor:
"The Whitman Effect" (editorial, July 9) begins with the statement:


A Trying Day
Record-breaking rains surged across the metropolitan area into the early hours yesterday, wreaking random havoc with transportation.
In eight hours, 3.36 inches of rain fell in Central Park.
Flooded subways and roadways delayed commuters.
Article, page B5.


Safety Board Criticizes F.A.A. Over 737's Outmoded Recorders
Boeing 737's need better "black boxes" to help investigators determine why they crash, and the Federal Aviation Administration is not taking the problem seriously enough, the National Transportation Safety Board said in a letter released yesterday.
The chairman of the safety board, James E. Hall, wrote to the Federal Aviation Administrator, David R. Hinson, that another crash that could not be explained, should one occur, would "further erode public confidence in the airplane," which he said was far more important than costs.


International Briefs; Russian Menatep Bank Raises Red October Bid
Bank Menatep, one of Russia's largest banks, raised its takeover bid for the candy maker Red October while denying that the factory's location on prime downtown real estate was a factor in the bid.
The new offer of $9.50 a share values the company, which last year made a profit of $24 million, at $60 million.
Menatep officials raised their bid when shareholders said the first offer was too low.


Yesterday in Washington
AFFIRMATIVE ACTION Prospects for an overhaul of Federal affirmative action programs this year have significantly dimmed as President Clinton has decided to make only marginal changes in programs that give special help to minorities and women, while Republicans in Congress are unable to reach a consensus on how many of the programs to abolish.
WHITEWATER HEARINGS The Senate began the politically charged hearings about Whitewater and the personal finances of President Clinton and his wife, Hillary.
The first witness was Webster L. Hubbell, the former Associate Attorney General who was sentenced last month to a 21-month prison term for taking almost $500,000 from his clients and former law partners at the Rose Law Firm in Little Rock, Ark.


USX-U.S. Steel Group (X,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Judge to Reconsider I.R.S. Letter
Whether the Whitman administration will have to disclose a letter from the Internal Revenue Service about the state's use of $769 million in state pension funds to help balance the budget is now back in the hands of Judge Philip S. Carchman of State Superior Court in Trenton.


Journal; Shotgun Hearings
What a heady time to be a Republican in Congress!
With Whitewater hearings resuming yesterday in the Senate and Waco hearings starting today in the House, the smell of blood is in the air.
All that's needed to insure the Clinton Administration's demise is the link merging Whitewater and Waco into one grand conspiracy -- and this, too, may be at hand.
The trusty Washington Times has already uncovered a previously undisclosed Vincent Foster "role" in the Waco raid; how long until jackbooted government thugs are implicated in his "murder"?
Fair-minded Americans want to get to the bottom of Whitewater and Waco, however deep.
The real question is whether the Republican Congress is up to the task.
If I had to bet on who is going to discover the whole truth about Whitewater, I wouldn't put my money on partisans like New York's favorite exemplar of ethics, Al D'Amato, or the independent counsel, Kenneth Starr, but on James Stewart, the impartial reporter who is following his definitive and best-selling account of 1980's Wall Street felonies, "Den of Thieves," with his own examination of Whitewater, "Blood Sport," due from Simon &amp; Schuster in January.


Minister Loses Renomination To City Panel On the Police
Recognizing that the proposed reappointment would probably be defeated, the City Council withdrew the Rev.
Ruben Diaz's nomination to the Civilian Complaint Review Board yesterday.
But the effective result is that Mr.
Diaz, harshly criticized for what some considered anti-homosexual views, may stay on the board indefinitely as a holdover member.
Since his initial appointment two years ago, Mr.
Diaz has been the source of intense criticism from many within the Council as well as from gay groups for remarks critical of homosexuality.


Transactions
Baseball  American League
BALTIMORE ORIOLES -- Placed Jeffrey Hammonds, outfielder, on the 15-day disabled list.
Recalled Mark Smith, outfielder, from Rochester of the International League.


What's In at Camp: Designer Water (TV, Too)
WHILE some things at summer camp may be as timeless as campfires and poison ivy, the old-fashioned "care package" -- homemade cookies and a couple of rolls of Life Savers -- has gone the way of the outhouse.
Some campers today receive miniature televisions, CD players and designer clothes in addition to the expected shipments of finger paints, stickers and candy.


Pataki Walks Fine Line on Rail Talks
In his quiet efforts to resolve the Metro-North Commuter Railroad contract dispute, Gov.
George E. Pataki is struggling to balance two conflicting mind-sets within his administration: those who want him to take a hard line against labor and those who believe he must work with the unions to avoid a disruptive strike.
To some of his advisers, the talks between Metro-North's 17 unions and the Metropolitan Transportation Authority give the Republican Governor a sterling opportunity to show that he can be tough with organized labor as part of his effort to hold down government costs.


Whirlpool Corp.(WHR,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Insect Imperils Hemlock Trees
Ecologists and forestry officials are becoming alarmed over the increasing menace posed by the hemlock woolly adelgid, an aphidlike insect that attacks hemlock trees, a source of shade for many animals and plants.
The pest has destroyed stands of these evergreens at the Delaware Water Gap and other Northeast parks.


Jurors See Tape of Simpson Working Out
Jurors at the O. J. Simpson trial today saw Mr.
Simpson work out for 45 minutes on a videotape made two weeks before the murders with which he is charged.
They also heard him make a veiled remark about striking his wife -- one that defense lawyers say was a joke but that prosecutors contend betrayed the mind of a batterer.
In an outtake from the videotape, shown by prosecutors to prove that Mr.
Simpson was not the invalid hobbled by arthritis and football injuries that his lawyers have portrayed him to be, a trainer facetiously warned Mr.
Simpson to steer clear of him as he threw some punches into the air.


CHRONICLE
The surprise party in honor of FLO KENNEDY, a lawyer long in the forefront of civil rights and feminist causes, was a gathering of the clan, her immediate family and her spiritual one.
Three of Ms.
Kennedy's four sisters, GRAYCE KENNEDY BAYLES, JOY KENNEDY BANKS and FAYE KENNEDY, went to the celebration on Monday in the apartment of Judge EMILY JANE GOODMAN of New York State Supreme Court for their first reunion since since 1986.
Faye Kennedy lives in Hawaii, so it is difficult for them to get together.
The other sister, Evelyn Kennedy Woods, was not able to attend.


MERRILL LYNCH &amp; CO. (MER,N)
Merrill Lynch &amp; Company, bolstered by rallies in the stock and bond markets, said yesterday that earnings rose 12 percent in the second quarter.
Profit at Merrill, the nation's biggest securities firm, rose as interest rates fell to 16-month lows, stocks reached record highs, underwriting of corporate stocks and bonds advanced, and mergers surged.
Earnings were $282.7 million, or $1.40 a share, up from $251.8 million, or $1.18 a share, in the 1994 quarter.


PREFERENCE PLANS MAY ESCAPE MOVE FOR MAJOR CHANGE
Prospects for a vast overhaul in Federal affirmative action programs this year have significantly dimmed with a decision by President Clinton to make only marginal changes in them, coupled with Congressional Republicans' decision to put off any effort to impose an outright ban.
After a four-month review of all Federal preference programs based on race or sex, a White House task force has concluded that they have generally worked to advance equal opportunity, according to the resulting report, a copy of which was provided by White House officials.


Two Calypso Monarchs in the Park
Super Blue summed up the mission of Trinidadian calypso at Central Park Summerstage on Sunday afternoon.
"We are informing, educating and entertaining at the same time," he announced.
Calypso watchers have long worried that the party chants of modern soca (or soul-calypso) are driving out calypso's long tradition of sophisticated wordplay and social commentary.
Sunday's concert brought something from both sides: Super Blue's jubilant, participatory soca hits and Black Stalin's buoyant message calypsos.
Super Blue, born Austin Lyons, has won Trinidad's Road March competition seven times since 1980 and has held the Soca Monarch title since it was introduced in 1993.
The winning road march is the song played most often by the mobile sound systems in the carnival parade; it's the people's choice for party music.


CHRONICLE
Subject for a summer evening in Newport, R.I.: the splendors of Faberge jewelry, eggs, silver and art objects.
Archduke GEZA von HAPSBURG,, a great-great-grandson of Emperor Francis Joseph of Austria and an authority on the works of Peter Carl Faberge, the jeweler to the Romanovs, will discuss recent discoveries about Faberge at a lecture for the Newport Music Festival at the Rosecliff mansion tonight.


McDonnell Douglas (MD,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Man Found Dead After Beating
A 76-year-old man was found dead yesterday after having apparently been beaten by someone who rifled through his belongings and then fled.
The police identified the man as Marvin Thomas of Elizabeth.


Brister Finds A Niche (For Now)
He was the quarterback for the Pittsburgh Steelers until an injury and Neil O'Donnell's younger arm knocked him out of the starting job.
He moved to the Philadelphia Eagles, where a new owner enamored of Randall Cunningham's fickle talents kept him from challenging for Cunningham's starting job.
So now Bubby Brister is a Jet, the designated backup to Boomer Esiason.
After a frustrating two years with the Eagles, he became an unrestricted free agent.
In March, he signed with the Jets for $2 million over two years.


Rain Floods Roads and Rails, and Breaks a Record
Record-breaking rains, pelting from lowering skies creased with jagged veins of lightning and booming with thunder, surged across the metropolitan area into the early hours yesterday, wreaking random havoc with transportation and leaving a summer-sodden populace no cooler than before.
The ill wind blew so little good that even the city's reservoirs could not be expected to slake their thirst for fresh runoff and raise their levels from their current subnormal content, officials said.


Taking On Insurance Giants
When Ronald R. Parry, a soft-spoken lawyer from Kentucky, comes calling these days, life insurance companies look for cover.
That's because Mr.
Parry, an insurance neophyte until just two years ago, has emerged as a champion for tens of thousands of aggrieved policyholders.
For decades, life insurers were considered too big and powerful for individuals to fight.
But that is rapidly changing.
Mr.
Parry has already helped win a $43 million settlement for 18,000 customers of the Metropolitan Life Insurance Company, which was accused of improperly selling life insurance as a retirement or savings plan.
Now, he has trained his sights on other companies.


Legislators Against the Arts
It is an astonishing day for New York when it has a better friend in Alan Simpson than in its own Congressional representatives.
The Wyoming Senator is one of three Republicans who have come up with a sensible alternative to the House's slash-and-burn approach to arts funding.
Yesterday the entire Republican side of the New York delegation voted to write the death warrant for the National Endowment for the Arts and the National Endowment for the Humanities, approving a bill that would end all funding within two years.
It is surprising to see upstate moderates like Amo Houghton and Sherwood Boehlert joining the anti-arts swing, but it is at least understandable.
Their constituencies are not nearly as dependent on the arts as is the New York metropolitan area.
But for Susan Molinari, Michael Forbes, Peter King, Daniel Frisa and Rick Lazio, it is mind-boggling.
These Representatives are selling their constituents down the river.


Elderly Pilots, Too, Need More Stringent Testing
To the Editor:
More stringent testing of elderly drivers was recommended (July 13) because of the predicted increased number of drivers in the next 30 years.
Concern should also be raised about the growing number of elderly pilots.
Statistics show that there are 30,000 pilots in the United States over age 64, including more than 300 over 80.
In fact, flying has become so popular among the aged, an Octogenarian Flying Club has been formed.


International Briefs; Toyota Sees Low Sales Because of Rising Yen
Japan's largest auto maker, the Toyota Motor Corporation, announced yesterday that it had lowered its planned domestic production for the year.
The auto maker said the rising yen and weakening overseas markets had led it to expect lower exports, and domestic sales were slower than anticipated.
Toyota said it would cut domestic production 5.8 percent from its original plan, to 3.22 million vehicles.
The company said it had lowered projections for domestic sales by 3.1 percent, to 2.17 million, and for exports by 8.8 percent, to 1.14 million.
The company also said its production and exports in the first half of 1995 were down compared with the corresponding period in 1994, and its domestic sales had grown by only 1.2 percent, to 1.06 million vehicles. (AP)


One Precinct Takes Aim At Environmental Crime
The calls would come in regularly to the 90th Precinct in Brooklyn: mysterious oil drum on street corner; unidentified men carrying barrels of waste into and out of an abandoned warehouse; unlicensed dumping in a local lot; green smoke pouring out of factory chimney.
But collaring dangerous oil drums is not exactly a traditional way of getting ahead in the New York City Police Department.
And so the typical response from the precinct was one of sympathy, but not much else.


At the Nation's Table: Fort Worth; Offbeat Decor For Beer Hall
The Ed Bass empire already includes Biosphere 2 and Caravan of Dreams, a combination nightclub, grotto bar and geodesic-domed cactus garden in downtown Fort Worth.
Now, also in downtown Fort Worth, add the Flying Saucer Beer Emporium, a Romanesque beer hall lined with 1,500 souvenir plates.
Mr.
Bass, of the wealthy Bass family, is the landlord who approved the idea for the beer hall, cooked up by Shannon Wynne, a local restaurant owner, and then renovated an 1889 building for it.


Panel's Haunting Replay Of Official's Final Days
Suddenly, some of the cares that Vincent W. Foster Jr. left behind when he walked out of the White House and committed suicide two years ago surfaced today in a giant replica of his own tight handwriting, highlighted in luminous green on nine high-tech video screens at a Senate hearing where all eyes and lenses snapped to attention.
"Don't want to go back into that box," Mr.
Foster had jotted in his private notes about President Clinton's financial affairs.


Microsoft Speeding Its On-Line Service
Taking a step closer to a showdown with the Justice Department, the Microsoft Corporation said yesterday that not only did it plan to include access to its new on-line service in the Windows 95 operating system next month, but that the service would also be fully linked to the Internet, several months earlier than expected.
The announcements, made by the chairman of Microsoft, William H. Gates, at an industry conference in Long Beach, Calif., came on the eve of Microsoft's expected filing of a court brief challenging the Justice Department's latest request for information.


When Schools Favor Religion
To the Editor:
President Clinton is commendably concerned about public school violations of the constitutional obligation to be neutral toward religion by wrongly disfavoring religion (front page, July 13).
But you rightly call him to task in "School Prayer Anxieties" (editorial, same day) for not expressing concern about public school violations of this obligation by wrongly favoring religion.


Strawberry Up By Tomorrow?
He has put up some solid numbers at Class AAA Columbus for nearly a week, and now, according to a source familiar with the situation, Darryl Strawberry is ready to return to the major leagues and will report to the Yankees for tomorrow night's game with the Kansas City Royals at Yankee Stadium.


No Headline
"There's the merchant in me, which likes to sell things, and then there's the mother in me, which says, 'Enough already!"' -- REYNA WALLSH, whose store stocks items for summer-camp "care packages."  [ C6:6. ]


Rivers Should Belong To All Humankind
To the Editor:
Ships used to be designed to fit rivers.
Now rivers are being redesigned to fit oversized commercial barges.
In the past, when rivers were low, navigation stopped; now some rivers are being converted into open sewers to guarantee year-round shipping (news article, July 13).


Minority Applicants Gain on Home Loans
Black and Hispanic mortgage applicants remain much more likely than white applicants to be turned down for loans to buy homes but the gap is narrowing, a Federal interagency panel announced today.
Banks, credit unions, savings institutions and other lenders across the country turned down 33.4 percent of black mortgage applicants last year and 24.6 percent of Hispanic mortgage applicants, the panel found.
Only 16.4 percent of white applicants were rejected.


Malpractice Guidelines
To the Editor:
Re "Wrong Direction on Malpractice" (editorial, July 16): While I agree that Congress has been considering unfair bills, your solution also is quite dangerous.


Banc One Corp.(ONE,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Trains Running
Contract talks between the Metropolitan Transportation Authority and 17 of the Metro-North Commuter Railroad's unions resumed yesterday after breaking off on Sunday, and by last night, both sides said that the prospects for a settlement had improved.


Ewing Answers Critics Of His Labor Stance
Patrick Ewing, the Knicks' All-Star center, who is part of a group of select players trying to decertify the National Basketball Players Association, criticized his detractors yesterday during an informal news conference at City Hall.
Ewing, who along with Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani kicked off the Hoop It Up 1995 World Tour on the steps of City Hall, said he was tired of hearing that a select group of agents are behind part of the league's unsettled labor problems.


Springs Industries(SMI,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jul 1


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-9  PEACEKEEPERS AT RISK
Bosnian troops declared that if NATO warplanes did not come to the aid of Zepa they would use United Nations peacekeepers as human shields against the advancing Serbs.
A1  SENATE DEBATES BOSNIA
Clinton Administration officials scrambled to head off Senate legislation they feared would force United Nations peacekeepers out of Bosnia and imperil efforts to forge a new plan with the allies to curb Serbian aggression.
A6  Germany began moving pilots to Italy for missions in Bosnia.
A6  YELTSIN NOT AT DEATH'S DOOR
President Boris N. Yeltsin appeared on television to prove he was sick, but not as sick as some have thought.
A1  BILLS COME DUE IN SOUTH AFRICA
Ten years ago, the African National Congress urged black township residents to stop paying utility bills to protest the apartheid government.
Now, the monster they created has turned on them.
A3  REIMAGINING JERUSALEM
Jews of different religious convictions are locked in a struggle over whose vision for the holy city will prevail.
A8  FATAL SHORTCUTS IN ASIA
East Asia's rapid economic development has been marked by hasty and often shoddy construction, as witnessed in the collapse of a South Korean department store and other man-made disasters.
A9  Warsaw Journal: Sex education is mandatory, and unteachable.
A4  National A10-17  SLOW ON AFFIRMATIVE ACTION
Prospects for a major overhaul of Federal affirmative action programs this year have significantly dimmed as the President has decided to make only marginal changes and Congressional Republicans have put off action.
A1  WHITEWATER HEARING BEGIN
The Senate began hearings about Whitewater and the finances of President Clinton and his wife.
A1  NEW I.R.S.
AUDITS DRAW FIRE
A plan by the I.R.S. to step up audits to see how accurately individual taxpayers fill out their forms has come under attack.
A1  DEMOCRATS WIN ON RULES BILL
Senate Democrats forced a Republican retreat on the bill to limit Federal health, safety and environmental regulations.
A1  PLAN FOR A COUNTY'S RECOVERY
Advisors for Orange County recommended a recovery plan intended to lift the county from bankruptcy without new taxes, but with the help of the California Legislature.
A10  TESTIMONY IN SUSAN SMITH TRIAL
Opening arguments began in the trial of Susan Smith, who is accused of killing her two children.
A10  WATCHING SIMPSON EXERCISE
Jurors saw more of O.J.
Simpson's fitness videotape, including a remark about hitting one's wife; defense lawyers say it was a joke but prosecutors said it revealed the mind of a batterer.
A14  BOMBING SUSPECT IN COURT
Timothy J. McVeigh refused to give the grand jury a handwriting sample that could show that he rented the truck that blew up the Oklahoma City Federal Building.
A11  AGENTS AT 'BOYS ROUNDUP'
At least seven F.B.I. agents attended a "Good Ol' Boys Roundup" in recent years and at least one went to this year's gathering, where racist paraphernalia was sold.
A12  SPLIT OVER DETROIT PAPER STRIKE
Reporters and columnists in Detroit are imploring their readers not to buy the city's two daily newspapers, which are being struck.
A15  EXPLAINING HEALTH CONCERNS
At least 25 million Americans would benefit each year from legislation that would enable workers to take health insurance coverage with them when they leave jobs, a Senate committee was told.
A16  DOUBTS ON F.B.I.
OFFICIAL
Aides said top Justice Department officials quietly raised questions about Larry Potts, the F.B.I.'s former deputy director, for weeks before he was demoted.
A16  A Florida doctor was suspended after two wrong amputations.
A10  Education B7  The man behind University of California's affirmative-action debate.
New York City superintendents say schools face touch choices.
Metro Digest B1  INVESTIGATING CHILD SEX ABUSE
A decade ago five men were convicted of sex abuse at three Bronx day-care centers.
Since then, standards for investigating such cases have changed dramatically.
Today, four of the convictions have been reversed and the men are free; the fifth case is under appeal.
A1  Business Digest D1  Arts/Entertainment C9-16  David Lodge on "Therapy." C9  Film: "Clueless." C9  "Free Willy 2." C10  "My Life and Times With Antonin Artaud." C10  Music: Calypso monarchs.
C12  Salsa-jazz merger.
C12  Books: Book Notes C15  "Highways to a War," by Christopher J. Koch.
C16  Television: "Larry Sanders" and "Dream On." C9  The Living Section C1-7  Baking soda to the rescue!
C1  What's in at camp: Designer water and television.
C1  At the movies with Jim Lovell: No room for fear in space.
C1  Health Page C8  Using a single sperm, new hopes for male fertility.
C8  Personal Health: Who needs growth hormone therapy?
C8  Estrogen linked to a lower colon cancer rate.
C8  Sports B8-13  Baseball: Mets rip Cubs.
B11  Yankees swept by White Sox.
B9  Basketball: Ewing speaks his mind.
B12  Magic won't return after all.
B12  Columns: Rhoden on Rutgers's Stringer.
B9  Cycling: A fatal crash in Tour de France.
B9  Football: Brister a backup for Jets this time.
B13  Olympics: One year to Atlanta.
B9  Sports People.
B8  Obituaries D20  Patsy Ruth Miller, silent-film actress.
Editorials/Op-Ed A18-19  Editorials  Legislators against the arts.
Nigerian tragedy.
Reviewing the Waco raids.
Letters  Thomas L. Friedman: Muffled militants.
Frank Rich: Shotgun hearings.
Tony Judt: French war stories.
Paul Sheehan: Taxed into the ground.
Chronicle B4  Crossword C15


Arguments Begin in Susan Smith Trial
The prosecution urged the jurors at the Susan Smith trial to hold on to their common sense in the weeks ahead, and they would come to see Mrs.
Smith as a selfish, malicious killer who sacrificed her children for the love of the son of a rich industrialist.
The defense begged them to look into their hearts and, through that softer focus, find a disturbed, child-like figure who, after a lifetime of sadness, just snapped like a dry twig.


Clemens Returns to Form in Strong Outing
Red Sox 4, Royals 1
Roger Clemens pitched one of his best games of the season after four straight starts without a victory, leading the Boston Red Sox past the Kansas City Royals, 4-1, yesterday at Fenway Park.


Sprint Corp.(FON,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Council Vote Clears Way For Pathmark
Plans to build a 65,000-square-foot Pathmark supermarket in Springfield Gardens, Queens, won approval from a City Council committee yesterday, virtually assuring that the store will be built, but only after the developer agreed to donate more than $400,000 over the next 20 years to other merchants in the area.
Under the agreement, the money would be distributed to merchants who would be Pathmark's competitors and used to renovate facades, for example, and make other store improvements.
Community groups would also get money for projects like youth programs.


In South Africa, a Culture of Resistance Dies Hard
Outside the electric company's tin shack, which is barely big enough to hold two cashiers and their computers, Angelina Tshisa stood in the dust here waiting to pay her bill.
She was glad to complain to anyone who would listen that the rates were outrageous.
"This is killing us," she said. "We are crying in Soweto."


Book Notes
A Poet's Life
In the 1930's, Virginia H. Adair, then a precocious poet in her 20's, happily saw her verses published in Atlantic Monthly, The New Republic, The Christian Science Monitor and The Saturday Review of Literature.
But with a husband and then children, Mrs.
Adair began to shun publication, saying it was too time-consuming and restrictive.


Blades Charged In Death Of Cousin
Brian Blades, the receiver for the Seattle Seahawks, was charged today with manslaughter in the shooting death of his cousin.
Blades, 29, said at a news conference last week that the death of Charles Blades, his 34-year-old cousin, was accidental.
Under Florida law, manslaughter is a second-degree felony defined as the killing of a human being through negligence or without lawful justification.


Bill on Gap In Health Care Gets Boost At Hearing
At least 25 million Americans would benefit each year from legislation that would enable workers to take health insurance coverage with them when they leave jobs, a Government accountant told the Senate Labor and Human Resources Committee today.
Mark V. Nadel, associate director of the General Accounting Office, gave that estimate for a bill introduced by Senators Nancy Landon Kassebaum of Kansas, the committee's chairwoman, and Edward M. Kennedy of Massachusetts, its senior Democrat.
He called his figures "conservative at every turn."


TRW Inc.(TRW,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


On the Trail of a Missing Man, in the Old Indochina
HIGHWAYS TO A WAR
By Christopher J. Koch
469 pages. Viking. $23.95.
"In April 1976," Christopher J. Koch announces in the first line of his eventful new novel, "my friend Michael Langford disappeared inside Cambodia." That was exactly one year after the Khmer Rouge marched into Phnom Penh and inaugurated one of the cruelest experiments in social engineering of our dreadful century.
Mr.
Koch, the Australian writer whose best-known book is "The Year of Living Dangerously," about foreign journalists in Indonesia, is obviously turning his considerable talents toward a more familiar locale, Indochina during and just after the Vietnam War.


Genentech Inc.(GNE,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Tarango Clashes on the Court
JEFF TARANGO's return to singles play yesterday was about as stormy as the match in which he defaulted at Wimbledon.
In a 6-3, 5-7, 6-3 loss to BYRON BLACK in the opening round of the $675,000 Legg Mason Tennis Classic in Washington, Tarango clashed with the chair umpire NORM CHRYST several times, and he sat down to protest Chryst's refusal to overrule when one of his serves in the 10th game of the second set was called long.
"I was disappointed because if it's called in, we're at 5-5 and I'm back in it," said Tarango, who wound up winning the set.
"But I respect Norm and I know he doesn't have it in for me."


New York Superintendents Say Cuts Will Lead to Imbalances
Community school superintendents, faced with tough choices about how to cut millions of dollars from their budgets, said yesterday that the result of budget cuts would be a patchwork of schools with different schedules and varying class sizes.
To cut $250 million from its budget, the Board of Education voted on Monday to allow New York City school districts to increase class size in first, second and third grades to 27 students, from 25, and to shorten the hours of instruction to 26, from the current 27 1/2 a week.
Community school boards would have to endorse the changes, and the Schools Chancellor would have to approve them.


Johnson &amp; Johnson's Profits Up 18.2% in Second Quarter
Johnson &amp; Johnson, the world's largest manufacturer of health care products, said yesterday that revenues and profits had surged in the second quarter, but Eli Lilly &amp; Company and the Upjohn Company reported mixed results.
Pushed by strong sales of new products, worldwide pharmaceutical revenues rose 23.9 percent, to $1.62 billion, for Johnson &amp; Johnson, compared with $1.308 billion the year before.
Overall sales rose 21.6 percent, to $4.76 billion.
Earnings rose 18.2 percent, to $661 million, or $1.02 a share, from $559 million, or 86 cents, in the quarter a year earlier.


Strikers at Detroit Newspapers Count on Deep Labor History
Reporters and columnists here are imploring their loyal readers not to buy the newspaper, in perhaps the most poignant proof of how bitter and damaging this city's five-day-old newspaper strike has already become.
Supervisory editors at The Detroit News and The Detroit Free Press have joined forces in their emptied newsrooms to publish a combined newspaper.
But six striking unions, with about 2,500 members who include drivers, pressmen, photographers, reporters and copy editors, are counting on Detroit's deep labor tradition to keep readers and advertisers away.


Tarango Clashes on the Court
JEFF TARANGO's return to singles play yesterday was about as stormy as the match in which he defaulted at Wimbledon.
In a 6-3, 5-7, 6-3 loss to BYRON BLACK in the opening round of the $675,000 Legg Mason Tennis Classic in Washington, Tarango clashed with the chair umpire NORM CHRYST several times, and he sat down to protest Chryst's refusal to overrule when one of his serves in the 10th game of the second set was called long.
"I was disappointed because if it's called in, we're at 5-5 and I'm back in it," said Tarango, who wound up winning the set.
"But I respect Norm and I know he doesn't have it in for me."


Brooks Brothers Departure Seen
George M. Hanley, executive vice president of Brooks Brothers and a veteran of New York City retailing, left the clothing chain yesterday, people familiar with the company said.
They said his job had been eliminated as part of the restructuring that the company's owner, Marks &amp; Spencer L.P., began last fall.
The restructuring is part of an effort by Brooks Brothers to reposition itself as a seller of more casual attire favored by younger shoppers.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Orange County Plan Uses Taxes for Debts  Orange County's financial advisers recommended a plan to lift the California county from bankruptcy without new taxes.
The plan calls for the diversion of taxes already paid by county residents, primarily property and sales taxes, to cover some $2 billion in backruptcy-related debts.
If approved by the county's Board of Supervisors, the plan would be submitted to the State Legislature next month.  [ Page A10. ] I.B.M.
Surpasses Forecasts With Strong Rise in Earnings  I.B.M.'s second-quarter earnings more than doubled, to $1.72 billion, or $2.97 a share, surpassing the highest forecasts made by Wall Street analysts.
Revenues rose 14.2 percent to $17.5 billion, as the computer maker showed improved results in virtually every part of its business.  [ D4. ] Chrysler's Income Drops 86%  Chrysler's earnings tumbled 86 percent in the second quarter, to $135 million, or 35 cents a share, below Wall Street's expectations as higher customer incentives slashed the profit from each vehicle.  [ D15. ] The I.R.S.
The deal would allow him to maintain management control of his television interests -- more than 40 percent of the Italian airwaves.  [ D7. ] More Times Mirror Cutbacks  The Los Angeles Times plans to eliminate 450 jobs this year, as part of the aggressive cost-cutting by its parent, Times Mirror.  [ A15. ] New Ads From Volkswagen  New ads for Volkswagen start tomorrow and are the first from its new agency, Arnold Fortuna Lawner &amp; Cabot in Boston.
Stuart Elliott: Advertising.  [ D7. ]


For Those in the Twilight of Life, the Balm of Song
RIMA STARR, whose job is to sing for the dying, was going about her important and meaningful work.
With her Yamaha keyboard under one arm, and a big bag of music in the other, Ms.
Starr, a tall and handsome woman, was about to visit another patient.
"This woman moans all the time, " said Ms.
Starr, who once toured with national companies of Broadway shows and sang in concerts with Luciano Pavarotti.
"But when I sing, she stops." A certified music therapist, Ms.
Starr has spent the last three years on the staff of the Jacob Perlow Hospice of Beth Israel Medical Center, singing for, and sometimes with, the terminally ill.


GTE Corp.(GTE,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


CHRONICLE
Subject for a summer evening in Newport, R.I.: the splendors of Faberge jewelry, eggs, silver and art objects.
Archduke GEZA von HAPSBURG,, a great-great-grandson of Emperor Francis Joseph of Austria and an authority on the works of Peter Carl Faberge, the jeweler to the Romanovs, will discuss recent discoveries about Faberge at a lecture for the Newport Music Festival at the Rosecliff mansion tonight.


Intel Earnings, Up 37%, Are Below Estimates
The Intel Corporation today reported a 37.3 percent increase in second-quarter earnings, but its results still fell a few pennies short of Wall Street's expectations.
Analysts said the semiconductor maker's earnings growth was held down by higher-than-expected costs and a greater-than-expected percentage of lower profit items.


French War Stories
There are countries in Europe where almost every village holds a repressed memory of something terrible done by one group of people to another during World War II.
In Austria, the Netherlands and elsewhere, most war crimes have been conveniently attributed to the Germans.
Nowhere has this tendency been more evident than in France, where the Government has always drawn a careful distinction between those who collaborated with the Nazis and everyone else.
President Jacques Chirac's speech on Sunday acknowledging the collective responsibility of the French state for the wartime deportation of Jews is thus startling.
For the first time, a French head of state has admitted that his country was and remains responsible for crimes committed by Frenchmen under the Vichy regime of Marshal Petain.


Italian Rider Dies After High-Speed Crash
Fabio Casartelli, a 24-year-old Italian bicycle racer who was the reigning Olympic road race champion, was killed in the Tour de France today when he crashed on a steep and sinuous descent in the mountains and fractured his skull.
While Casartelli was being flown by helicopter to a hospital in Tarbes, his heart stopped three times.
He was revived by doctors aboard the craft after the first two attacks, but they were unsuccessful after the third and he could not be helped at the hospital either.


Continental Airlines Inc.(CAIB,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Intel Corp.(INTC,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jul 1


International Briefs; Reed Elsevier to Sell Publishing Companies
Reed Elsevier P.L.C. said yesterday that it planned to sell publishing companies in Britain, the Netherlands and the United States that generated more than $900 million in revenue last year, or about 19 percent of its group revenue.


Roberta Church, 81, an Official Under Eisenhower and Nixon
Roberta Church, an official in the Eisenhower and Nixon Administrations who was the first black woman to be elected to the Tennessee Republican State Executive Committee, died on Saturday at Baptist Memorial Hospital East in Memphis.
She was 81 and lived in Memphis.
She had suffered a brief illness, said Ronald A. Walter, the co-author of one of her books.


Brister Finds A Niche (For Now)
He was the quarterback for the Pittsburgh Steelers until an injury and Neil O'Donnell's younger arm knocked him out of the starting job.
He moved to the Philadelphia Eagles, where a new owner enamored of Randall Cunningham's fickle talents kept him from challenging for Cunningham's starting job.
So now Bubby Brister is a Jet, the designated backup to Boomer Esiason.
After a frustrating two years with the Eagles, he became an unrestricted free agent.
In March, he signed with the Jets for $2 million over two years.


Appearing for the Defense . . .
David Gruber, a defense lawyer, will be fighting for his client's life in Municipal Court in Hoboken this afternoon.
Well, not his client's life, exactly, but his client's dog's.
Big Head, a mixed-breed who is part pit bull, is accused of attacking Dorothy Petrozelli, 68, of Weehawken, crushing her hand and forcing her to undergo three operations.


Market Place; Good earnings news for airline stocks could turn out to be bad.
CONTINENTAL AIRLINES was happy to trumpet its second-quarter earnings yesterday: $102 million, its best-ever profit.
It was the first major carrier to announce results in what is expected to be a record second quarter for the industry.
But a couple of sour notes could be heard in the fanfare, for good news for the airlines can also be bad news.
One problem is that the airlines are trying to persuade Congress to extend a tax exemption of 4.3 cents a gallon on fuel beyond Oct. 1, which would be worth more than $500 million to the industry.
With strong earnings, though, politicians are not likely to give the airlines a break.


Nolan Officially Takes Over As Head Coach of the Sabres
TED NOLAN knew he was headed for a hockey town when he met the United States Customs agents as he drove across the border into New York from Canada.
"Just wanted to check to see if you had any blood and guts in there," one agent told Nolan as he opened the trunk.
"That's what we want here in Buffalo."


Mellon Bank Corp.(MEL,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Appearing for the Defense . . .
David Gruber, a defense lawyer, will be fighting for his client's life in Municipal Court in Hoboken this afternoon.
Well, not his client's life, exactly, but his client's dog's.
Big Head, a mixed-breed who is part pit bull, is accused of attacking Dorothy Petrozelli, 68, of Weehawken, crushing her hand and forcing her to undergo three operations.


A Teen-Ager Who's Clear on Her Priorities
Alicia Silverstone makes a delectable teen queen in "Clueless," a candy-colored, brightly satirical showcase for her decidedly visual talents.
Thus far famous mostly for being famous (mostly in Aerosmith videos), Ms.
Silverstone finally gives a film performance that clicks.
As a pampered Beverly Hills clotheshorse, she's mostly a one-joke princess, but the joke happens to work.
Even if "Clueless" runs out of gas before it's over, most of it is as eye-catching and cheery as its star.
The director, Amy Heckerling, also finds herself on friendly territory with the worst Californian academic talent this side of Ridgemont High.
Surfer burnouts held center stage in that earlier comedy of Ms.
Heckerling's, but this time she has gone hilariously upscale.
Ms.
Silverstone's Cher, a heroine who along with her friend Dionne (Stacey Dash) is "named after great singers of the past who now do infomercials," uses a computer to tell her when her clothes match and doesn't even let it go at that.
"I don't rely on mirrors, so I always take Polaroids," Cher confides.


Sony and Toshiba Hint at Accord on Disk
In a possible hint of a reconciliation between rival camps, the Sony Corporation has proposed that efforts be made to achieve at least partial compatibility between two competing formats for the digital videodisk.
One idea that has been broached is to make players that can play disks recorded in both formats, much as there are now machines that can play both compact disks and the much larger laser disks, according to an official of the Toshiba Corporation, which is the leader of the camp opposed to Sony.


Orange County Financial Plan Is Devised
Orange County's financial advisers today recommended a new recovery plan designed to lift this county from bankruptcy without new taxes, but with the help of the California Legislature.
The plan calls for the county to cover some $2 billion in bankruptcy-related debts by diverting taxes -- primarily property and sales taxes -- already paid by residents.
If approved by the county's Board of Supervisors, the plan would be submitted to the Legislature in mid-August.
Under California law, such tax diversions require legislative action.


Johnson &amp; Johnson (JNJ,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Ratings Are Down From '94
Baseball's first network television ratings of 1995 show that viewership is down from last year, but not quite as steeply as stadium attendance.
ABC's prime-time roster of regional games, which began Saturday night, generated a 5.5 average Nielsen rating, down 19 percent from last year's 6.8.
Monday night's rating fell 12 percent, to a 6.9 from a 7.8.
The average two-night rating of 6.2 is down 15 percent from 1994.
Each national ratings point represents 954,000 television households.


Newly Revived Mets Scoring by the Dozen
Is this the same club that posted more losses that any other team in the National League during the first half of the season?
And is this the same team that only a month ago had what its manager called the "stoop-shouldered" and "dead" look of a club that couldn't wait for October?


Bridge to Ellis Island Gains
Efforts to let pedestrians use a construction bridge connecting Jersey City to Ellis Island cleared a hurdle yesterday when the House of Representatives passed an amendment that would open the bridge to pedestrians and prevent the National Park Service from tearing it down.


Granita, the newest word in espresso-speak: C6.


Newly Revived Mets Scoring by the Dozen
Is this the same club that posted more losses that any other team in the National League during the first half of the season?
And is this the same team that only a month ago had what its manager called the "stoop-shouldered" and "dead" look of a club that couldn't wait for October?


Charges Dropped Against a Youth
Assault charges against a Brooklyn teen-ager who was arrested after a shootout that injured seven people last month have been dropped, the police said yesterday.
The youth, Rowan Henry, who lives in the Bedford-Stuyvesant section of Brooklyn, was arrested less than an hour after the June 27 gun battle.
But later that night, the charges were dropped after several witnesses told detectives that Mr.
Henry was not among those firing weapons, said Deputy Inspector Martin Johnson, the commander of Brooklyn North Detectives.


First Tennessee National Corp.(FTEN,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Seles and Graf to Share No. 1
The WTA Tour is expected to confirm tomorrow that MONICA SELES, absent from the tour since she was stabbed in April 1993, will be co-ranked No. 1 in the world alongside STEFFI GRAF upon her return.
At the time Seles was attacked, she was ranked No. 1 ahead of Graf, who said 10 days ago after winning Wimbledon that she was fully in favor of sharing her ranking with Seles for the remainder of 1995.
"It's obvious that the tour needs her, and hopefully she's ready to need tennis again," Graf said.


Clemens Returns to Form in Strong Outing
Red Sox 4, Royals 1
Roger Clemens pitched one of his best games of the season after four straight starts without a victory, leading the Boston Red Sox past the Kansas City Royals, 4-1, yesterday at Fenway Park.


You Surely Can Die Of Lyme Disease
To the Editor:
Your report on the outbreak of human granulocytic ehrlichiosis in the Northeast ("A New Lethal Illness Carried by Ticks Is Identified," July 12) contains the astonishing assertion about Lyme disease by Federal officials that they have been unable to "document a single death out of tens of thousands of cases of Lyme." They aren't looking very hard; fatalities unequivocally attributed to Lyme disease appear in the peer-reviewed medical literature.


Trains Running
Contract talks between the Metropolitan Transportation Authority and 17 of the Metro-North Commuter Railroad's unions resumed yesterday after breaking off on Sunday, and by last night, both sides said that the prospects for a settlement had improved.


F.B.I. Says at Least 7 Agents Attended Gatherings Displaying Racist Paraphernalia
The Federal Bureau of Investigation said today that at least seven agents had attended annual "Good Ol' Boys Roundups" in recent years and that at least one was among the 300 law-enforcement officers who attended the gathering this year in the Tennessee mountains, where racist paraphernalia was displayed and sold.
The three-day gathering, organized by a retired agent of the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms, was attended by Federal, state and local law-enforcement officers, including agents from the firearms bureau, Government officials said.


YELTSIN DISPLAYS HIS HEALTH ON TV
Sounding hoarse but robust, President Boris N. Yeltsin appeared on television from his hospital room here tonight to prove that while he was sick, he was not as sick as the Kremlin had led people to believe by its insistence that he was fine.
Mr.
Yeltsin was flushed into public view by serious questions about the authenticity of the only photograph released of the President after he was hospitalized on July 11.
The picture, distributed by the Itar-Tass news agency last Friday, showed Mr.
Yeltsin in an Ellesse tennis shirt seated at a desk next to a table with four telephones.
It appeared identical to footage of the Russian President, wearing an Ellesse tennis shirt at a desk next to four telephones, that was filmed when he was on vacation in southern Russia last April.
Mr.
Yeltsin's press secretary said it was taken at Central Clinical Hospital in Moscow on Friday.


Bridge to Ellis Island Gains
Efforts to let pedestrians use a construction bridge connecting Jersey City to Ellis Island cleared a hurdle yesterday when the House of Representatives passed an amendment that would open the bridge to pedestrians and prevent the National Park Service from tearing it down.


Details Emerge On Whitewater As Panel Starts
With a theatrical flourish and a few revelations, the Senate today began months of scheduled hearings about Whitewater and the personal finances of the President and Hillary Rodham Clinton.
The hearings, conducted by a special committee on Whitewater, are supposed to examine the White House's handling of papers in the office of deputy counsel Vincent W. Foster Jr. after he killed himself in a Virginia park two years ago.
In Mr.
Foster's office were personal papers of the Clintons, including files about their investment in Whitewater, a land-development venture in Arkansas.


N.C.A.A. Reduces Suspension
SCOTT MILANOVICH, the starting quarterback at the University of Maryland, had his National Collegiate Athletic Association suspension for gambling reduced to four games yesterday.
In one of the most severe penalties handed to a Division I athlete, the N.C.A.A. suspended Milanovich for eight games.
But after hearing his appeal, the N.C.A.A.
Eligibility Committee halved the punishment.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  Federal National Mortgage Association, known as Fannie Mae, is selling $200 million of medium-term notes due in 1997 through Merrill Lynch &amp; Co.
Callable in six months, the issue is priced at par to yield 6.14 percent.
Common  Dura Pharmaceuticals Inc., San Diego, filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission to sell 2 million shares.
Merrill Lynch will be the lead underwriter.


Newspaper to Cut 450 Positions
The Los Angeles Times announced today that it planned to cut 450 full-time positions by the end of this year, and employees in the editorial department said they were told that these cuts would include up to 160 out of 1,300 news-gathering positions.
Breaking with the newspaper's recent practice of using attrition and buyouts to cut its staff and save operating costs, the reductions announced today would include an undetermined number of outright layoffs, said Laura Morgan, director of communications for the newspaper.


About Real Estate; A Los Angeles Tenant For I.B.M.'s Extra Space
The Los Angeles Unified School District has become an unexpected beneficiary of efforts by the International Business Machines Corporation to consolidate its worldwide operations.
I.B.M. has tried for two years to find a subtenant for one-quarter of the 45-floor building on Grand Avenue that bears its name.
After engineers found the school district's decades-old business office unsafe, the district recently agreed to a $35 million lease in the I.B.M. building.


Ratings Are Down From '94
Baseball's first network television ratings of 1995 show that viewership is down from last year, but not quite as steeply as stadium attendance.
ABC's prime-time roster of regional games, which began Saturday night, generated a 5.5 average Nielsen rating, down 19 percent from last year's 6.8.
Monday night's rating fell 12 percent, to a 6.9 from a 7.8.
The average two-night rating of 6.2 is down 15 percent from 1994.
Each national ratings point represents 954,000 television households.


METRO DIGEST
AFTER DECADE, CHILD-ABUSE CASE LIVES ON
In 1984, five men, including a Methodist minister, were sent to prison for raping and sodomizing more than a dozen preschoolers in the Bronx.
Since then, four of the convictions have been reversed.
The remaining man, the minister, is still in prison and is pressing his appeal in a case that provides a window for examining the dramatic changes in standards for investigating sexual abuse involving very young children.  [ Page A1. ] NEW YORK CITY


AT THE MOVIES WITH: Jim Lovell; In Space, No Room For Fear
AT the chilling moment in the film "Apollo 13" when Tom Hanks tries to maneuver the crippled spacecraft on an exact course toward Earth, the audience at the Ziegfeld Theater held its collective breath.
But Jim Lovell, the real-life commander of Apollo 13, watched the drama impassively while he munched buttered popcorn in the last row.


First Financial Management Corp.(FFM,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


2 Parisian Postwar Bohemian Poets, With Smoke
"My Life and Times With Antonin Artaud" is a movie to make you long for those good old Parisian days of chain-smoking Gauloises in sidewalk cafes and passionately debating art and literature while imagining that the future of Western civilization depends on the publication of your first book of poetry.
Set in and around Paris in the late 1940's and directed by Gerard Mordillat in the freewheeling style of early Truffaut and Godard, this terrific black-and-white film has a grainy look to match its postwar bohemian ambiance.
Jacques Prevel (Marc Barbe), the movie's fictitious central character, is a hawk-faced young poet of boundless self-absorption who latches on to Antonin Artaud (Sami Frey), the French poet, theatrical impresario and founder of the Theater of Cruelty.
The film is Prevel's journal of a two-year friendship that ends in 1948 with Artaud's death.


Brutality Suit Filed Against Police Officer
The widow of a security guard who died in a confrontation with a New York City police officer last December has filed a $48 million lawsuit against the officer, his colleagues, and the city.
The lawsuit against Officer Francis X. Livoti by Maribel Baez, the widow of Anthony Baez, announced last March but only filed Monday, accuses the city of being "careless, negligent and reckless" for failing to recognize a "pattern of conduct" by Officer Livoti that it calls "excessively confrontational."


More Backstage Intrigue, Egotism And Meaningful Old Movie Clips
"The Larry Sanders Show" and "Dream On" begin yet another new season on HBO this evening, and everything remains blessedly off the wall.
Forget Letterman and Leno.
Larry Sanders, eerily and hilariously embodied by Garry Shandling, is this decade's ur-talk-show host.
Ego trips and neuroses are his stock in trade, even as he copes with various substance abuses and unfailingly failed affairs.
Last season ended, you may remember, with Larry re-igniting a relationship with his good friend Roseanne.
But it turns out the romance was limited, lasting, as Larry recalls, "from the Emmys to the People's Choice Awards."


Charges Dropped Against a Youth
Assault charges against a Brooklyn teen-ager who was arrested after a shootout that injured seven people last month have been dropped, the police said yesterday.
The youth, Rowan Henry, who lives in the Bedford-Stuyvesant section of Brooklyn, was arrested less than an hour after the June 27 gun battle.
But later that night, the charges were dropped after several witnesses told detectives that Mr.
Henry was not among those firing weapons, said Deputy Inspector Martin Johnson, the commander of Brooklyn North Detectives.


Union Bank (Calif.) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


USX-Delhi Group (DGP,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Technology Stocks Lead Market Selloff
Only a day after posting several records, the stock market fell sharply yesterday in its biggest decline in nearly nine weeks.
The drop was attributed in part to some traders' concern about technology stocks, especially Microsoft.
These issues have been high fliers that have outpaced the overall market to reach record levels, but they could now be rising higher than their earnings warrant, traders fear.


Wine Talk
TAKE care, you wine lovers; the anemic dollar will get you if you don't watch out.
Over the last year, normally expensive French wines have become even more expensive, and there is every reason to believe that another round of price increases will come in the fall.
Good wines, like the 1993 Burgundies, are going to be hard to find and expensive to buy.
Even indifferent wines, like the 1992 Bordeaux, are up 15 percent or more over their autumn 1994 prices.


McVeigh Refuses a Handwriting Sample
For the first time since the Government says he came here with a bomb, Timothy J. McVeigh traveled to downtown Oklahoma City today for a hearing and refused to give the grand jury a handwriting sample that could show if he rented the truck that blew up the Federal Building.
Mr.
McVeigh, pale and dressed in khakis, arrived early this morning in a heavily guarded convoy to appear before the grand jury investigating the April 19 bombing that took 167 lives.
The grand jury is meeting in the Federal courthouse facing the explosion site, coming through an entrance still adorned with purple mourning ribbons and rough board windows.


Mets and Orioles Talking About a Deal for Bonilla
The Mets are playing their best ball of the season, and Bobby Bonilla has been at the center of it as the club's only .300 hitter and most consistent player.
But there's a chance Bonilla could join the Baltimore Orioles if the teams can reach an agreement on a trade before the non-waiver deadline of July 31.
The Orioles, in contention in the American League East, need a power hitter and are seeking the switch-hitting Bonilla in exchange for outfielder Jeffrey Hammonds.
The Mets also want the right-handed relief pitcher Armando Benitez.


For Those in the Twilight of Life, the Balm of Song
RIMA STARR, whose job is to sing for the dying, was going about her important and meaningful work.
With her Yamaha keyboard under one arm, and a big bag of music in the other, Ms.
Starr, a tall and handsome woman, was about to visit another patient.
"This woman moans all the time, " said Ms.
Starr, who once toured with national companies of Broadway shows and sang in concerts with Luciano Pavarotti.
"But when I sing, she stops." A certified music therapist, Ms.
Starr has spent the last three years on the staff of the Jacob Perlow Hospice of Beth Israel Medical Center, singing for, and sometimes with, the terminally ill.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.75
8.75
7.25
DISCOUNT RATE
5.25
5.25
3.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
5.63
5.76
4.19
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.43
5.46
4.25
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.39
5.40
4.62
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.30
6.22
7.13
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.76
6.67
7.46
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.63
7.56
8.26
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.08
6.05
6.35
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Koreans Ponder Whether Economic Miracle's Pillars Are Shaky
When a military Government here once needed scenic foliage for a ceremony and had no time to plant it, soldiers cut down forest trees and stuck them into the ground to fill out the picture.
For Lee Chul, an outspoken legislator, that maneuver is a metaphor for the problem facing South Korea today: in the country's race to develop, people have taken shortcuts at every turn.
This mentality was made too clear last month when the Sampoong Department Store collapsed in a heap of concrete, wires and asbestos, killing at least 400 people and injuring 900 more.


Strawberry Up By Tomorrow?
He has put up some solid numbers at Class AAA Columbus for nearly a week, and now, according to a source familiar with the situation, Darryl Strawberry is ready to return to the major leagues and will report to the Yankees for tomorrow night's game with the Kansas City Royals at Yankee Stadium.


Big New Trade Gap Deepens Clinton's Political Problems
The nation's trade deficit set yet another record in May, despite remarkably strong exports, compounding a political problem for the Clinton Administration, which is trying to portray its string of trade agreements in Asia and North America as its greatest foreign policy success.
The Commerce Department said today that the deficit was $11.4 billion for the month, just slightly above the April deficit but more than $1 billion higher than many economists expected.
President Clinton's economic advisers, increasingly attuned to the politics of the monthly statistics, said that a close look at the figures demonstrated the economy's continued strength.


Blades Charged In Death Of Cousin
Brian Blades, the receiver for the Seattle Seahawks, was charged today with manslaughter in the shooting death of his cousin.
Blades, 29, said at a news conference last week that the death of Charles Blades, his 34-year-old cousin, was accidental.
Under Florida law, manslaughter is a second-degree felony defined as the killing of a human being through negligence or without lawful justification.


Council Vote Clears Way For Pathmark
Plans to build a 65,000-square-foot Pathmark supermarket in Springfield Gardens, Queens, won approval from a City Council committee yesterday, virtually assuring that the store will be built, but only after the developer agreed to donate more than $400,000 over the next 20 years to other merchants in the area.
Under the agreement, the money would be distributed to merchants who would be Pathmark's competitors and used to renovate facades, for example, and make other store improvements.
Community groups would also get money for projects like youth programs.


Graf Out of Carlsbad Event
Top-ranked STEFFI GRAF has withdrawn from the Toshiba Tennis Classic in Carlsbad, Calif., because of back problems that bothered her at Wimbledon and the French Open, a tournament official said yesterday.
"I know she did everything to get here," the co-promoter, JANE STRATTON, said.
"It's something she can't play through."


Marketing Deal to Link Meredith And Reader's Digest Association
The Reader's Digest Association and the Meredith Corporation, owners of two of the largest customer data bases among publishing companies, announced yesterday that they were joining forces in a 15-year direct marketing agreement.
The Reader's Digest Association, which has information on the interests and buying habits of its more than 100 million readers and other customers worldwide, will gain access to the Meredith data base, which has similar information on Meredith's 60 million readers and other customers in the United States.
Using its extensive experience with direct marketing, Reader's Digest will market its books and magazines and some Meredith products to these customers.
Meredith will get royalties from sales of its products by Reader's Digest.


Kinder Care, ignoring its own turmoil, seeks a nurturing image.
A NEW campaign for Kinder Care Learning Centers is as calm and reassuring as the company's recent past has been turbulent.
The campaign demonstrates how one company deals in its advertisements with a tumultuous corporate history and continuing clashes in its executive suite: ignore them.


Alumax Inc.(AMX,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Egypt Arrests 15 in 2-Day Sweep Against Muslim Brotherhood
In a move that broadens Egypt's three-year campaign against Muslim militants, the Government has arrested 15 leaders of the Muslim Brotherhood over the past two days, including a senior clergyman at Islam's oldest university, Al Azhar.
"This is the first time that this Government arrested someone from Al Azhar," Mostapha Mashhour, a senior official of the Muslim Brotherhood, said in a telephone interview today.
Mr.
Mashhour also confirmed the arrest of Sheik Sayed Askar, director of public information at the thousand-year-old university.


Wolohan Lumber Co.(WLHN,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


AT HOME WITH: Jane Stubbs; Life in Bloomsbury-on-Hudson
THE jewel-box gallery and bookshop run by Jane Stubbs like a modern-day version of Bloomsbury is probably the closest thing New York has to that early-20th-century insular world of artists, writers and thinkers.
Certainly the love of estheticism is there at Stubbs Books and Prints.
As is the quality that Sir Osbert Sitwell called an enormous tolerance for the untoward or eccentric.
Blame it on her Mississippi-bred Southern hospitality, but Ms.
Stubbs just can't seem to get the insular part exactly right.


Piper Jaffray Cos.(PJC,N) reports earnings for 3d qtr to Jun 30


Agassi, McEnroe in Benefit
ANDRE AGASSI and JOHN McENROE will participate in a benefit match on Aug. 21 that will serve as a prelude to the Pathmark Tennis Classic, an annual women's tournament that will be held Aug. 22-27 at Mahwah, N.J.
It will be the third straight year Agassi appears in the benefit match, whose proceeds go to the Safe Passage Foundation, a Newark-based charity founded by the late Arthur Ashe in 1990.


Valmont Industries(VALM,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jul 1


AmSouth Bancorp (ASO,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Blood, Gore and Fettuccine?; Sure, When These Mystery Writers Hold a Round Table
Joyce Harrington was making dinner conversation.
"Why I know I can kill is because when I was 7 years old, I killed a mouse in a box of Wheaties," she said.
"It was just there in the box and I banged it and banged it with a broom."


WMX Technologies Inc.(WMX,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Greenpoint Financial (GNPT,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Maneuver by M.T.A. Postpones Metro-North Strike for 4 Months
After days of painful uncertainty for thousands of Metro-North commuters, railroad officials yesterday invoked a provision in Federal law to postpone a possible strike for four months.
The move came at the end of a day in which the railroad's unions gave up some of their cherished, decades-old work rules in contract talks.


Corrections
Because of a computer transmission error, a picture of the Olympic Stadium in Atlanta yesterday with a sports article about the the 1996 Games appeared in mirror image.
The highway shown at the right of the stadium is actually at the left.


Orange &amp; Rockland Utilities Inc.(ORU,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


World News Briefs; Rebel's American Widow Protests in Guatemala
Reuters
The American widow of a Guatemalan guerrilla leader who was reportedly captured and killed by the army began a protest today outside a military base where she believes her husband may be buried.
The woman, Jennifer Harbury, who has spent three years trying to find out what happened to her husband, Efrain Bamaca Velasquez, after he disappeared after a battle between Government troops and rebels in March 1992, said she planned to camp for at least 30 days.


VWR Corp.(VWRX,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Drop in Murder Rate Began Under Dinkins
To the Editor:
Re "Bringing the Murder Rate Down" (editorial, July 17): Much to the political benefit of Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani, the news media have heralded the decline in New York City's murder rate as groundbreaking.
The projected decline in murder rate for 1995 is the culmination of a five-year trend that began under Mayor David N. Dinkins.


Legg Mason Inc.(LM,N) reports earnings for 1st qtr to Jun 30


American Maize (AZE.A,A) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Girl, 4, Falls 5 Floors and Dies in Harlem
A 4-year-old girl was killed in Harlem yesterday when she fell from a fifth-floor apartment she was visiting with her aunt, the police said.
Doram Tamari, a police spokesman, said the girl was apparently sleeping in a rear bedroom at 695 St.
Nicholas Avenue while her aunt went downstairs.
Twenty minutes later, the police said, the aunt heard the shouts of the building superintendent, who said a child had fallen to the rear alley.


Paccar Inc.(PCAR,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Finale for Palmer Spices St. Andrews Drama
It was one of those classic British Open moments, the sort that Arnold Palmer has starred in across the last three decades.
He was on the third hole at the Old Course today, on the eve of his last appearance in the Open, and the Scots who had come out to see him were leaning over the the gallery ropes, trying to breathe his air.
He had driven his ball into the rough, almost into the crowd, and they were happy.
"Sometimes we like it when you hit a bad shot, too, Arnie," one of them said, and Palmer smiled.
He then slashed his ball out of the high grass, taking an enormous divot, and the crowd roared its throaty approval after the man, now 65 years old, who strode away actually hiking his pants.


Subway Safety Issue
Transit Authority officials said there were 257 miles of subway track, nearly half the total, where an antiquated signal system provides the potential for an accident like the fatal crash on the Williamburg Bridge last month.


COMPANY NEWS
BANC ONE TO ACQUIRE PREMIER BANCORP The Banc One Corporation has agreed to buy Premier Bancorp Inc. of Baton Rouge, La., for about $700 million in stock, the companies said yesterday.
Banc One, based in Columbus, Ohio, paid $65 million in 1991 for an option that gave it the right to buy Premier for 125 percent of book value between July 1995 and July 1997.
Yesterday's deal represents about 149 percent of Premier's book value, which was $13.28 a share as of March 31.
Banc One will exchange 0.61776 share for each Premier share.
"We were able to increase the original offer price based on the outstanding job Premier has done improving both the credit quality and the performance of their franchise," said John B. McCoy, chief executive of Banc One.
Shares of Banc One fell 62.5 cents, to $32, on the New York Stock Exchange, while shares of Premier fell 6.25 cents, to $18.4375, in Nasdaq trading. (Bloomberg Business News) USX SETTLES 8-YEAR-OLD SUIT FOR MORE THAN $47 MILLION The USX Corporation agreed yesterday to pay more than $47 million to settle an eight-year legal battle over allegations that it illegally closed a steel mill in Utah to cheat workers out of their pensions.
The settlement came more than two months after a Federal judge upheld a jury's verdict that the steelmaker had violated Federal pension laws when it idled Geneva Steel in 1986.
Under the settlement, the company will make cash payments totaling $47 million to the 1,674 plaintiffs in the class-action lawsuit.
It also will provide between $5 million and $20 million in pensions, the plaintiffs' attorney said. (AP) ROCKWELL TO BUY SILICON WAFER PLANT The Rockwell International Corporation, seeking to meet its sales targets for semiconductors, said yesterday that it had agreed to buy a silicon wafer factory in Colorado Springs from the microelectronics unit of the United Technologies Corporation.
Terms were not disclosed.
The 300,000-square-foot plant makes about 3,000 five-inch wafers a month, which are used to make computer chips.
Rockwell, based in Seal Beach, Calif., said it expected the plant to provide revenue of $50 million a year for the company's telecommunications business. (Dow Jones) MASTERCARD IN TALKS WITH OWNERS OF ACCESS CARD The four banks that own the Access credit card in Britain are in talks with Mastercard International Inc. of New York to sell the brand in a deal worth more than $:100 million, or $160 million, several British newspapers reported today.
Access, created in 1972, is the No. 2 credit card in Britain, with 7 million cardholders.
Visa is the biggest, with 11 million cardholders.
The deal, which will make Foxmeyer the largest supplier of drugs to Rite Aid, will cover about two-thirds of Rite Aid's 2,829 stores in 23 states.
Foxmeyer is a subsidiary of the Foxmeyer Health Corporation, a provider of health care products and information services.
The company said the deal could add as much as $300 million to its annual revenue.
Rite Aid, based in Camp Hill, Pa., had sales of $4.5 billion in the year that ended March 4, 1995. (Bloomberg Business News) LOCKHEED APPEARS CLOSE TO WINNING BIG BRITISH ORDER The Lockheed Martin Corporation is likely to get an order for anti-submarine aircraft worth almost $:1 billion, or $1.6 billion, from the British Government, a legislator close to the Ministry of Defense said yesterday.
The Lockheed P-3 Orion planes would replace Britain's 25-year-old Nimrod fleet.
The legislator, speaking on the condition of anonymity, said the Lockheed order was "by far the most attractive" of four options under consideration.
Officials at Lockheed Martin in Bethesda, Md., were unavailable for comment.
The other contenders are British Aerospace P.L.C., Dassault Aviation of France and the Loral Corporation. (Bloomberg Business News) PACIFIC BELL GETS APPROVAL TO OFFER VIDEO SERVICE Pacific Bell, a unit of Pacific Telesis Group, said yesterday that the Federal Communications Commission had approved its Video Dialtone service, which will offer customers such services as movies on demand, home shopping, video games and high-speed Internet access.
The executives resigned earlier this month after losing a takeover battle with Dickstein Partners Inc., a New York investment firm.
Hills, a retailer based in Canton, Mass., said three of the executives had since returned to the company.
E.
Flagstar, based in Spartanburg, S.C., said it would recruit and promote more Hispanic employees to management; increase the use of Hispanic businesses for banking, advertising and legal matters, and look for more Hispanic franchisees.
Flagstar employs about 100,000 people at its Denny's, El Pollo Loco and Quincy's Family Steakhouse restaurant chains and at the Hardee's franchises it runs. (AP) STANLEY WORKS PLANNING A BROAD REVAMPING The Stanley Works said yesterday that it would begin a broad reorganization to cut $150 million in costs by 1997 to help improve sales and profitability.
The company, which makes tools, hardware and other products, said it had hired a consultant to evaluate its businesses.
Stanley Works, based in New Britain, Conn., said it would probably incur reorganization charges.
The company also said its second-quarter earnings fell 6.7 percent, to $31.5 million, or 71 cents a share, from $33.7 million, or 75 cents a share. (Bloomberg Business News) AMERICAN STANDARD, Piscataway, N.J., a maker of household goods and automotive products, said it would cut some operations at its factory in Hamilton Township, N.J., and dismiss 230 workers.
AIRBUS INDUSTRIE, Toulouse, France, the manufacturer of large aircraft, has received an order valued at $360 million from Egyptair for three long-range A340 planes.
CORTECH INC., Denver, a biopharmaceutical company, said its shares plunged 55 percent after the company reported disappointing results from a trial of its Bradycor blood infection drug.


Integrated Device Technology Inc.(IDTI,NNM) reports earnings for 1st qtr to Jul 2


No Headline
"Would you believe Richard Nixon if he said his lawyers would decide what was relevant to disclose and what wasn't? Of course not." ALFONSE M. D'AMATO, closing yesterday's Senate hearings on Whitewater.  [ A1:3. ]


Times Mirror Sets More Cuts and Closings
The Times Mirror Company announced a series of cutbacks and closings yesterday that amount to a wholesale retreat from its strategy of becoming a multimedia powerhouse.
Three days after it closed New York Newsday, the publishing company based in Los Angeles said it would cut an additional 1,000 newspaper jobs, close its consumer multimedia group and reduce its investment in several cable television programming ventures.


For First Time, Junta Tells Burmese the Top Democrat Is Free
The Burmese junta admitted to the public today what millions of Burmese have known for more than a week -- that Daw Aung San Suu Kyi, the Nobel Prize-winning opposition leader, has been freed from house arrest.
The admission came in a snippet of videotape that appeared on the evening news on Government-run television in Myanmar, formerly known as Burma.
It showed Daw Aung San Suu Kyi (pronounced awng sahn sue chee), who was released early last week after nearly six years in detention, visiting the Martyrs Mausoleum in Yangon to present flowers to honor her father, Gen.
Aung San, the nation's independence hero.


Oxford Industries(OXM,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Jun 2


Rollins Truck Leasing Corp.(RLC,N) reports earnings for 3d qtr to Jun 30


Cummins Engine Co.(CUM,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jul 2


Shawmut National Corp.(SNC,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Read-Rite Corp.(RDRT,NNM) reports earnings for 3d qtr to Jun 30


Lydall Inc.(LDL,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


With CBS, Westinghouse May Be a Star Again
If the Westinghouse Electric Company succeeds in acquiring CBS Inc., it will be in a position to become a leading player in a business it has not dominated since the 1970's.
Westinghouse's primary broadcasting holdings consist of 5 television stations, 18 radio stations and a television programming business.


COMPANY BRIEFS
AMERICAN STANDARD, Piscataway, N.J., a maker of household goods and automotive products, said it would cut some operations at its factory in Hamilton Township, N.J., and dismiss 230 workers.
AIRBUS INDUSTRIE, Toulouse, France, the manufacturer of large aircraft, has received an order valued at $360 million from Egyptair for three long-range A340 planes.


President Shows Fervent Support For Goals of Affirmative Action
Four months after hinting that he might scale back Federal preference programs based on race and sex in the face of Republican demands to end them, President Clinton today issued a ringing reaffirmation of the goals and results of affirmative action, saying it has been good for America.
"Affirmative action has not always been perfect, and affirmative action should not go on forever," Mr.
Clinton said in a speech at the National Archives.
"It should be changed now to take care of those things that are wrong, and it should be retired when its job is done.


Heat Death Toll Rises to 436 in Chicago
Like the grisly toll from some distant war, the number of dead from last week's murderous heat wave here climbed to 436 today, and the medical examiner is not finished counting.
But while the weather has cooled, the debate about why so many died has inflamed this city's combustible politics, with Mayor Richard M. Daley and other officials trading sharp accusations over who is to blame for not doing enough to save the poor, infirm and aged from the consequences of Chicago's most crippling siege of summer heat in memory.


Outdoor Triumph of 'Tempest' Stirs Interest on Broadway
In the epilogue to "The Tempest," Patrick Stewart, in the role of Prospero, has turned nightly to the audience for the last month and begged it to release him from "this bare island."
New York has said no way.


Challenging Giuliani, Board Authorizes School Layoffs to Close the Budget Shortfall
Openly defying Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani's no-layoff pledge to the city's labor unions, the Board of Education sent a directive to school superintendents yesterday authorizing them to lay off staff if that was necessary to close the budget gap.
In addition, Schools Chancellor Ramon C. Cortines and Carol A. Gresser, the board president, sent the Mayor a strongly worded letter saying he had put them "in a box" by promising the unions that there would be no layoffs, even as the school board tries to close a $250 million budget shortfall.


Reading &amp; Bates Corp.(RB,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Jefferson Bankshares (JBNK,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Republic New York Corp.(RNB,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Acxiom Corp.(ACXM,NNM) reports earnings for 1st qtr to Jun 30


SECOND 'SAFE AREA' IN EASTERN BOSNIA OVERRUN BY SERBS
The Bosnian Serb army captured the besieged "safe area" of Zepa today, Serbian officers said, just eight days after they overran a nearby Muslim enclave in eastern Bosnia, expelling tens of thousands of residents and sending thousands more fleeing in terror.
The Bosnian Government denied the Serbs' report, and United Nations officials here had only sketchy information because their troops were confined to an area outside Zepa town.
But earlier today, the officials said the Serbs were poised to take the town, in a rugged mountain valley, where the Muslims were outgunned by the Serbs.


McGraw-Hill Cos.(MHP,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Knicks Announce the $1,000 View
It started with the Lakers in Los Angeles, where Kareem Abdul-Jabbar and Magic Johnson performed their magic on the court and Jack Nicholson and other celebrities cheered and mugged from the front row.
For $500 a seat, the highest ticket price in professional sports, everyone seemed happy.
So happy that Madison Square Garden introduced v.i.p. seats four years ago, and for $500 a seat per game, Spike Lee, John McEnroe Sr. and Jr., Ahmad Rashad and big businessmen cheered on the Knicks.


Magna Group Inc.(MAGI,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Augat Inc.(AUG,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun30


Crawford &amp; Co. (CRDA,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


SBC Communications Inc.(SBC,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Teledyne Inc.(TDY,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


General Dynamics (GD,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


LIN Broadcasting (LINB,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Greenspan Says Economy's Low May Be Past
Alan Greenspan, the Federal Reserve chairman, gave a favorable portrayal of the economy's health to a House panel today, which some traders in the financial markets viewed as making further interest-rate cuts unlikely soon.
His comments, while open to conflicting interpretations, contributed to big early-afternoon selloffs in the bond and stock markets.


Midlantic Corp.(MIDL,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


CBS News Revisits Migrants 35 Years Later
Thirty-five years ago, when CBS News was known for its documentaries, "CBS Reports" delivered the memorable "Harvest of Shame," an expose of the harsh existence of America's migrant workers.
David Lowe produced; Edward R. Murrow narrated.
Tonight, "CBS Reports," which was reborn two years ago, returns to the subject with an hourlong look at how much or little the changes speeded by that program have done to better the lives of farm workers.
Reported by Dan Rather and Randall Pinkston, "Legacy of Shame" revisits Belle Glade, Fla., a stop on the earlier investigation too, and travels to fields in South Carolina, where workers are found still to be in a state approaching peonage, and to California, where they do their planting and picking in pesticide-soaked fields.


A Sore Norman Plans to Play
For the second straight day, Greg Norman's backache prevented him from playing a practice round on the Old Course at St.
Andrews, raising questions about whether he will be fit enough to compete in the British Open.
Norman, the No. 1-ranked player in the world, was receiving therapy on his sore lower back and said he expected to be ready for his 8:45 A.M. tee time Thursday with Tom Watson and Gordon Sherry, the British Amateur champion.
"If this were any other tournament, I would have withdrawn," Norman said.
"Only time will tell. I am planning to play tomorrow."


For Jews, Intermarriage Also Has Positive Side; Role for Rabbis
To the Editor:
William Safire's observations about Jewish continuity correctly identify the home and family as the transmitters of Jewish identity and identification (column, July 17).


Norwest Corp.(NOB,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Ackerley Communications Inc.(AK,A) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Rubbermaid Inc.(RBD,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Del Laboratories (DLI,A) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Western Digital Corp.(WDC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to July 1


Hughes Electronics Corp. reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Santa Fe Pacific Corp.(SFX,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


William H. Lane, 81, Collector of American Art
William H. Lane, a collector of 20th-century American art and photography, died on Saturday at the Apple Valley Continuing Care Center in Ayer, Mass.
He was 81 and lived in Lunenburg, Mass.
He died after a long illness, said Theodore E. Stebbins Jr., the curator of American paintings at the Boston Museum of Fine Arts.


Precision Castparts Corp.(PCP,N) reports earnings for 1st qtr to Jul 2


Wolverine Tube Inc.(WLV,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jul 1


For Simpson Prosecutors, New Assists From Defense
O.
J.
Simpson's defense continued to sputter today, as the latest in a lengthening parade of witnesses either was discredited or offered ammunition for the prosecution.
John Meraz, who towed Mr.
Simpson's Bronco away from a police department shed two and a half days after Nicole Brown Simpson and Ronald L. Goldman were stabbed and slashed to death on the night of June 12, 1994, reiterated that he saw no blood inside the vehicle or fingerprint powder on the doors.


Bridge
In the last three decades, Britain has only once made a serious challenge for a world team title.
But her turn may be coming again: her juniors have just won the World Junior Team Championship, for players under the age of 26, which ended Monday in Bali, Indonesia.
The winners were Jason Hackett, Justin Hackett, Tom Townsend, Jeffrey Allerton, Danny Davies and Phil Souter.
They won the final by 124 imps against New Zealand, and they had won the semifinal by an even larger margin against Canada.
Two American teams were a disappointing seventh and eighth in a field of 12.


Dauphin Deposit (DAPN,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Push for Line-Item Veto Runs Out of G.O.P. Steam
One of the top items in the Republicans' Contract With America, a "line-item veto to restore fiscal responsibility to an out-of-control Congress," appears to be dead.
Despite passing both houses by overwhelming margins earlier this year, the proposal became a victim, in large part, because of a loss of enthusiasm among Republicans.
Now that they control Congress, many are reluctant to give a Democratic President the power to strike specific parts of spending bills without vetoing the entire legislation -- a change that might result in a significant shift of authority to the White House from the Capitol.


Falconbridge reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Coachmen Industries(COA,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


With an Abortion Vote and a Budget Cut, House Republicans Counter Clinton
The House voted today to abolish abortion coverage for Federal workers who are the victims of rape or incest, overturning one of the earliest of President Clinton's policy decisions.
And ending Congress's traditional hands-off policy on the White House budget, the Republican-controlled House cut $41 million from Mr.
Clinton's request for the Executive Office for the 1996 fiscal year, including all money for the Council of Economic Advisers, a major Presidential advisory group.


U.S. Hopes to Avenge Cup Defeat to Brazil
The last time the United States soccer team played Brazil, the North Americans lost by 1-0 on July 4, 1994, at the Rose Bowl in the second round of the World Cup.
On Thursday, the United States hopes to avenge the loss that bounced it out of the tournament when it plays Brazil, which went on to win the 1994 World Cup, in the semifinals of the America Cup.
The winner of the match will play Uruguay, which beat Colombia in Montevideo tonight by 2-0.
The game will be played at Campus Municipal Stadium in the resort town of Maldonado, Uruguay, about 75 miles from the capital, Montevideo.


Who Will Lead the Arts Counterattack?
To the Editor:
Your splendid editorial "New Yorkers Against New York" (July 16) upbraids New York Republicans for their "cramped vision" in voting to devastate Government support of the arts.
Whom do they think they are representing, you ask, in saving a mere $20 million for museums, orchestras, ballet companies and public television, while voting for an outrageous $8 billion for defense that the Pentagon does not even ask for?


York International Corp.(YRK,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Survey Finds Surge in Smoking by Young
There has been a sharp increase in smoking among young teen-agers in the United States, according to a survey of 50,000 8th-, 10th- and 12th-graders, and fewer of them believe that smoking is hazardous to their health.
The shift has alarmed authorities on drug abuse because it makes it clear that after more than a decade of unchanging rates of smoking among youths, significant increases have begun "despite the accumulating evidence of smoking's lethal effects, despite the many new restrictions on cigarette smoking, and despite the fact that smoking has fallen considerably among adults," said Dr.
Lloyd D. Johnston of the University of Michigan Survey Research Center, the director of the study.


Decision in Psychiatrist's Favor
After less than an hour of deliberation, a jury in Hunterdon County rejected on Tuesday the claims of a man who blamed his psychiatrist for the psychosis that led him to stab his wife 100 times, The Associated Press reported.
Michael Komons, who was found not guilty by reason of insanity in the 1988 death of his wife, had sued Dr.
Ira R. Morganstern, saying the psychiatrist had not properly supervised his care.


Protection for Elderly Sought
Attorney General Deborah T. Poritz said yesterday that she has formed a 24-member task force to recommend new laws or educational programs aimed at protecting the elderly from consumer fraud.
Older people who live alone are particularly susceptible to fraudulent telephone pitches, said Mark Herr, director of the Division of Consumer Affairs.
"One of the problems we have with elderly people is that they're too polite -- they won't tell someone to take a hike," he said.


Seles to Return With No. 1 Ranking
Monica Seles, once a giggling, grunting teen-ager with the fastest strokes in tennis before a traumatic stabbing in April 1993 forced her to the sideline for two years, confirmed yesterday that she will finally be able to return to the circuit the same way she left it: as the No. 1 player in the world.
Speaking from her home in Sarasota, Fla., where she has been using her brother, Zoltan, as a convenient punching bag while practicing for her July 29 exhibition match against Martina Navratilova, Seles said she is "trying to go back to the normality of what I was doing before all this happened."


Essay; Singapore's Fear
In our last episode about Singapore, we learned that students and faculty at Williams College, an academic bastion of liberalism in Massachusetts, were objecting to the school's plan to honor the Prime Minister of that rich, repressive, anti-American regime.
Evidently Goh Chok Tung, the puppet who is keeping the Prime Minister's seat warm for one of Dictator Lee Kuan Yew's sons, became fearful at the revelation in this space that he may be confronted on his great day by the exiled Singaporean dissident Francis Seow, now a fellow at Harvard Law School.


Economic Scene; When it comes to farm subsidies, the G.O.P. walks a narrow line.
THE most effective political salesmen often work on the thinnest margins.
Consider the Congressional Republican leadership, which must walk a narrow line between new-fashioned, take-no-prisoners conservatism that intrigued voters in 1994 and old-fashioned, scratch-my-back coalition politics.
On the one hand, Republicans are committed to balancing the budget by 2002.
On the other, they are as dependent as Democrats on interest groups that favor welfare -- in their case, corporate welfare.
Perhaps nowhere is the contradiction as vivid as in the struggle over farm policy, a 60-year-old machine for increasing the incomes of favored farmers at the expense of taxpayers and consumers.


Commerce Is Reviving at a Japanese Port


KU Energy Corp.(KU,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


BUSINESS SUMMARY FRONT PAGE SQN##386090##STOCKS PLUNGE IN A SELLING SURGE, SWAMPING RALLY Riding one of the most powerful rallies in their history, the stock and bond markets stumbled badly yesterday in one of the busiest trading days ever, raising the specter in some quarters of what Wall Street calls a correction -- a sharp retreat in stock and bond prices. The Dow Jones industrial average closed down 57.41 points to 4,628.87. SQN##392480##THE HIGHER THEY RISE, THE HARDER . . .  Yesterday's 35.66-point drop in the Nasdaq composite index, which is dominated by technology stocks, was the second worst in the index's history, measured in points, exceeded only by the 46.12-point decline on Oct. 19, 1987. But at the low point yesterday, the decline exceeded the 1987 number. Since closing Monday at 1,005.89, its first-ever finish above 1,000, the index has fallen 53.02 points, or 5.3 percent, to 952.87. SQN##385913##GREENSPAN SAYS ECONOMY'S LOW MAY BE PAST Alan Greenspan, the Federal Reserve chairman, gave a favorable portrayal of the economy's health to a House panel today, which some traders in the financial markets viewed as making further interest-rate cuts unlikely soon. SQN##388963##CREDITORS IN A BIG PONZI SCHEME SAY THEY'VE BEEN TAKEN AGAIN Thousands of creditors of the Towers Financial Corporation, who lost hundreds of millions of dollars in what regulators have called the largest Ponzi scheme ever, are saying they have been taken again. And, they contend, it happened right under the noses of a battalion of high-priced lawyers and financial advisers hired to help the creditors recover their money. BUSINESS DIGEST SQN##389900##FORD CITES ECONOMY FOR DECLINE IN EARNINGS Ford reported its first quarterly decline in profit in more than two years, as its second-quarter earnings fell 8.1 percent, to $1.57 billion, or $1.45 a share. The company attributed the decline to a softening economy and a weak dollar. It warned that the next quarter was also likely to be weak as it writes off new factory equipment and reduces production to introduce new cars and trucks. SQN##389668##TIMES MIRROR PLANS MORE CUTS Times Mirror will cut 1,000 more jobs, mainly at The Los Angeles Times. It will also close its consumer multimedia group and reduce its investment in cable television. The moves mark a broad retreat from its strategy of becoming a multimedia power. "We must get our cost base in line; we must be significantly more productive than w


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League  CALIFORNIA ANGELS -- Claimed Mike Harkey, pitcher, off waivers from the Oakland Athletics.
Designated Mark Dalesandro, pitcher, for assignment.


Deciding if It's Time for Kindergarten or Time to Wait a Year
SUSAN MILLAR PERRY decided to give her child that extra push in life by holding him back.
When her son, Nick, was just a toddler, Ms.
Perry began to agonize over whether to delay his entry into kindergarten by a year, until he was nearly 6.
She consulted with friends and his preschool teachers at the West Side Montessori School in Manhattan.
She received conflicting advice from a neighbor who acted as a sort of Greek chorus, telling her one day to hold him back, then changing her tone to advise that the current wisdom was to push him forward.


Boise Cascade Office Products Corp.(BOP,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Web of Cellular Phone Fraud Widens
HENRY DUQUETTE, who operates a limousine service in the Hudson Valley town of Pleasant Valley, N.Y., was delighted with the cellular telephone that he bought for his car earlier this year.
No more searching for phone booths.
No more scrambling for change.
Then the March bill arrived.


Tellabs Inc.(TLAB,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Daniel and Alcott Covet an Elusive Honor
In any other sport, Beth Daniel would be a shoo-in for the Hall of Fame based on her overall achievements.
So, too, would Amy Alcott.
But both players, who are entered in the $700,000 JAL Big Apple Classic which begins Thursday at the Wykagyl Country Club, may not make it into the hall under the current requirements.
If so, it would be akin to baseball pitchers with 2.00 earned run averages over long careers, or hitters with .325 career averages, not making it to Cooperstown.


Damark International (DMRK,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jul 1


Jacobs Engineering Group Inc.(JEC,N) reports earnings for 3d qtr to Jun 30


Selloff Jolts Stock Market
The stock market stumbled badly yesterday, raising fears that it might be facing a sharp retreat from one of the most powerful rallies in history.
Still, the market was able to cut its losses late in the day.
The Dow Jones industrial average, which had plummeted 132 points, closed down 57.41 points.


Valley National Bancorp (VLY,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr Jun 30


Bush Boake Allen Inc.(BOA,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 25


Sudbury Inc.(SUDS,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Office Depot Inc.(ODP,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jul 1


DMR Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


The Pop Life
Not Really Bragging
Shaggy is not like other dancehall reggae performers.
On "Boombastic," the Top 10 single and title track from his second album, released last week on Virgin records, he raps, "With my sexual physique, Jah know me well built" (Jah is short for Jahweh, or God.) The next thing one hears in the song is Shaggy laughing at himself.
"It's a real braggadocious type of tune," Shaggy, 26, said by telephone recently from the John F. Kennedy International Airport, where he was leaving for a sold-out tour of Japan.
"But I'm not a person who's really the bragging type. I'm laughing because I'm trying not to let anybody take it as being serious. I'm not actually Mister Lover-Lover."


Borg-Warner Automotive Inc.(BWA,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Stanley Works (SWK,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Examination Of Waco Raid Goes Partisan
Congressional hearings on the Branch Davidians and the Federal siege near Waco, Tex., opened today with a burst of partisan battling and new Republican questions about missing Government files.
House Republicans spent much of the day fending off Democratic accusations that the firearms lobby had improperly influenced the inquiry into the Government's handling of the siege, which began with a botched raid that left four Federal agents dead and ended 51 days later with an assault by the Federal Bureau of Investigation and a fire that killed about 80 people in the sect's compound.


Inter-Regional Financial Group Inc. reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Forest Laboratories Inc.(FRX,A) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


In an Assertive and Democratic Taiwan, a Basic Issue Arises: Who Are We?
Chen Ming-tong brushed a mop of hair off his forehead and laughed about his last trip to China.
"China?" he said, his eyes widening.
"I'm a foreigner in that country. It's not my country. A lot of their language, I don't even understand their meaning."


Sonat Offshore Drilling Inc.(RIG,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Firan Corp. reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 2


Boatmen's Bancshares Inc.(BOAT,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Kinetic Concepts Inc.(KNCI,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Golden West Financial Corp.(GDW,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Plexus Corp.(PLXS,NNM) reports earnings for 3d qtr to Jun 30


A Restoration Is Announced For 42d Street
The resurrection of 42d Street took a critical step forward yesterday as a Toronto-based production company announced plans to transform two historic buildings into one state-of-the-art theater to be used for large-scale musical productions.
By combining the two theaters, the Lyric and the Academy, the company said it plans to create a 1,850-seat venue that will be used for the type of big, lavish musicals that in recent years have driven the growth of ticket sales on Broadway.


Mr. McConnell's Silly Ploy
Under rising pressure to hold public hearings on accusations of sexual and official misconduct against Senator Bob Packwood, Senator Mitch McConnell, chairman of the Senate Ethics Committee, has resorted to bullying tactics that betray the committee's nonpartisan mission.
Mr.
McConnell, a Kentucky Republican, has threatened to begin hearings on accusations against Senator Tom Daschle, the Democratic minority leader, and into Senator Edward Kennedy's 1969 Chappaquiddick tragedy if Senator Barbara Boxer of California keeps pushing for public hearings in the Packwood case.


Great Western Financial Corp.(GWF,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Justin Industries(JSTN,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Industrial Flotsam Elevated to Art
LIKE waves at the shore, decorating styles of the last decade -- English country, cozy cottage, Art Deco, Old World and New Age -- have risen and receded, leaving their gentle traces on our sensibilities and on the pillows in many living rooms.
But these trends, with their feeling of fantasy and escape, have not enthralled the photographer Jan Staller.
For nearly 35 years, Mr.
Staller, whose professional focus is the ruins of the man-made landscape (its remote streets and decaying piers, the crumbling West Side Highway, New Jersey landfills, abandoned chemical plants and construction sites after hours), has been attuned to one muse only: 20th-century industrial design, whether in the furniture of masters like George Nelson and Charles Eames or in the myriad anonymous objects that were once an intrinsic part of the machine age.


Chancellor Search Reflects Power Struggle
As the search for a new Chancellor for New York City's schools officially began yesterday with the first of two public hearings, it was clear that the Board of Education and Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani disagree on almost every aspect of the process -- from the basic description of the job to the Mayor's very role in the selection.
A month after Chancellor Ramon C. Cortines submitted his resignation amid a barrage of attacks from City Hall, the search is taking shape as a struggle between the Mayor and the board not only over the qualities they envision in a successor, but also over a larger question of who should control the nation's largest school system.


Comair Holdings Inc.(COMR,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Japan's Elections on Sunday May Reshape Its Politics Again
As sound trucks roam the streets and posters accost pedestrians with gleaming images of eager candidates, the central figure in the national elections set for Sunday is not even on the ballots.
Prime Minister Tomiichi Murayama may not be formally competing, for voters will choose only members of the upper house in Parliament, but a poor showing for his Socialist Party could force his resignation.
And that, in turn, could lead to the collapse of the governing coalition of three political parties, and then a political realignment.


Guidant Corp.(GDT,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Fulton Financial Corp. reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


On Men Killing Men, Especially Within a Family
After working nearly 30 hours "subtitling, appropriately enough, Huston's 'The Dead' for its French distributor," Luke Benami goes back to his apartment in lower Manhattan to learn, when he responds to a message from Jerusalem on his answering machine, that his father has just died of a heart attack.
So begins Neil Gordon's brooding first novel, "The Sacrifice of Isaac," an international murder thriller whose outcome hinges on the meaning of the biblical story of Abraham and Isaac.
Luke's father, Yosef Benami, was a towering figure in Israel, a general, ambassador, professor and "hero of the Mosad le-Aliya Bet during the war, famous for his Italian Passage, the still-secret route by which he saved hundreds of Viennese Jews from extermination." Yet his death is the latest in a series of family catastrophes that have seen Luke's older brother, Danni, disappear after deserting from the army during the 1973 War, and their mother commit suicide after leaving their father.


Freehan Quits at Michigan
The University of Michigan coach, BILL FREEHAN, resigned yesterday after six years in the post.
Athletic Director JOE ROBERSON said in a statement that he and Freehan, who played 15 years for the Detroit Tigers, had discussed his resignation on several occasions and Freehan felt it was time to move on.


Milanovich Staying On
Maryland quarterback SCOTT MILANOVICH will stay for his senior year despite a four-game N.C.A.A. suspension for gambling on college games.
"I made a terrible mistake," Milanovich said at a news conference yesterday.
"I've become a successful player because I've made a habit out of making good decisions on the field. Now I've made a bad decision off the field that I wish I could take back."


Comerica Inc.(CMA,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  *
First Data Corp., Hackensack, N.J., is selling $200 million of notes due in 2005 through Lehman Brothers.
The notes are priced at 99.304 to yield 6.847 percent.
The noncallable issue is rated A3 by Moody's Investors Service Inc. and A by the Standard &amp; Poor's Corp.


Playtex Products Inc.(PYX,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jul 1


Search for Suspect Goes on TV
Nicholas L. Bissell Jr., the Somerset County Prosecutor, hopes a television program will help flush out the mastermind of a botched robbery at a Franklin Park jewelry store in which the store owner fatally shot his wife.
The owner, Jeffrey Wolf, will appear on "America's Most Wanted" on the Fox network Saturday evening to describe the attempted robbery and how he fired a gun last May, wounding a robber but also killing his wife, Brenda.
Four suspects have been arrested, but the police are seeking Avram David Gottlieb, who Mr.
Bissell said set up the robbery.


Andrew Corp.(ANDW,NNM) reports earnings for 3d qtr to Jun 30


Come to Singapore and Debate the Issues
To the Editor
William Safire (column, July 10) claims Prime Minister Goh Chok Tong of Singapore has "seized a three-year-old invitation" from Williams College to "be used as a powerful symbolic tool in Singapore" (quoting a Williams professor).


Put the Students First
New York City's Board of Education has approved an austerity plan that could lead to bigger classes and shorter school days.
That is hardly the right recipe for educational excellence, but the board says it is the only way it can cope with the restrictive budget that took effect on July 1.
Mayor Rudolph Giuliani has denounced the plan as another attempt by the board to spare its bureaucracy at the expense of the city's schoolchildren.
The Mayor may be overstating the case, but his instincts are right.
If sacrifices are to be made, they should be made by the school system's administrative apparatus, not by the schoolchildren.


Plum Creek Timber L.P.  (PCL,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Market Place; A breakup of Thorn-EMI may already be priced into its stock.
THORN-EMI has enjoyed a hefty surge in its stock price this year.
Its shares have gone from just under $:10 (about $16) early this year to $:13.60 ($21.76) yesterday, a rise of 36 percent.
In part, the share price has been driven by strong earnings growth.
But most of the excitement has come from a growing conviction in the market that Thorn-EMI will voluntarily or involuntarily be split into its component parts: primarily EMI Music, one of the world's premier recording companies; music and book retailing, and rentals of home electronics and appliances.


Hon Industries (HONI,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jul 1


VF Corp.(VFC,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jul 1


Talks May Follow War of Words
The union that represents toll collectors on the New Jersey Turnpike accused management yesterday of unfair labor practices, including bargaining in bad faith, harassing members of the union's negotiating team and refusing to allow toll collectors to come back to work immediately after their eight-hour walkout on July 3.


Executive Changes
BOSTON COMPANY ASSET MANAGEMENT INC. , Boston, appointed Alexander Webb 3d vice chairman and chief investment officer.
BUSINESS EXPRESS AIRLINES , Portsmouth, N.H., a unit of Delta Air Lines Inc., named Gary Ellmer chief operating officer.


Health Management Associates (HMA,N) reports earnings for 3d qtr to Jun 30


Littlefuse Inc. reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Sanifill Inc.(FIl,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


METRO DIGEST
M.T.A. ACTS TO POSTPONE RAIL STRIKE
After days of painful uncertainty for thousands of Metro-North commuters, railroad officials invoked a provision in Federal law to postpone a possible strike for four months.
The move came at the end of a day in which the railroad's unions gave up some of their cherished, decades-old work rules in contract talks.  [ Page A1. ]
The labor dispute with Metro-North had stirred a systemwide paranoia among riders about an imminent job action.  [ B7. ] POWER STRUGGLE IN CHANCELLOR SEARCH
As the search for a new Chancellor for New York City's schools officially began with the first of two public hearings, the Board of Education and Mayor Giuliani disagree on almost every aspect of the process, from the basic description of the job to the Mayor's role in the selection.  [ A1. ]
Openly defying Mayor Giuliani's no-layoff pledge to the city's labor unions, the Board of Education sent a directive to school superintendents authorizing them to lay off employees if that was necessary to close the budget gap.  [ B4. ] NEW YORK CITY  FOR CHILDREN, 15 MINUTES OF FEAR
About 50 young children from a Bronx Head Start center spent a terrifying quarter-hour in the sweltering darkness of a subway car after two police officers confronted a man armed with a knife, touching off a near-stampede toward the last car.  [ B3. ] HISPANIC RESIDENTS FIGHT FOR DISTRICT
In the aftermath of a Supreme Court decision striking down a Georgia Congressional district that was drawn along racial lines, a fight is under way over the future of the largely Hispanic 12th District in New York City.  [ B3. ] WITNESS FAKED TAPES, JURORS ARE TOLD
The former wife of the Government's chief witness in the trial of Sheik Omar Abdel Rahman testified that her ex-husband had bragged of his skills in making bogus recordings of conversations and that he once made a phony tape for use in their own divorce case.  [ B5. ] BLACK FAMILY'S CAR TORCHED IN BROOKLYN
The Rev.
Donovan Leys and his family are the only blacks on an all-white street in Midwood, Brooklyn.
Someone doused their sedan with gasoline and set it ablaze, and the police are trying to determine whether the incident was racially motivated.  [ B8. ] WITNESS DESCRIBES BOTCHED ABORTION
As her life drained from her, Guadalupe Negron sat bleeding on an operating table, drowning in her own vomit as a doctor fumbled in a failed attempt to get oxygen into her lungs, a paramedic testified at the doctor's murder trial.  [ B2. ] REGION  TESTS TRACE VIRUS TO MOUSE
Tests indicate a possible link between the death of a Long Island man in April and a virus found in the tissue of a mouse captured afterward in the man's home in Bridgehampton, state health officials announced.  [ B7. ] STATE TAKEOVER OF SCHOOL IS AUTHORIZED
Governor Pataki signed a bill authorizing the state takeover of the troubled school district in Roosevelt, L.I., warning that takeovers could happen elsewhere if local officials don't shape up.
It is believed to be the first time New York State has authorized the takeover of a local school district.  [ B7. ]


Corrections
An article and a picture caption yesterday about an annual gathering of Federal and local law-enforcement officers in Tennessee, misstated the age of a videotape showing signs and placards with racist messages.
The scenes in the tape were from the 1990 gathering, not last May's.
Details and later developments appear today in an article on page A16.


Meridian Bancorp Shifts Its Account
Meridian Bancorp in Reading, Pa., has selected the Weightman Group in Philadelphia to handle its account, which had been at Reimel Carter Advertising in Philadelphia for the last 19 years.
The billings were not disclosed, but Adweek estimated them at $4 million to $5 million.
Weightman was awarded the account after a five-month review that was narrowed to that agency; Reimel Carter; Jordan, McGrath, Case &amp; Taylor in New York, and Tierney &amp; Partners in Philadelphia, a unit of True North Communications.


A Spree for Lukas At Keeneland Sale
The trainer D. Wayne Lukas, who won all three Triple Crown races this year with Thunder Gulch and Timber Country, was the top American buyer at the Keeneland July Selected Yearling sale that concluded Tuesday night.
Lukas spent $3,410,000 for eight yearlings on behalf of several different owners.
In all, Lukas will train 14 of the sale's horses, including the sale's topper, a bay filly by Mr.
Prospector out of Daring Bidder, which brought $1,250,000 in the final night session.


Harmac Pacific reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Charged in I.R.S. Check Fraud
Three taxpayers who wrote checks in 1991 to the Internal Revenue Service were surprised when their checks came back from the bank.
Instead of IRS, two checks had been altered to read IDRIS F. MOHAMMED, and a third to read IURIS PRODUCTS.
Yesterday Peter Odafe Obebeduo, a nursing student who lives in the Bronx, was indicted by a Federal grand jury for altering three checks totaling $89,000 and cashing them.
"We don't know how he got hold of the checks," said Donna Krappa, an Assistant United States Attorney.
TERRY PRISTIN


Komag Inc.(KMAG,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jul 2


Conrail Inc.(CRR,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Nature's Sunshine Products Inc.(NATR,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Panhandle Eastern Corp.(PEL,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Cara Operations reports earnings for 1st qtr to Jun 25


Witness in Terror Trial Says Informer Could Fake Tape Recordings
The former wife of the Government's chief witness in the trial of Sheik Omar Abdel Rahman testified yesterday that her ex-husband had boasted of his skills in making bogus recordings of conversations and that he once made a phony tape for use in their own divorce case.
She also testified that the witness, Emad A. Salem, who was a military officer in Egypt before he immigrated to the United States in 1987, had told her that his first loyalty was to Egypt.


General Instrument Corp.(GIC,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Hubbell Inc.(HUBB,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Werner Enterprises Inc.(WERN,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Creditors in a Big Ponzi Scheme Say They've Been Taken Again
Thousands of creditors of the Towers Financial Corporation, who lost hundreds of millions of dollars in what regulators have called the largest Ponzi scheme ever, are saying they have been taken again.
And, they contend, it happened right under the noses of a battalion of high-priced lawyers and financial advisers hired to help the creditors recover their money.
The new fraud was masterminded by John Hall, a Los Angeles businessman whose record includes a criminal conviction and regulatory problems, according to a lawsuit filed two weeks ago in Federal District Court in Manhattan.
The suit and regulatory documents show that Mr.
Hall, who variously uses Thomas and Carlisle as his middle name, reached a settlement in 1992 with securities regulators who accused him of looting a small money-market fund.
He also entered a 1987 settlement with bank regulators who accused him of abusing his position at a failed California bank and was convicted in 1978 of lying to obtain a Government loan.


Standard Motor Products Inc.(SMP,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Mid-Atlantic Medical Services Inc.(MME,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Westcorp Inc.(WES,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Champion Enterprises (CHB,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jul 1


Fusion in a Synagogue
MODESTY, strong discipline and New England restraint -- as well as a dose of inspiration from the centuries-old wooden folk architecture synagogues in Poland now mostly destroyed -- are all elements that came into play in the design of Temple Israel (above), a synagogue for a 200-member Conservative congregation in Greenfield, Mass.
From Aug. 6 to Jan. 14, photographs, drawings and models will be included in the exhibition "A New England Wooden Synagogue: Building Temple Israel, Greenfield, Mass." at the Jewish Museum, 1109 Fifth Avenue, at 92d Street.
"We wanted to pay respect to the history, yet design a building that would be staunchly contemporary," said M. Louis Goodman, the New York architect who designed the temple.


Public Service Enterprise Group (PEG,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Life USA Holding Inc.(LUSA,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Chemed Corp.(CHE,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Senate Sets Term Limits for Committee Posts
Senate Republicans agreed today to abandon a smidgen of their stately reverence for seniority, imposing six-year term limits on committee chairmanships and lesser leadership positions.
But they diluted a freshman-inspired effort to make it easier to dump committee chairmen who defect on crucial votes, as Senator Mark O. Hatfield of Oregon, the Appropriations Committee chairman, did in casting the decisive vote on March 1 against a Constitutional amendment to require a balanced Federal budget.


Nicor Inc.(GAS,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Pilgrim's Pride Corp.(CHX,N) reports earnings for 3d qtr to Jul 1


Regulators Go on the Alert
Minutes after stock and bond markets started to plunge this afternoon, regulators began calling each other and market executives to determine whether any response was needed.
The markets bounced back after an alarming half-hour plunge -- during which the Dow Jones industrial average was briefly down more than 130 points -- and regulators took no action.
But that half-hour produced another test of the elaborate procedures developed since the 1987 stock market crash.


Florida Gallery for Self-Taught Artists
HERE are 16 cats, 1 dog and an overwhelming collection of outsider and folk art in Tamara Hendershot's small brightly colored home that doubles as the Vanity Novelty Garden gallery in Miami Beach.
Since she left New York eight years ago, Ms.
Hendershot, a former marine biologist and photography editor, has specialized in the work of self-taught Florida artists.
Her roster includes Purvis Young, who lives in Miami and whose thick sketchbooks ($1,000 to $6,000) are prized by folk art collectors; Joseph Abrams, who lives nearby in Miami Beach and makes fanciful hats out of The Miami Herald ($110 each); Willie Eaglin, who is 87 and blind and makes intricately braided rugs out of used clothing interlaced with buttons and zippers ($65 to $125); Hubert Walters, who, Ms.
Hendershot said, "makes wooden, tin and plaster boats with captains that are always as big as the boats" ($300 to $600), and Pablo Cano, who transforms Clorox bottles into angels and Victorian creatures ($300 to $5,000).


La Quinta Inns (LQI,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Amphenol Corp.(APH,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Patent Office Owes Inventors Protection
To the Editor:
Your July 14 Law page article on Commissioner of Patents and Trademarks Bruce Lehman reveals Mr.
Lehman's real attitude toward inventors.
He considers them nothing but weekend hobbyists and yahoos who don't understand the importance of the Patent and Trademark Office.


Havens Adds Torchiness in Unexpected Places
Torch singing and folk music may be only distantly related on the family tree of pop, but in Richie Havens, who opened a two-week engagement at Rainbow and Stars on Tuesday evening, they seem more like first cousins.
One reason is that Mr.
Havens sings pop as well as folk, spirituals and pop ballads by everyone from the Beatles to Bruce Springsteen.
Another important way in which Mr.
Havens blurs the lines is by stamping everything with the same sorrowful emotional urgency.
His craggy bass-baritone voice seems to rise from the earth in a bleeding-heart cry for the sorrows of humanity.
Echoes of that cry, which can seem indiscriminate and overwrought if applied to the wrong material, infuse the singing of everyone from Joe Cocker to Michael Bolton.


Staying in the School System
Eugene C. Campbell, the recently deposed Superintendent of the Newark schools, will remain in the system, most likely as a principal.
Mr.
Campbell and 12 other executives, along with the nine-member school board, were dismissed when the state took over the district last week.
State officials had asked Mr.
Campbell, who has tenure, to let them know by yesterday if he wanted to take a lesser post.


Corrections
An obituary on Friday about Dr.
George G. Glenner, a researcher on Alzheimer's disease, misidentified his surviving wife.
She is Joy A. Glenner, to whom he was married for 15 years, not Joyce Saunders, from whom he was divorced.


U.S. Cellular Corp.(USM,A) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Polaris Industries(PII,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


New York Needs a Much Tougher Assault Law
To the Editor:
The verdict in the case involving Police Detective Sgt.
Louis Cosentino (news article, July 13) underscores the need for immediate reform of New York's assault statute.


Coca-Cola Enterprises Inc.(CCE,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Hollywood Director To Try Commercials
Quentin Tarantino, the director whose films include "Pulp Fiction," is trying to branch out to the small screen with a commercial production company.


Hawaiian Electric Industries (HE,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Louis C. Abelson, 83, Founder Of J.F.K. Airport Medical Office
Dr.
Louis C. Abelson, who in 1950 started what became the J.F.K.
Medical Office in a Quonset hut when Kennedy International was little Idlewild Airport in Queens, died on Tuesday at Peninsula Hospital Center in Far Rockaway, Queens.
He was 83 and lived in Far Rockaway and Montauk, L.I.
The cause was amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, Lou Gehrig's disease, his family said.


At Tumultuous Hearing, Bombast and Fluster
The subcommittee chairman's fear of a second siege of Waco, bloodless but partisan, threatened to materialize soon after the gavel sounded today at the opening of a high-speed, eight-day hearing into the grisly chaos that marked the first siege two years ago in Texas.
The Democratic minority defending the Clinton Administration's handling of the matter demonstrated the unwieldiness of the special joint committee hearings -- crammed with lawmakers, reporters and photographers -- by raising early procedural objections and complaining that the process was already tainted by a bias toward gun fanciers.


Xilinx Inc.(XLNX,NNM) reports earnings for 1st qtr to July 1


German Business Ethics Loses Some Luster
Whenever corporate corruption in Europe was discussed, German business was held up as the prime example of good behavior.
But that image has been deeply shaken in recent weeks as a spate of high-profile corruption investigations has touched some of the country's blue-chip businesses, like Volkswagen, and even the cherished tennis star Steffi Graf.


Excerpts From Clinton Talk on Affirmative Action
Following are excerpts from President Clinton's speech yesterday at the National Archives on Federal affirmative-action programs as recorded by Federal News Service, a transcription company:
In recent weeks, I have begun a conversation with the American people about our fate and our duty to prepare our nation not only to meet the new century but to live and lead in a world transformed to a degree seldom seen in all of our history.
Much of this change is good, but it is not all good, and all of us are affected by it.
Therefore, we must reach beyond our fears and our divisions to a new time of great and common purpose.


Cincinnati Milacron Inc.(CMZ,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 17


Trustco Bank reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Fumes Force School to Evacuate
The Woodrow Wilson School of Public and International Affairs at Princeton University was evacuated yesterday morning after chlorine fumes began circulating through the four-story building.
A contractor had mistakenly added muriatic acid to a basement chlorine tank that feeds the reflecting pool in front of the building, The Associated Press reported.
Nineteen people were treated, with 17 taken to area hospitals for observation, a university spokesman said.


Race Ignored, Procession Honors Rider
Still stunned and saddened by the death of a fellow rider the day before, the 118 remaining competitors in the Tour de France turned today's stage into a tribute to the rider, 24-year-old Fabio Casartelli of Italy.
This 16th of the 20 stages in the 82d Tour de France was not a race.
It was a procession.
The pack's leaders decreed beforehand that all riders show solidarity for the memory of Casartelli, and so they remained grouped throughout, traveling at the stately pace of 30 kilometers an hour (18.6 miles an hour), about 10 k.p.h. below their average thus far in the three-week race.


General Binding (GBND,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Hunt(J.B.) Transport (JBHT,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Co-Steel Inc. reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Meridian Bancorp (MRDN,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Redman Industries(RDMN,NNM) reports earnings for 1st qtr to Jun 30


Deposit GuarantyCorp.(DEPS,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Quno Corp. reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 25


Intergraph reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Arvin Industries(ARV,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jul 2


Spotlight on Pianist, 12, With the Philharmonic
In a promotional video last winter, Kurt Masur raved about the 12-year-old pianist Helen Huang, who was then appearing in her first subscription concerts with the New York Philharmonic.
That promotion, with its hype and hyperbole, was a mistake.
So was Ms.
Huang's appearance with the Philharmonic at Avery Fisher Hall on Tuesday night, as part of the orchestra's summer concert series.
Ms.
Huang is a very gifted pianist, fluent well beyond her years.
But critical bluntness is required now lest the pressures that come with being pushed too quickly into the spotlight ruin the possibilities latent in her graceful turns of phrase.
Judging from her rendition of Mozart's Piano Concerto No. 23, accompanied by Mr.
Masur, she is still a half-formed musician, and a vulnerable one at that.


Murray Riese Is Dead at 73; An Innovator in Restaurants
Murray Riese, the younger of the redoubtable Riese brothers, who blanketed Manhattan with fast-food restaurants, died on Tuesday at his home in Great Neck, L.I.
He was 73 and at his death was chairman of the privately held Riese organization, which operates almost 200 restaurants in New York, many of them national franchises like T.G.I.
Friday's, Houlihan's and Dunkin' Donuts.
His son, Dennis, said the cause was cancer.


Owens-Illinois (OI,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Boy, 12, Dies in a Rage of Bullets, and a 16-Year-Old Is Held
Friends called him Junior or June or June-Bug.
Quentin Carter was a little guy, a bantam, the class clown and one of the smallest students in his sixth grade at Intermediate School 109 in Queens Village.
Two days before his 13th birthday, he pulled one of his usual routines on an older youth, nagging him comically for a quarter outside a neighborhood grocery store.
The older boy, 16-year-old Brian Wright, was also seen as a little guy by his peers; not physically, but in status.
He was nicknamed Shorty, and had the reputation of an easily bullied boy, a Herb or a nerd, high school acquaintances said.
They branded him a loser.


Wetteland Scatters Yanks' Dark Clouds
There were Royals standing on every base in the ninth inning, John Wetteland was desperately trying to preserve a three-run lead and suddenly a game that should have been over was looking like another dreary outing for the Yankees.
Could they actually botch this potential victory?
Could they add another bleak day to a season of darkness?


Bonilla's Homer in 10th Is the Latest Mets' Magic
This was the kind of game the Mets would have lost during their miserable first half of the season.
A 2-0 lead had turned into a 4-2 deficit.
They had been robbed of a run in the fifth inning by a bad call and seen the rookie pitcher Bill Pulsipher get tagged for a momentum-turning, three-run homer minutes later.
But since the All-Star break the Mets have embraced a new confidence and a never-give-up attitude.
So when Bobby Bonilla belted a towering home run in the 10th inning tonight at Busch Stadium, it not only lifted the Mets over the Cardinals, 5-4, but reaffirmed that this streak of success is not just a mirage.


China's Plans to Make Family Car Are Receding, Official Says
China's "family car" project, an idea that got Western auto makers salivating when they were invited to submit prototypes last year, is likely to be delayed until well into the next century, a senior Chinese official said today.
In the first public comments on the family car by a senior member of China's car bureaucracy since last fall, Huang Fuheng, general manager of the China National Automotive Industry Sales Corporation, said that making family cars salable would be a "very long and very complicated" process.


Bowater Inc.(BOW,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Alan D. Marks, Pianist, 46
Alan D. Marks, an American pianist living in Germany who was presented in recitals at the 92d Street Y and other New York concert halls, died on July 12 at his home in Berlin.
He was 46.
The cause was cancer, his family said.


Ohio Edison Co.(OEC,N) reports earnings for Year to Jun 30


Springs Industries(SMI,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jul 1


Ferraro Signs With the Rangers
six and a fraction with the Hartford Whalers and the last four and a fraction with the Islanders -- Ray Ferraro has been one of the better players in the National Hockey League, a scrappy center who can score.
But he has also been frustrated by playing for losing teams.
Yesterday, that changed.
The 30-year-old unrestricted free agent signed with the Rangers for three years, with the team having an option for a fourth at the same salary as the third.
Ferraro's agent, Steve Bartlett, said Ferraro would earn $4.8 million over three years, with a fourth year being worth $1.725 million.


Watkins-Johnson Co.(WJ,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Vastar Resources Inc.(VRI,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Stone &amp; Webster Inc.(SW,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Willamette Industries(WMTT,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Corrections
An obituary on July 1 about Lana Turner referred incorrectly to her first role, in the 1937 film "They Won't Forget." The role was not large, but Ms.
Turner did speak a few lines.


For Jews, Intermarriage Also Has Positive Side; Majority's Influence
To the Editor:
William Safire's call for more "old religion" (column, July 17) is more an interpretation than an explanation of the Jewish population decline.
A fuller description would include a corresponding Christianization of Jewry, the replacement of one religious culture by another.


Terror in Montana
Iserve as a municipal judge in the towns of Hamilton and Darby in western Montana.
Hate groups like the Militia of Montana, one of the most extreme self-styled paramilitary organizations, have been active in our area for several years.
My experience with them began in January, when a man who said he was part of the "Freemen" movement, which has ties to the militia, appeared in court in response to three routine traffic tickets.
He described his appearance as a "special visitation" and refused to cooperate with the initial proceedings.
He said he was not in any way bound by the laws of Montana.


On Train Platforms, Anxiety Aplenty
When the echoing tone and robotic voice announced that the 8:04 A.M.
Manhattan-bound train was delayed by mechanical trouble, commuters waiting at the Garrison stop on the Metro-North Hudson line today began to fret.
"You think it's starting?" one man asked a woman, referring to a possible strike.


Darling International reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jul 1


Koppers Industries reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Universal Foods Corp.(UFC,N) reports earnings for 3d qtr to Jun 30


Sports of The Times; Yankees Must Trade McDowell
IN trying to explain his obscene gesture, Jack McDowell never quite apologized.
Not that he really can.
And when the lanky right-hander was asked if he was concerned about the reaction of Yankee Stadium fans on Sunday when he starts against the Royals, he shrugged.


CHRONICLE
The actor LARRY HAGMAN, 63, has been placed on a waiting list for a liver transplant after doctors diagnosed a small tumor as malignant, his publicist, Richard Grant, said in a statement issued yesterday.
"In spite of this latest development, Hagman remains in excellent health and spirits and his prognosis for full recovery and long life is excellent," the news release said.
Dr.
Leonard Makowka, chairman of the department of surgery and director of the Liver Transplant program at Cedars-Sinai Hospital in Los Angeles, will lead the surgical team for Mr.
Hagman when an organ donor is found.


Trinity Industries(TRN,N) reports earnings for 1st qtr to Jun 30


For First Time in Two Years, Quarterly Net Falls at Ford
The Ford Motor Company reported its first quarterly decline in profits in more than two years today, attributing the decline to the softening economy and the weak dollar.
Ford warned that at least the next quarter was also likely to be weak compared with last year, as the company writes off expensive new factory equipment and reduces production to introduce new cars and trucks, including the new version of the Ford Taurus.


A Lawn-Chair View


Manitowoc Co.(MTW,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Clinton Assails Officers' Racist Event
As President Clinton joined the growing list of critics of the annual "Good Ol' Boys Roundup" in the east Tennessee mountains, the organizer of the events defended them today as legitimate parties where Federal and local law-enforcement officers got a chance to know each other.
Gene Rightmyer, a retired agent of the Federal Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms, said that when a few racist incidents had occurred among some beer-sodden participants, he had told the culprits to stop or leave.
He strongly denied assertions, first made by a member of an Alabama paramilitary group, that this year's gathering featured the sale of "nigger hunting licenses" or T-shirts emblazoned with the Rev.
Martin Luther King's face behind a target.
Mr.
Rightmyer said two black officers, including one from the firearms agency, had attended this year's gathering, and that when he learned that four white officers had complained about the blacks' presence, he told them, "You can do one of two things. Shut up or leave." The men left, he said.


In L.I. Death, Mouse Seems To Be Source Of Fatal Virus
Tests indicate a possible link between the death of a Long Island man in April and a virus found in the tissue of a mouse captured afterward in the man's home in Bridgehampton, state health officials announced today.
Barbara A. DeBuono, the State Health Commissioner, said the test results suggested -- but did not prove -- that the Suffolk County man came in contact with the often deadly hanta virus in his own home.
The virus, which is present in rodent droppings, infects humans when inhaled into the lungs.


How to Lose Games and Influence Fans
Sporting his typical grunge look of black Doc Martens boots, gray wool socks, baggy shorts and a plaid shirt, Jack McDowell walked the gantlet past dozens of fans outside Yankee Stadium this morning and, surprisingly, received what he called a "pretty cordial" greeting.
McDowell claimed the fans usually berate him for not signing autographs.
They did not berate him yesterday, but he did not sign either.
"I don't change my approach for one thing," McDowell explained.


Integra Financial Corp.(ITG,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Zions Bancorp (ZION,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Study Says Outdated Signals Are Widespread in Subway
Transit Authority officials said yesterday that there were 257 miles of subway track, nearly half the total, where an antiquated signal system provides the potential for an accident like the fatal crash on the Williamburg Bridge last month.
"Could we have a replica of what happened?" Transit Authority President Alan F. Kiepper said at a public hearing on the accident.
"The answer is yes."


Progressive Corp.(PGR,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Rohm &amp; Haas Co.(ROH,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


ABC to Show Another Jackson Video
The president of ABC Entertainment, Ted Harbert, said today that the network would broadcast a half-hour program next week featuring a new music-video of a song from Mr.
Jackson's latest album, HIStory.
The program is also to include a segment showing Mr.
Jackson recording new lyrics for another song on the album that has been widely perceived as anti-Semitic.
The program is to be produced by MTV and simultaneously broadcast by ABC, MTV and the Black Entertainment Television network on July 28 at 9:30 P.M..


Another Company Had Its Eye On Zenith, Korean Concern Says
The head of the South Korean company that is buying control of the Zenith Electronics Corporation says his company acted in part to stave off an attempt by another party to gain control of Zenith's management.
"There was another company that wished to be involved in the management closely," Lee Hun Jo, the chairman and chief executive of LG Electronics Inc., said in a telephone interview this week from Seoul.


Darwin Journal; Bitter Aborigines Sue For Stolen Childhoods
Peter Hansen has only the vaguest memories of life before he was stolen away from his family sometime after his fifth birthday.
He remembers hunting with other children for sand frogs, a common meal for aborigines in the bleak northern outback of Australia.
He remembers that his mother had the ebony skin of a full-blooded aborigine.


Whitman Corp.(WH,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Blistering Barnacles! Tintin Ware!
TINTIN and his dog -- Milou in French, Snowy in English -- and their exotic escapades have been favorites of children and adults on both sides of the Atlantic since Georges Remi, as Herge, started drawing them in 1929.
And for the last seven years, Axis, a French company, has been producing a dizzying array of Tintin accessories.
Recently, they reached these shores.


Michael Foods (MIKL,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Modine Mfg. Co.(MODI,NNM) reports earnings for 1st qtr to Jun 26


Corrections
A picture caption yesterday about the Rev.
Nathaniel T. Grady, who is fighting his 1984 conviction on sex-abuse charges, located him incorrectly in some copies within the photograph of three ministers.
Mr.
Grady was at the center; the man at the right was Dr.
Ernest Davis, a prison chaplain.


The Fishing Camp That Got Away: A Russian Tale
William Davies's fishing camp was conceived as a fly-fishing fantasy land.
Above the Arctic Circle on the Kola Peninsula, fishermen can catch enormous Atlantic salmon, on rivers so unspoiled and bountiful they recall the virgin waters of 19th-century Canada and the United States.
Mr.
Davies's clients fished in 20th-century luxury, with helicopters, hot showers, flush toilets and wall-to-wall carpeting, if not cabin-to-cabin.
A frisson of adventure was included in the $1,000-a-day fee.


Fleet Financial Group Inc.(FLT,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Carter, Top Pick in Draft, Gets 7-Year Bengal Pact
KI-JANA CARTER, the Penn State running back who was the top pick in the National Football League draft, agreed to a seven-year contract with the Cincinnati Bengals yesterday, ending a two-day absence from camp.
The contract includes a $7.1 million signing bonus, the biggest ever for a rookie.
The pact also includes three "voidable years" that are very likely to reduce it to a four-year deal, leaving Carter a potential free agent in 1999.
With annual incentives, the seven-year deal totals $19.2 million.


INSIDE
Congress Takes Up Waco Partisanship marked the opening of Congressional hearings on the raid at the Branch Davidian compound in Waco, Tex.
Page B10.
Line-Item Veto Failing
A top item in the Contract With America, the line-item veto, appears to be dead because Republicans are reluctant to give President Clinton such power.
Page B11.
Bright Lights, Big Theater
A Toronto production company announced plans to transform two historical Times Square buildings into one theater for large-scale musical productions.
Page B1.
Taiwan's Biggest Issue
One question dominates every element of life in Taiwan, from domestic politics to foreign policy: What is its national identity?
Page A4.


State Street Boston Corp.(STT,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Smith Jury Hears of 2 Little Bodies, and a Letter, in the Lake
Visibility was only about a foot when Steve Morrow, a diver searching for a missing car, floated to the burgundy Mazda that lay upside down in the cold water of John D. Long Lake last autumn.
"I had to put my light against the window, and peered in," Mr.
Morrow testified today in the trial of Susan Smith.
"I was able to see a small hand pressed against the glass."


CasTech Aluminum Group (CTA,N) reports earnings for 1st qtr to Jun 30


Pacific Gas &amp; Electric Co.(PCG,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Joslyn Corp.(JOSL,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Tempest in a Dugout, Starring McDowell
Jack McDowell, as we all know by now, has remarkable dexterity with the digits.
The Yankee right-hander can toss the most universally understood obscene gesture with the best of them and not let a camera miss it, as he proved in a remarkable show of bad humor Tuesday night.
The Yankees, the team that employs him to be a tasteful human being as well as a winning pitcher, will take his money, $5,000 of it, because of the foul tempest McDowell stirred after the White Sox, his former team, drilled him with 13 hits and nine runs in four and two-thirds very ugly innings Tuesday.


Rayonier Inc.(RYN,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Robert Mondavi (MOND,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Jun 30


Help for Blueberries
Q.
My high-bush blueberries look quite sad with pale leaves and no flowers or fruit.
Could you say what's ailing them? -- Lucy L.-H.
Yee, Flushing, Queens
A.
To look their best -- and be most fruitful -- blueberries must have direct sun at least half the day.
The soil must be moist, rich in organic matter and well drained.
But most important, the soil must be distinctly acid -- it should have a pH value between 4 and 5.2.


CHRONICLE
Another political romance hits the rocks.
There was barely time for the gossip-hungry public to absorb New York Lieut.
Gov.
Betsy McCaughey's broken engagement to Wilbur Ross Jr., an investment banker, when it was announced in Washington that Representative ROBERT G. TORRICELLI, Democrat of New Jersey, and BIANCA JAGGER had ended their two-year relationship.
"Bianca Jagger has been an extremely important part of Bob Torricelli's life during the past two years," James Fox, the Congressman's press secretary, said yesterday.
"Unfortunately, with homes in three different cities and individual time-consuming public commitments, they were kept apart for significant periods of time. They reached the conclusion that it would be best to end their relationship."


Brian Blades Posts Bond
Seattle Seahawks receiver BRIAN BLADES was freed after posting $10,000 bond yesterday in Fort Lauderdale, Fla., on a manslaughter charge in the shooting death of his cousin.
His agent said Blades would report to the Seahawks' training camp tomorrow.


Telephone &amp; Data Systems Inc.(TDS,A) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Bosnia and U.S. Politics: High Stakes for Dole
By venturing into the shoals of Bosnia policy, Senator Bob Dole is taking a considerable risk, one that could leave his political fortunes hostage to events in the Balkans.
The Clinton Administration's shifting Bosnia policy makes a fat target, and Mr.
Dole took to the Senate floor this afternoon and squarely blamed Mr.
Clinton for the Western alliance's repeated failures on this issue.


Zilog Inc.(ZLG,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jul 2


Idex Corp.(IEX,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Accounts
*
Frank Russell Co., Tacoma, Wash., to Team One Advertising, El Segundo, Calif., a unit of Cordiant P.L.C., as the first agency to handle the account of the financial services company.
The billings were estimated at $5 million.


Conner Peripherals Inc.(CNR,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Black Family's Car Is Torched in Brooklyn
When the Rev.
Donovan Leys moved his family into his new church's rectory on a quiet block in Midwood, Brooklyn, last January, his neighbors gave him a warm reception.
But on Monday morning, as the family -- the only blacks on the all-white street -- was inside the house, someone doused its sedan with gasoline and set it ablaze, said the police, who are trying to determine whether the event was racially motivated.


Corrections
A dance review on Saturday about a tribute to Marge and Gower Champion by the Film Society of Lincoln Center referred incorrectly to a sequence choreographed by Jack Cole.
The sequence, a parody of "Swan Lake," did indeed appear in the film "Two for the Show."


Hugh Hurd, 70, Actor With Role In Early Civil Rights Movement
Hugh Hurd, a stage and screen actor who was active in the civil rights movement, died on Saturday at St.
Vincent's Hospital.
He was 70 and lived in Greenwich Village.
The cause was complications from hypertension and kidney failure, his family said.


Hispanic Residents Vow to Fight for Carefully Drawn Congressional District
In the aftermath of a Supreme Court decision striking down a Georgia Congressional district that was drawn along racial lines, a fight is under way over the future of the largely Hispanic 12th District in New York City.
A suit was filed late last month in Brooklyn Federal Court seeking to abolish the district.
And yesterday, dozens of residents of the district, which includes parts of three boroughs, staged a public protest supporting the current configuration and vowing not to give up their hard-won political gains.


North Fork Bancorp Inc.(NFB,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Beach Finds, Hold the Sand
YOU'RE not the only one finding it harder to scavenge those little bits of translucent colored glass with edges that have been smoothed by the waves.
Catalogue companies like Williams-Sonoma and its sudsidiary Chambers have seen the marketing possibilities of providing consumers with bags of beach glass without their having to battle traffic.


Events: Shows, a Sale, A Benefit and Classes
Traditional Crafts  Rye Town Hilton, 699 Westchester Avenue, near Lincoln Avenue, Rye Brook, N.Y.; (914) 939-6300.
A show and sale of furniture, miniature quilts, toys, clocks, tablecloths and other early American-style crafts made using traditional methods, starts tomorrow with a preview from 6 to 10 P.M.
Tickets are $25.
Also open Saturday and Sunday, 10 A.M. to 5 P.M.
Admission is $8.
Design and Children  Childesign; (516) 324-1805.
On Saturday, from 8 to 10 P.M., Childesign, a nonprofit group promoting designs for home, school and public spaces that incorporate children's safety and developmental needs, is sponsoring a benefit in the form of dinners at East End homes and galleries, followed by a party at a restaurant in Bridgehampton.
Reservations are required.
Tickets, dinner and party, $100; party only, $45.


DIY Home Warehouse Inc.(DIYH,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jul 1


Japanese Group Keeps Noise Forever Young
When all else fails, rockers use noise and dissonance to get a reaction from listeners.
Through the years, listeners have learned to tolerate more jolts, leading bands to escalate in turn.
The Boredoms, from Japan, still have the power to shock and annoy listeners; their secret weapon is to combine noise with unpredictability.
In a song the band played on Monday night at Irving Plaza as part of the Macintosh New York Music Festival, taps from an electronic drum kit accompanied a repeated guitar note, turning into feedback; Yamatsuka Eye yelled, "Rock and roll!"; a slow riff, accompanied by trumpet, started to grind; the guitar brought in a pentatonic quasi-Japanese melody, which melted into echoey lines.
A heavy-metal riff began and Mr.
Eye started howling, leaping around the stage with karatelike kicks; below him, the mosh pit erupted into motion.
But slow drum tapping returned, and the song ended.


Olin Corp.(OLN,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Walbro Corp.(WALB,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


U.S. Will Not Oppose I.B.M. In Trimming of Most Barriers
The Justice Department said yesterday that it would not oppose most elements of an I.B.M. petition to end Federal antitrust restrictions dating from 1956.
But the department, in a filing with a Federal judge, indicated that it was not yet willing to remove the restrictions as they apply to I.B.M.'s mainframe and minicomputer product lines.


TCF Financial (TCB,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


The Higher They Rise, the Harder . . .
Since the beginning of the year, mutual funds investing in technology stocks have made millions of American investors seem like geniuses.
Thousands of funds, from specialists in technology companies to more general investment funds like the $48 billion Fidelity Magellan fund, have produced returns of more than 20 percent in the first half of this year by buying heavily in technology stocks.
But yesterday afternoon, a decline that at first seemed like a temporary cooling of an overheated market sector took on the look of a full-fledged collapse before recovering a bit in the final 90 minutes of trading.
Yesterday's 35.66-point drop in the Nasdaq composite index, which is dominated by technology stocks, was the second worst in the index's history, measured in points, exceeded only by the 46.12-point decline on Oct. 19, 1987.
But at the low point yesterday, the decline exceeded the 1987 number.
Since closing Monday at 1,005.89, its first-ever finish above 1,000, the index has fallen 53.02 points, or 5.3 percent, to 952.87.


ALC Communications (ALC,A) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


General Motors Acceptance Corp. reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Barrick Gold (ABX,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Weis Markets Inc.(WMK,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jul 1


Aid to Mink Ranchers: Pork or Priority?
The House is expected to vote on Thursday on whether to continue spending American tax dollars for fashion shows overseas to promote the sale of mink coats.
Several House members, most of them from states with mink ranches, support continuation of a $1.9 million subsidy to a special mink council, on the ground that American mink ranchers need it to compete in the heavily subsidized foreign mink markets.
Because domestic mink sales have soured, in part as a result of protests by animal rights advocates, American mink ranchers now export 95 percent of their fur.


CoreStates Financial (CFL,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


From Four Countries: Circles, a Train, a Bronze Angel and a Bed
A great deal of what goes on at the American Dance Festival at Duke University is exchange: of dance forms and styles, ideas and even cultural customs.
That exchange is epitomized by the International Choreographers Concert, a presentation of dances commissioned by the festival from foreign choreographers and performed by festival students.
The program presented on Tuesday night at the Reynolds Industries Theater suggested that choreographers the world over have trouble editing their work.
But production values were lavish by impoverished American standards, and the emphasis in these sleek-looking dances was on atmosphere rather than the popular American concerns of movement and technique.


Fort Wayne National Corp. reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Witness Describes Botched-Abortion Scene
As her life drained from her, Guadalupe Negron sat bleeding on an operating table, drowning in her own vomit as a doctor fumbled in a failed attempt to get oxygen into her lungs, a paramedic testified yesterday in the doctor's murder trialy.
The doctor, David Benjamin, is accused of botching an abortion on Mrs.
Negron -- the fetus was 19 to 20 weeks old -- so badly that he caused her death.
At his trial yesterday, the witness, Freddie Neboa, a paramedic for 13 years, told of arriving at the Metro Women's Center in Corona, Queens, on July 9, 1993, and finding the bizarre scene after being told that the woman was suffering a heart attack.


Defending Affirmative Action
In near-evangelical tones, President Clinton made the moral, legal and practical case yesterday for the embattled cause of affirmative action.
It was a sermon the nation needed to hear from a President who can only be helped by exhibiting a strong core of principle.
Instead of the aimlessness that has marked so many White House efforts, this speech offered the zest and forthrightness promised by the Bill Clinton of the '92 campaign.
Gone, too, was the hair-splitting accommodationism of the recent speech on school prayer.
In an address notably free of apologies and political trimming, Mr.
Clinton asserted that "when affirmative action is done right, it is flexible, it is fair, and it works." Instead of running for cover on specious claims of favoritism for minorities and women, Mr.
Clinton met the critics straight on.
"Let me be clear," he said.
"Affirmative action has been good for America."


Jefferies Group (JEFG,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Stocks Plunge in a Selling Surge, Swamping Rally
Riding one of the most powerful rallies in their history, the stock and bond markets stumbled badly yesterday in one of the busiest trading days ever, raising the specter in some quarters of what Wall Street calls a correction -- a sharp retreat in stock and bond prices.
But because the Dow Jones industrial average made up more than half its losses in the last 90 minutes of trading, it was not clear which way investors would jump this morning.


Magma Copper Co.(MCU,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Investors in Mutual Funds Are Not Deserting Market
Even though stock prices have fallen sharply in the last two days, mutual fund investors do not seem to be leaving the market in droves.
Still, the market moves since Monday have frayed a few nerves.
That was particularly true yesterday, when at one point the Dow Jones industrial average was down by as much as 132 points.


G.O.P. SENATORS DEMAND ALL FILES ON WHITEWATER
Setting the stage for confrontation, Senate Republicans today demanded a more complete disclosure from the White House of the files removed from the office of the deputy White House counsel Vincent W. Foster Jr. after he died.
Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato, the New York Republican who heads the special committee conducting hearings into how the White House handled Mr.
Foster's papers after his suicide two years ago, suggested that he would go to court if the White House refused, and raised the prospect of a constitutional clash.


Bard (C.R.) Inc.(BCR,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Inacom Corp.(INAC,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jul 1


Signet Banking (SBK,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Loyola Capital Corp. reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Sonoco Products Co.(SON,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jul 2


Maddux Moves to 10-1 As Braves Edge Pirates
Braves 3, Pirates 2
Greg Maddux captured his 10th victory last night and Fred McGriff and Ryan Klesko hit homers, carrying the Atlanta Braves to a 3-2 victory over the visiting Pittsburgh Pirates.


NEWS BRIEFS INTERNATIONAL  SQN##386430##SERBS SAY THEY TOOK 'SAFE AREA'  The Bosnia Serb army said it had captured the besieged "safe area" of Zepa, but the Bosnian Government in Sarajevo denied the claim and U.N. officials said they were unable to verify it. SQN##386332##ALLIES CAN'T AGREE ON BOSNIA  Rejecting a French plan to reinforce U.N. peacekeepers in Bosnia, President Clinton sought allied support for a large-scale program of air attacks on the Bosnian Serbs. But the Western allies could not reach an agreement. SQN##385808##DOLE GAMBLES ON THE BALKANS  News analysis: In criticizing President Clinton's actions in the Balkan war, Senator Bob Dole is venturing into the shoals of Bosnia policy, and is taking a big political risk. SQN##392502##TAIWAN PONDERS ITS IDENTITY  One question dominates every element of life in Taiwan, from domestic politics to foreign policy: What is the island's national identity? SQN##386839##INTRIGUE IN ARCTIC RUSSIA  Beneath a dispute over rights on the Varzina River in the Kola Peninsula above the Arctic Circle lies a tangled web of political intrigue, money and whispers of corruption that are part of doing business in Russia. SQN##387290##JAPAN'S ELECTIONS ON SUNDAY MAY RESHAPE ITS POLITICS AGAIN  Prime Minister Tomiichi Murayama may not be formally competing, for voters will choose only members of the upper house in Parliament, but a poor showing for his Socialist Party could force his resignation. And that, in turn, could lead to the collapse of the governing coalition of three political parties, and then a political realignment. SQN##387134##CHINA'S PLANS TO MAKE FAMILY CAR ARE RECEDING China's "family car" project, an idea that got Western auto makers salivating when they were invited to submit prototypes last year, is likely to be delayed until well into the next century. SQN##387371##FOR FIRST TIME, JUNTA TELLS BURMESE THE TOP DEMOCRAT IS FREE  The Burmese junta admitted to the public today what millions of Burmese have known for more than a week -- that Daw Aung San Suu Kyi, the Nobel Prize-winning oppositionleader, has been freed from house arrest. SQN##387185##DARWIN JOURNAL: BITTER ABORIGINES SUE FOR STOLEN CHILDHOODS  Australia's Stolen Generation seeks restitution. NATIONAL  SQN##386413##DEMAND FOR FOSTER FILES  Senate Republicans demanded a more complete disclosure from the White House of the files removed from the office of Vincent W. Foster Jr. after he d


Ruddick Corp.(RDK,N) reports earnings for 3d qtr to Jul 2


John Doe and Exene Go a Little Bit Country
What happens when punk rockers grow up?
Most disappear or pretend nothing has changed, but X, a major Los Angeles punk band when the 1980's began, is trying something different.
On its new album, "Unclogged," X remakes songs from the 1980's with acoustic guitars and country-style arrangements.
At the Bottom Line on Tuesday night, about two-thirds of the songs thrived in their new get-up.
X was never a typical punk band; it's too idiosyncratic to encourage imitators.
John Doe and Exene Cervenka, X's singers and songwriters, set stream-of-consciousness lyrics, full of offhand details, to tunes that sprawl outside rock or country conventions.
The chords take unexpected turns, while the melody often seems to hide between the vocal lines; Mr.
Doe and Ms.
Cervenka harmonize using wide open spaces, not so much blending as intersecting.
They sound earnest and unsettled and are always a little ragged.


S3 Inc.(SIII,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Scholastic Corp.(SCHL,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


After a Century, a Black Cadet Is Vindicated
A former slave from South Carolina who more than a century ago was beaten by fellow cadets at West Point and then drummed out of the corps will finally receive the Army commission that his descendants have sought for years.
Acting on a request from Congress, where Senator Ernest F. Hollings of South Carolina had pushed for the posthumous commission, President Clinton is to award it at a White House ceremony next Monday to the family of the onetime cadet, Johnson C. Whittaker.


Man, 24, Is Charged in Death of a Child, 2
A 24-year-old man was arrested yesterday in the fatal beating of the 2-year-old daughter of the woman he lived with on Staten Island, the police said.
Barry Rodrigo was charged with murder and endangering the welfare of a minor in connection with the death of Lisa Nugent.


Electronic Data Systems Corp. reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Borden Chemicals &amp; Plastics L.P. (BCU,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


N.L.R.B. Hearing Postponed
Lawyers for Major League Baseball and the Players Association agreed yesterday to a third postponement of a National Labor Relations Board trial on unfair labor practice charges against the owners.
The trial, which had originally been scheduled for May 22 and most recently for next Monday, was reset for Aug. 28.
Three lawyers from each side met on Monday as a follow-up to previous sessions they had held in trying to settle the N.L.R.B. charges.
The lawyers also discussed a format and schedule for the resumption of negotiations.
Nothing was set.


Bell Industries (BI,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Mueller Industries(MLI,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jul 1


Wheelabrator Technologies Inc.(WTI,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


200 California Students Jeer Bid to End Affirmative Action
A boisterous group of 200 University of California students hissed, booed and waved placards during an emotional meeting here with a dozen members of the university's board as they debated proposals to eliminate affirmative-action policies at the university's nine campuses.
The proposals are scheduled to come before the full 26 regents on Thursday at a formal meeting presided over by Gov.
Pete Wilson, who has said he approves of terminating policies that use race, sex, religion or national origin as a criterion for admission to the university, as well as for hiring and contracting.


Lukens Inc.(LUC,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jul 1


Travel Ports of America Inc. reports earnings for Year to Apr 30


Keystone Financial Inc.(KSTN,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


CTS Corp.(CTS,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jul 2


House Bill Sets Off Fight In Long-Distance Calling
The long-distance telephone industry began waging war today against a House bill to rewrite the nation's communications laws after the bill was changed late last week to make it much easier for the seven regional Bell companies to enter their $70 billion market.
A coalition led by AT&amp;T, MCI and Sprint began buying radio and television time around the country for advertisements that will probably start running early next week.
Top executives at dozens of long-distance companies have blanketed House leaders with letters opposing the bill, while AT&amp;T began pushing its thousands of employees, shareholders and retirees to put pressure on members of Congress.


Bus Full of Campers Strikes Sanitation Truck
Twelve children attending a day camp were jostled or injured slightly yesterday morning when their bus hit the back of a sanitation truck making trash collections on Staten Island, the police said.
The accident occurred about 8:40 A.M. on Bement Avenue near Matthews Avenue as the bus was taking the children, aged 8 to 13, from the Jewish Community Center of Staten Island on Victory Boulevard to the center's day camp on Manor Road.


Scott Paper Reports Best Quarter Ever
Two days after it had agreed to merge with the Kimberly-Clark Corporation in a $7 billion deal, the Scott Paper Company announced sharply higher earnings yesterday for the second quarter, exceeding analysts' highest estimates.
Scott said earnings increased to $145.5 million, or 96 cents a share, from $40.2 million, or 27 cents a share, in the corresponding quarter last year.
Sales increased 15 percent, to $1.06 billion from $914 million.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.75
8.75
7.25
DISCOUNT RATE
5.25
5.25
3.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
5.75
5.67
4.78
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.40
5.43
4.28
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.39
5.39
4.68
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.40
6.30
7.22
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.86
6.76
7.54
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.70
7.63
8.33
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.18
6.08
6.37
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Panic for Children on a Subway Train
About 50 young children from a Bronx Head Start center spent a terrifying quarter-hour in the sweltering darkness of a subway car yesterday after the false rumor of a gunman on the train touched off a near-stampede toward the last car.
The rumor apparently started with a minor disturbance on the southbound No. 2 train -- the police said an emotionally disturbed man was pushing other passengers in one of the front cars.


Lance Inc.(LNCE,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 17


Michigan National (MNCO,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Post Office Near Slaying Site
A new post office will open in September or October to replace the Watchung Plaza post office, where four people were shot to death in March, United States Senator Bill Bradley said yesterday.
For the past four months, customers have picked up their mail from a truck.
The new post office will be around the corner from the old one.
"I'm glad to see closure coming to this," said Jessica G. De Koninck, a Montclair Township Councilor.


Exabyte Corp.(EXBT,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jul 1


CHRONICLE
Normally, ANITA NAGER, who is a senior program officer at the New York Community Trust, and HILDY SIMMONS, who directs community relations at J. P. Morgan &amp; Company, are in the business of giving away money to worthy causes.
Tonight, at a joint celebration of their birthdays, called "Alive at 45!" in Prospect Park in Brooklyn, they will be raising money.
The 150 guests invited to the picnic supper are being asked not to bring presents but to donate to the Prospect Park Alliance's Woodland Restoration Campaign, whose goal is to save and replenish 250 acres of woodlands there.


Owens-Corning Fiberglass Corp.(OCF,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Summit Bamcorp (N.J.) (SUBN,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


For Jews, Intermarriage Also Has Positive Side
To the Editor:
While intermarriage is definitely a serious problem in the Jewish community, Jonathan S. Tobin, editor of The Jewish Ledger of West Hartford, Conn., and Jewish leaders like him exacerbate the problem by labeling almost all marriages between Jews and non-Jews as destructive to Jewish continuity (news article, July 13).


Liberties; The Loss of the Dodo
Newt is cute. Terminally, irretrievably, sickeningly cute.
I first suspected this when I heard about the line that the Speaker used to invite Melanie Griffith to his office when she came to Capitol Hill recently to lobby for the National Endowment for the Arts.


Ford Motor Co. of Canada (FC,A) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Graco Inc.(GGG,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Ford Motor Credit Co. reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun30


Westamerica Bancorp (WABC,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Fruit of the Loom (FTL,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


BIC Corp.(BIC,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jul 2


Unifi Inc.(UFI,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Jun 25


Kaman Corp.(KAMNA,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Hostages Hero Works to Save Yellowstone
To the Editor:
Re "New Star Scores Home Runs for Democrats" (news article, July 18): Your article describing Representative Bill Richardson's successful human rights initiatives around the globe omitted an important element of his remarkable work here at home on behalf of all Americans.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-8  U.S. WINS SUPPORT ON BOSNIA PLAN
On the eve of a critical allied meeting on Bosnia, the U.S. won British support for a plan to threaten the Bosnian Serbs with massive NATO air strikes if they continue attacks on eastern enclaves.
A1  SAFE AREA SEEMS ABOUT TO FALL
Bosnian Serb troops encircled the town of Zepa, preparing to complete their conquest of the so-called protected area as Bosnian Government troops refused to surrender.
A8  A NEW TIDE OF BOSNIAN REFUGEES
Relief officials waited in the small Bosnian town of Kladanj for the first influx of Muslim deportees from Zepa amid confusion about how many would be coming.
A8  SRI LANKANS' DREAM ENDS IN DEATH
A journey from Sri Lanka to Moscow through Kiev and Bucharest ended in horror when 18 Sri Lankans suffocated in the back of a padlocked container abandoned on the hot plains of Hungary.
A3  HOUSE KEEPS CHINA STATUS QUO
The House railed against China's human rights abuses, weapons exports and policy of forced birth control, but it declined to revoke China's preferred trading status.
A3  FRAUD IS CITED IN HAITIAN VOTE
The Carter Center, normally a strong supporter of President Jean-Bertrand Aristide, said that Haiti's elections were riddled with fraud and that the U.S. should not back a series of reruns and runoffs.
A5  Spain's leader is accused in the killing of Basque separatists.
A4  A convict linked Mexico's ex-President to an assassination plot.
A7  Hirosaki Journal: To Japan's apple farmers, looks are everything.
A4  National A10-17  WEIGHING AFFIRMATIVE ACTION
With demonstrators outside, the Board of Regents of the University of California took up the question of whether to drop their affirmative-action policy.
A1  FRUSTRATED INVESTIGATORS
Documents obtained by the Senate Whitewater committee show that senior Justice Department officials thought the White House was improperly limiting the investigation into the suicide of the deputy White House counsel.
A1  APPROPRIATIONS DECISIONS
The House Appropriations Committee voted to dismantle a program that has provided family planning advice for poor and low-income women and to ban the use of Federal money for research that uses human embryos.
A1  THIS LAND IS WHOSE LAND?
Ranching interests have the upper hand as Congress prepares to pass a law on who can use Federal lands and how.
A1  SETBACKS FOR SIMPSON
Judge Lance A. Ito twice stymied O. J. Simpson's lawyers, who spent the day in court scrambling to repair the damage.
A10  ONE CITY'S COMEBACK
The new city manager of Chelsea, Mass., where corruption and financial problems led to an emergency receivership four years ago, says the city has a lot to prove.
A10  SUSAN SMITH'S DEFENSE
Lawyers for Susan Smith, the South Carolina woman accused of drowning her two sons, began painting a picture of a troubled past.
A10  PROTECTING THE FLAG
A Senate committee approved a constitutional amendment that would let states make it a crime to desecrate the American flag.
A14  PRESIDENT VS.
RAID HEARINGS
President Clinton called the Congressional hearings into the Branch Davidian raid irresponsible, but some Republicans used them to portray a government making war on its own people.
A16  OVERHAUL EFFORT FAILS
With a compromise proving too elusive, the Republican drive to curtail Federal rules on the environment, health and safety collapsed, a defeat for Senator Bob Dole.
A16  WHAT PRICE JOURNALISM?
The Senate, in an easily approved resolution, said reporters should disclose the amount and sources of their outside income.
A17  Law B6  A profile of Susan Smith's lawyer: Fighter against the death penalty.
At the Bar: Helping Simpson addicts anticipate the end of the trial.
Metro Digest B1  BALLPLAYERS ADMIT TAX FRAUD
Duke Snider and Willie McCovey, baseball Hall of Famers, pleaded guilty to tax fraud charges, saying they had knowingly failed to report thousands of dollars earned by signing autographs and participating in sports memorabilia shows.
A1  NEW TIMES SQUARE ATTRACTIONS
After 15 years of false starts and dashed hopes, efforts to revitalize 42d Street turned an important corner as a group of entertainment companies and developers announced plans to open glittering new attractions.
A1  Business Digest D1  Weekend C1-26  A survey of country fairs.
C1  "Showgirls" is rated NC-17.
C3  For Children C14  Theater: "Sunset Boulevard." C1  A new "Around the World in 80 Days." C2  Film: "Kids." C1  "Awfully Big Adventure." C8  "Postcards From America." C8  Music: Macintosh Festival.
C2  From Supergrass.
C19  Dance: Trisha Brown.
C3  Restaurants C22  Art: Thinking about corners.
C25  By 70 women.
C15  Brett Weston.
C16  Art in Review C23  Inside Art C24  Books: "A Bridge of Longing," by David G. Roskies.
C26  Television: TV Weekend B16  "E.R." leads the Emmy prime-time nominations.
B16  Home Video B16  Sports B8-16  Baseball: A further McDowell penalty.
B9  The Bonilla formula.
B11  Columns: Araton on Snider and McCovey.
B9  Football: Giants' cap game.
B9  Jets sign Haselrig.
B12  Golf: A wild first round.
B9  Racing: Lukas at Saratoga.
B9  Soccer: Milutinovic on hand.
B9  Sports People: B8  Obituaries B7  Editorials/Op-Ed A24-25  Editorials  Bosnian exit strategy.
Federal good ol' boys.
Michael M. Weinstein: The C.E.A.
Letters  A. M. Rosenthal: Bombs for Bosnia.
Bob Herbert: Children of the Dark Ages.
Anthony Lewis: What should we do?
Antonio Pagan: Why should New York put Pathmark on the dole?
Jack Kemp, Joseph I. Lieberman: Real Americans, register here.
Chronicle B6  Crossword C25


BHC Communications (BC,A) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Union Pacific Corp.(UNP,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Hershey Foods Corp.(HSY,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jul 2


Nash Finch Co.(NAFC,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 17


White House Role Faulted In Inquiry on Aide's Suicide
In the days after the death of Vincent W. Foster Jr., the Deputy Counsel to the President, senior Justice Department officials complained bitterly that the White House was setting improper limits on the investigation into his suicide, threatening to ruin it, according to documents obtained by the Senate Whitewater committee.
Two days after Mr.
Foster died, Deputy Attorney General Philip B. Heymann told the White House counsel, Bernard W. Nussbaum, that he was "messing this up very badly" and "making a terrible mistake" by forbidding Justice Department lawyers from looking at any papers in Mr.
Foster's office.


Murdoch and Laborite: Britain's New Odd Couple
Tony Blair, the Labor Party leader, is so far ahead in the public opinion polls that even with an election two years off he is treated as a Prime Minister in waiting.
He is a lionized dinner guest, a hot item in the columns, a favorite of profile writers.
They depict him as high-minded but also a bit ruthless -- like a young Faust.
Rupert Murdoch is Britain's most powerful non-Briton.
His media outlets here, built as a waystation between his home-boy start in Australia and his worldwide empire run from the United States, are so influential that critics charge him with single-handedly destabilizing the monarchy and snatching elections.
To old-timers in Labor, he is nothing less than Mephistopheles.


International Briefs; Fininvest to Sell Stake in TV Unit
Fininvest S.p.A., headed by Silvio Berlusconi, the former Prime Minister of Italy, said yesterday that as was rumored it would sell a 20 percent stake in its television unit Mediaset to a group including Prince Walid bin Talal of Saudi Arabia; Leo Kirch, a German media executive, and the Richemont Group of the South African investor Johann Rupert.
It also plans to sell shares in Mediaset to the public in 1996.


After 3 Deaths, Safe Water Returns to the Jersey Shore
The perilous Atlantic along the Jersey Shore and Long Island turned placid today, its treacherous surf soothed by gentle westerly winds that dissipated potentially lethal riptides and undertows.
All along coastal beaches, lifeguards and beach managers breathed sighs of relief today after five days of turbulent, violent water, with riptides and undertows that drowned at least three New Jersey swimmers and forced lifeguards to scramble to rescue scores of others as they were being pulled away by the surf.
Green flags symbolizing surf safe for swimming replaced the yellow or red flags that had urged caution or banned swimming altogether in recent days because of treacherous seas apparently spawned by Tropical Storm Chantal far out in the Atlantic.


Uncovered Short Positions Drop 3.4% on the Big Board
Open positions of short sales declined 3.4 percent on the New York Stock Exchange in the most recent month, but rose slightly on the American Stock Exchange, the exchanges said yesterday.
In a short sale, investors borrow shares from a brokerage firm and sell them, hoping to buy them back later at a lower price and profit on the difference.
Rising share prices cause losses for short-sellers, who must replace their borrowed shares with more costly ones.


CHRONICLE
Send this baby a toy donkey or elephant, or better yet, both.
That quintessentially political married couple, MARY MATALIN, George Bush's political director in the last Presidential race, and JAMES CARVILLE, who was Bill Clinton's chief strategist, have a daughter, born yesterday morning at George Washington University Hospital in Washington.
Her name is MATALIN MARY CARVILLE.


Future Is Cloudy for U.S. Festival
The summer gathering of the nation's developing athletes in Olympic-related sports, the Olympic Festival, begins a 10-day run on Friday and faces an uncertain future on a crowded sports calendar.
The festival, which features 3,500 athletes from around the country competing in 37 sports, began in 1978 and was designed to be held in the three years between Summer Olympics.
But growing costs, such as the need to construct velodromes, have made the festival an expensive proposition for host cities, which cannot sign corporate sponsors that compete with the official sponsors of the United States Olympic team and the Summer Games.


METRO DIGEST
HALL OF FAMERS PLEAD GUILTY IN TAX CASE
Duke Snider and Willie McCovey, two baseball Hall of Famers whose images of power and dignity still sparkle for generations of the game's loyalists, pleaded guilty in federal court in Brooklyn to tax fraud charges in connection with money made from autographs and sports memorabilia.  [ Page A1. ]


Art in Review
Jonathan Borofsky  'Man With a Heart'
Grand Central Terminal  Main Waiting Room  Through Aug. 19
The two versions of Jonathan Borofsky's "Man With a Heart" rise from their pedestals like giant mannequins escaped from a shop window.
The Fiberglas figures -- one painted black, the other white -- stare blankly at each other across the length of Grand Central's waiting room.
Each figure extends an oversize hand with its palm turned out, as if to demonstrate its peaceful intentions.
A circular hole in each figure's chest reveals a large plastic ruby flashing with a regular pulse, accompanied by a tape recording of a heartbeat.
The vast marble spaces of the waiting room resonate with the deep thump-thump of closing valves and the whoosh of liquid coursing through the veins.


Prices of Stocks Are Calm; Dow Advances by 12.68
After Wednesday's tumultuous sessions, the stock market returned to a relative calm yesterday, with the leading indexes inching upward as traders snapped up the stocks made cheaper by the earlier rout in prices.
"Just as stocks do not go up every single day," said Neal Soss, co-founder of Soss &amp; Cotton L.P., an economic consulting firm, "they also do not go down every single day. What today shows is that there were people who wanted to buy stocks, they just wanted to buy a bargain."


Nets to Tip Off With Raptors
The New Jersey Nets, who have sometimes played like an expansion team the last several seasons, will open the 1995-96 National Basketball Association season against one of the two new expansion teams, the Toronto Raptors.
The Nets will play the Raptors in Toronto on Friday, Nov. 3.
The other expansion team, the Vancouver Grizzlies, will play Portland at the Trail Blazers' new Rose Garden arena.


Diametric Views of Waco: Federal Agents as Aggressors -- and as Victims of Outlaws
As President Clinton denounced Congressional hearings on the Branch Davidian siege as part of an ideological "war against police," House Republicans today used the hearings to raise the specter of the Government's making war on its own people.
The President told a group of senior law-enforcement officials that it was "irresponsible for people in elected positions to suggest that the police are some sort of armed bureaucracy acting on private grudges and hidden agendas." He said it was wrong to equate the innocent, if fatal, mistakes of Federal agents and the moral "depravity" of the leader of the Branch Davidian sect.


Lafarge Corp.(LAF,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


BellSouth Corp.(BLS,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


A Woman Is Raped In a Park in Queens
A 20-year-old woman was attacked and dragged at knife point to a wooded area of a park in northeast Queens where she was raped yesterday afternoon, the police said.
The woman was walking on Douglaston Parkway, near the intersection of Cross Island Parkway and Grand Central Parkway in Douglaston, about 1:45 P.M., when a man riding a bicycle came up behind her, Doram Tamari, a police spokesman, said.
The man pressed a knife to her throat and forced her into nearby Alley Pond Park.


Art in Review
'Collage Made in America'
Michael Rosenfeld Gallery  24 West 57th Street  Through Aug. 25
This summer picnic of mostly small works looks like a smorgasbord of appetizers but adds up to a surprisingly solid meal.
The more than 70 American collages pretty much cover the range of modernist styles, from 1930's geometric abstractions by Gertrude Greene to Fritz Bultman's gestural painted paper piece of 1962, and venture into more contemporary terrain with Chris Burden's sly "Full Financial Disclosure (November)" (1977), a display of all the checks the artist wrote in a single month.
Individual works worth lingering over include abstract pieces by Joseph Stella, Albert E. Gallatin, Charmion von Wiegand and Michael Byron, Mary Bauermeister's ambitious mixed-media assemblage, Gene Hedges's accumulation of burned paper, and figurative works by Benny Andrews and Betye Saar.
Of the handful of artists represented by more than one work, Lenore Tawney is a standout.
Whether she sets cut-up bits of handwriting spinning around a reproduction of a Michelangelo sibyl or turns strips of antique German books into suspended grids, she touches on the roots of the collage medium in language and personal history with a reticent orginality.
Speaking of language, the gallery has also mounted a small show of Fairfield Porter drawings accompanied by printed texts of a few of his poems.
The drawings -- dashed-off sketches, really, in pen and ink -- of summer fields, pretty houses and women reading by lamplight, are fine and, like many of the collages in the adjoining room, share the unpretentious elegance of Porter's words.
HOLLAND COTTER


Judge Stymies Simpson Lawyers' Effort to Build Case for a Conspiracy
Lawyers for O. J. Simpson, stung by a series of counterproductive witnesses, labored today to call a pair of experts to buttress their contention that Mr.
Simpson had been the target of an elaborate police conspiracy.
But Judge Lance A. Ito stymied their efforts on both fronts.
Mr.
Simpson's lawyers now say they can complete their case in a dozen more court days.
But as witnesses came and went today, largely unmemorably, Judge Ito eviscerated the proposed testimony of one expert and delayed that of another, both of whom had been primed to suggest that the blood found on one of a pair of socks in Mr.
Simpson's bedroom had been planted.


BANKERS TRUST NEW YORK CORP. (BT,N)
The Bankers Trust New York Corporation said yesterday that earnings fell 50 percent in the second quarter, hurt by continued losses in its Latin American trading and derivatives business.
Bankers Trust, the nation's seventh-largest banking company, earned $91 million, or 98 cents a share, down from $181 million, or $2.09 a share, in the quarter a year earlier.
Lower revenue from trading and funds management offset an increase in investment banking and other fees.


Bell Atlantic Corp.(BEL,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


COCA-COLA CO. (KO,N)
The Coca-Cola Company said yesterday that profit rose 18.5 percent in the second quarter, meeting Wall Street expectations, as its international sales grew strongly.
The world's biggest soft-drink maker, based in Atlanta, said net income rose to $898 million, or 71 cents a share, from $758 million, or 59 cents a share, a year earlier.
Revenue rose 13.7 percent, to $4.94 billion from $4.34 billion.


Arrow Electronics (ARW,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Giants Ask Players to Make a Deal
When a National Football League team is putting players on the field, it must keep one eye on the talent and one eye on the dotted line.
The salary cap is as bottom line as it gets.
That is why Giants General Manager George Young, seeking ways to be creative with the salary cap, has decided to restructure the contract of center Brian Williams, giving him a long-term deal that will make him a Giant for years to come while also helping Young find some savings in his payroll.


American Home Products Corp.(AHP,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Advo Inc.(AD,N) reports earnings for 3d qtr to Jun 24


Sounds Around Town
Sax, Organ and Guitar
Lou Donaldson, Village Vanguard, 178 Seventh Avenue South, at 11th Street, Greenwich Village, (212) 255-4037.
Lou Donaldson, an alto saxophonist, is one of the great living jazz improvisers, one of a diminishing number of be-bop eyewitnesses.
His records don't in any way reproduce the rhythmic and harmonic blues sophistication he brings to the bandstand, and his humor -- a direct descendant of vaudeville -- explains in good portion what American entertainment used to be.
Mr.
Donaldson, with the release of several of his funky Blue Note albums from the 1960's, is attracting a new, hip audience; he'll be performing with Dr.
Lonnie Smith on organ and Peter Bernstein on guitar.
Sets tonight and tomorrow are at 9:30 and 11:30 P.M. and 1 A.M.; there is no third set on Sunday.
The cover is $15 and the minimum, $10.
PETER WATROUS Heavy on Rhythm
Gust W. Tsilis, Visiones, 125 Macdougal Street, Greenwich Village, (212) 673-5576.
By playing vibraphone and marimba, Gust W. Tsilis tends to leave lots of open space for his improvisers.
That's a good thing, especially when the band's other main soloist is the potent saxophonist Arthur Blythe.
They're after a modern, adventurous sound, and they get it; the rhythm section includes Lonnie Plaxico on bass and Cecil Brooks 3d on drums.
There's a $10 minimum, but no cover.
Sets are Sunday at 9 and 11 P.M.
P.
W.
Trombone Extravagance
Ray Anderson, Sweet Basil, 88 Seventh Avenue South, at Bleecker Street, Greenwich Village, (212) 242-1785.
Ray Anderson is a loud, aggressive trombonist who likes extravagance; he's a throwback to an era when jazz was a party.
Backed by his Alligatory band, Mr.
Anderson does his best to take the house apart.
It's music for a good time.
Sets tonight and tomorrow are at 9 and 11 P.M. and 12:30 A.M.; there is no third set on Sunday.
There is a $15 cover and a $10 minimum.
P.
W.


Utility Discounts Permitted
Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman signed a bill into law yesterday that will allow the Board of Public Utility to offer discounted rates to certain retail customers.
The Governor said the bill was designed to attract new businesses to New Jersey and persuade others not to relocate.
Consumer groups had opposed the bill, singling out a provision that will give the utility board more latitude in setting rates on a case-by-case basis.
This part of the legislation "opens the floodgates for utilities to increase the cost of electric service in New Jersey," said Curtis Fisher, program director of the New Jersey Public Interest Research Group Citzen Lobby.


COMPANY BRIEFS
LLIANT TECHSYSTEMS, Hopkins, Minn., an aerospace and military company, received a $12 million contract from Hughes Missile Systems Co., a subsidiary of General Motors Corp., to develop a rocket motor.
FARM FRESH INC., Norfolk, Va., a unit of B. Greene &amp; Co., Baltimore, signed an agreement to sell eight supermarket sites to Hannaford Bros.
Co., Scarborough, Maine, which operates chains of retail stores, for about $25 million.


Koreans Seen Buying More U.S. Concerns
Just as the Japanese are licking their wounds from ill-fated investments in American companies, the Korean giants are starting to buy in.
The announcement by LG Electronics on Monday that it would purchase a controlling stake in the Zenith Electronics Corporation for $350 million was only the latest of a recent spurt of investments in well-known American consumer-products and high-technology companies by South Korean conglomerates.


Arkansas Best (ABFS,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


3 Oil Companies Report Strong Earnings
Buoyed by almost every major segment of its business, particularly chemicals, the Exxon Corporation yesterday reported a surge in earnings in the second quarter.
The Occidental Petroleum Corporation and the Sun Company also reported strong quarterly earnings yesterday.


Real Americans, Register Here
It is hard to imagine legislation so dismal that it is opposed by Bill Kristol on the right and the American Civil Liberties Union on the left.
But such legislation, intended to fight illegal immigration, is wending its way through Congress.
It would create a computer registry listing the names of everyone eligible to work in the United States.
The aim is to screen out undocumented immigrants trying to enter the work force.


Democrats Block Vote on Anti-Regulation Measure
The ambitious Republican-led drive to curtail Federal environment, health and safety regulations collapsed today as negotiations to find a compromise stalled and Senate Democrats refused for the third time this week to bring the matter to a vote.
Supporters of the anti-regulation bill, including its chief sponsor, Senator Bob Dole of Kansas, the majority leader, conceded tonight's vote was a bitter defeat.
He had characterized the vote as a do-or-die moment for the bill, a central element of the Republican agenda in Congress.


Tagliabue Backs Raiders' Bid to Move
PAUL TAGLIABUE, the National Football League commissioner, has recommended that the league's owners approve the Raiders' move back to Oakland from Los Angeles.
According to several sources, Tagliabue faxed all 30 owners a memo Wednesday night supporting the move.
The owners will vote today.
AL DAVIS, the Raiders' managing general partner, announced last month that he had chosen Oakland, which he left after the 1981 season, over a proposed new stadium in Los Angeles. (AP)


Thompson to Handle Raisin Bran Account
The Kellogg Company said yesterday that it had moved its Raisin Bran cereal account in North America to the New York and Toronto offices of the J. Walter Thompson Company.
The account, with billings estimated at $20 million to $25 million, had been at the Leo Burnett Company in Chicago since 1950.
"On a continuing basis we are making new product assignments and balancing product portfolios," said Karen MacLeod, a Kellogg spokeswoman in Battle Creek, Mich.
"Ultimately, our goal is to have two strong ad agencies worldwide."


Judge Decides Rape Victim In Lawsuit Is Public Figure
Setting the stage for an unusual libel trial against a Daily News columnist, a state judge has ruled that a rape victim who has never been named in press reports was nonetheless a public figure and thus must prove that the writer, Mike McAlary, recklessly ignored the truth in defaming her.
By declaring the woman a public figure, the judge, Justice Charles E. Ramos of State Supreme Court in Manhattan, made it more difficult for her to prevail in her libel suit.
In contrast, private citizens can win libel cases more easily, simply by proving the writer was negligent.


Corrections
A picture caption yesterday about a 12-year-old boy who was killed in Queens and the 16-year-old accused of having shot him reversed their identities in some copies.
The boy wearing a gold chain was Quentin Carter, the victim; the one with a shaved head was Brian White, the suspect.


Clarion Acquires Promotion Company
Clarion Marketing and Communications, a unit of D'Arcy Masius Benton &amp; Bowles in Greenwich, Conn., said yesterday that it had acquired Fresh Perspectives, a promotion marketing agency in Armonk, N.Y., which is being merged into the Clarion Promotion division.
The terms were not disclosed.
Fresh Perspectives, with 30 employees, brings in billings estimated at $5 million from clients like Johnson &amp; Johnson and Nabisco, which will be added to Clarion Promotion, with 30 employees and billings estimated at $16 million from clients like Quaker Oats and Revlon.


Female Athletes May Be Seeing Long-Awaited Era of Good Will
"I wish every male in the decision-making chain could experience the frustration and puzzlement I've encountered, the reality of discrimination that exists in women's issues," said Charles S. Mechem Jr., the quintessential American white boy.
"It was the biggest single surprise I've come up against. Nothing's ever hit me so completely. I'm not bitter because there's hope for change. Look at me, at 64, finally a feminist."
He is also a 64-year-old smoothie, quick and smart, whose handling two months ago of what he calls the "Ben Wright incident" was a model of damage control; the TV commentator was not punished for allegedly disrespecting lesbians, female golfers and breasts, and the Ladies Professional Golf Association got some desperately needed ink and air time.


In America; Children of the Dark Ages
The next time you pick up a safari jacket at Banana Republic, or a pair of jeans at the Gap, or an Eddie Bauer T-shirt, give a moment's thought to girls like Claudia Molina and Judith Viera, teen-agers who have had to work under extremely cruel conditions to produce much of that clothing.
Until recently, Ms.
Molina and Ms.
Viera were maquiladora workers -- young people employed by the hundreds of thousands in free-trade-zone factories in Central America and the Caribbean to make goods for the American market.
The U.S. companies that benefit from the near-enslavement of these workers pretend not to know about the abuses in the factories, which are independently owned.


Hirosaki Journal; The Victors: Apples Exquisite And Dear
Four farm women, leaves cascading over their sun-bonneted heads, teetered on ladders under the tree and began folding and twisting tiny baby-blue papers around each of the dangling apples.
With a thousand apples on a tree, and a hundred trees to wrap in the orchard, these women were in a rush.
The rising summer sun would soon tan the pale skins of the young fruit.


No Headline
"We have choices to make in our lives. I made the wrong choice." -- DUKE SNIDER, after pleading guilty to tax fraud charges.  [ B2:1. ]


PPG Industries(PPG,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


From Pop to Punk With a Slew of Themes and Variations
One band was nervous, another looked bored.
One band was picky, another was accepting.
It was the first night of the Macintosh New York Music Festival, and as with most of the packed bills at weeklong concert marathons like this one, the lineup at each club was immense and diverse.
On Monday night at Brownie's -- one of 15 clubs taking part -- the music ranged from the new North Carolina rock band Squatweiler to the 13-year-old Milwaukee experimental band F/i; from one of Austin's most talked-about alternative bands, Sixteen Deluxe, to Seattle's less-well-known sound sculptors, Engine Kid.
Haydee Thompson, Squatweiler's singer, spoke in a trembling and out-of-breath voice between songs, but the moment she started singing all apprehension was replaced with confidence.
"Carry your fears with me," she bellowed fiercely in "73 Degrees," from the band's album "All Tempo Hot Pants" (Huel Records).
The band played fast, jagged punk rock as Ms.
Thompson alternated from sweet to sour, screaming angry rants one minute and crooning pop choruses the next.
Trip Costner switched off between hard guitar riffing, crisp college-rock strumming and punk noodling, adding muscle to an already strong performance.


Benetton's unrepentant adman vows to keep pushing the envelope.
OLIVIERO TOSCANI, your worldwide campaigns for Benetton featuring contentious, startling images of strife and turmoil have been ruled illegal by German judges and offensive by a French court.
And they are castigated by consumers who perceive them as opportunistic exploitations of human frailties.
What are you going to do next?
Mr.
Toscani's reply, delivered yesterday in his characteristically puckish manner: more of the same.
An unrepentant, undaunted Mr.
Toscani said he would not only produce additional provocative advertising for the clothing lines marketed by Benetton Group S.p.A., but would adopt the same pot-stirring tactics to sell the company's sporting goods like tennis racquets, in-line skates and ski boots.


Georgia Gulf Corp.(GGC,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


PNC Bank Corp.(PNC,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Sounds Around Town
Synthesizer at Work
Stereolab and John Cale with the Soldier String Quartet, Central Park Summerstage, midpark at 72d Street, Manhattan, (212) 360-2777.
Stereolab, an English pop band, and John Cale, an original member of the Velvet Underground, are pop historians of different natures.
Stereolab looks low, and Mr.
Cale looks high.
Grounding their sound in percolating Moog synthesizers and bubbling organs, Stereolab flips through the back pages of mid-century kitsch, singing odes to synthesizers past and obscure musicians who tried to become pop heroes.
Mr.
Cale, on the other hand, finds his source material in the poems of Dylan Thomas and the annals of minimalism.
Even Elvis Presley's "Heartbreak Hotel" becomes a composition instead of a song when he sits down at his piano to perform it while the Soldier String Quartet scrapes and slides in the background.
The free concert is tomorrow at 3 P.M.
NEIL STRAUSS Pop Magic
Arthur Lee and Love, the Bottom Line, 15 West Fourth Street, Greenwich Village, (212) 228-6300.
Arthur Lee, best known for leading the psychedelic pop band Love in the 1960's, has his own way of turning the mundane into the magical.
Since he reformed Love with younger musicians three years ago, Mr.
Lee has been touring relentlessly, becoming weirder and wilder with each concert.
On a good night, his voice remains sweet and dreamy and his music a beautiful pop swirl.
He will perform tomorrow at 7:30 and 10:30 P.M.; admission is $15.
N.
S.


Exxon Corp.(XON,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Guilty Verdict for Furious Driver
A Verona teen-ager who prosecutors said had flown into a jealous rage upon learning that her boyfriend might have made another girl pregnant was acquitted of murder but convicted of death by auto and fourth-degree assault by auto yesterday in the death of a friend and the injuring of another in a fatal car accident last year.
The dead youth, Robert Maffei, had been riding with the teen-ager, Shana Romano, when she drove her father's Mercedes into a parked truck.
Another passenger, Ed Brech, suffered brain damage in the crash.
The teen-age girl who had sparked Ms.
Romano's rage was also in the car when the crash occurred but was not injured.


Book Says Prudential Continues to Pay a Former Executive
Prudential Securities Inc. has continued to pay millions of dollars to the former head of its limited partnership division even after widespread fraud was discovered in the sale and operation of the partnerships it sold to hundreds of thousands of small investors in the 1980's, a new book about the scandal asserts.
The book, "Serpent on the Rock" (Harper Business), by Kurt Eichenwald, a New York Times reporter who covered the scandal as it unfolded, says the continuing payments to James J. Darr, the head of the unit, and other executives who assembled and marketed the limited partnerships have never been disclosed to investors.
Mr.
Darr was forced out of the firm in 1988 after accusations of widespread fraud in the sales and marketing of the partnerships he oversaw.


Starbucks Corp.(SBUX,NNM) reports earnings for 3d qtr to Jul 2


Domtar Inc.(DTC,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Service Corp. Intl.(SRV,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Ecolab Inc.(ECL,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


A Once-Notorious Haunt Still Stands
To the Editor:
"New York's Haunted Houses" (Op-Ed, July 12) sent me to the microfilm and then to a street near Beekman Place to see whether a house that earned notoriety during my childhood was still there.
It was.


Hannaford Bros. Co.(HRD,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jul 1


Phelps Dodge Corp.(PD,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


New York Fed Official Resigns Over Article in The Times
John W. Moscow, the New York Federal Reserve Bank's deputy general counsel, resigned this week after differences of opinion over an article he wrote for the Op-Ed page of The New York Times last month.
Mr.
Moscow had joined the New York Fed in June, after a long career as a prosecutor working for Robert M. Morgenthau, the Manhattan District Attorney.


Ahmanson (H.F.) (AHM,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


New Jersey Is Stretching Parole Officers' Days
New Jersey parole officers will start working evenings and weekends to stretch the hours and resources available to check up on parolees at home or at work, a senior official at the Department of Corrections in Trenton said yesterday.
The change, which will begin next month, comes at a time of angry public reaction to the handling of the case of Darnell Collins, the ex-convict from Atlantic City who killed seven people in New York and New Jersey before he was shot and killed by the police.


Tax Fraud: Two Baseball Legends Say It's So
Duke Snider and Willie McCovey, two baseball Hall of Famers whose images of power and dignity still sparkle for generations of the game's loyalists, pleaded guilty yesterday to Federal tax fraud charges, saying they had knowingly failed to report thousands of dollars earned by signing autographs and participating in sports memorabilia shows.
The two slugging legends, who had spent their physical primes playing under the bright lights of stadiums across the country, yesterday stood under the ordinary glare of the fluorescent ceiling lights in Federal Court in Brooklyn, where they raised their right hands, swore oaths to tell the truth, and pronounced themselves criminals.
And so for the first time, the stars from the game's gilded age were enveloped in a crime that up to now has involved players only from its more troubled present.


Westinghouse And CBS Plan Talks on Deal
The Westinghouse Electric Company and CBS Inc. are meeting this morning to negotiate the terms of a takeover offer that Westinghouse hopes to make for CBS within the next several weeks, executives close to the discussions said yesterday.
But even as they gather at the Manhattan headquarters of the Loews Corporation, the company that is controlled by the chairman of CBS, Laurence A. Tisch, key issues remain unresolved.
These issues include the price for CBS shares and how quickly a takeover, which would involve the transfer of television station licenses, could win approval from the Federal Communications Commission.


Murray Riese, 73, Restaurateur Who Developed the Food Court
Murray Riese, the younger of the redoubtable Riese brothers, who blanketed Manhattan with fast-food restaurants, died on Tuesday at his home in Great Neck, L.I.
The Riese brothers were widely credited with developing the concept of the food court, a cluster of fast-food restaurants.
At his death, Mr.
Riese, who was 73, was chairman of the privately held Riese Organization, which operates almost 200 restaurants in New York, many of them national franchises like T.G.I.
Friday's, Houlihan's and Dunkin' Donuts.


Thomas Tang, 73, Senior Judge For a Federal Court of Appeals
Thomas Tang, a senior judge of the United States Court of Appeals, died on Tuesday at Good Samaritan Hospital in Phoenix.
A lifelong resident of Phoenix, he was 73.
The cause was cancer, the Whitney &amp; Murphy Arcadia Funeral Home in Phoenix reported.


In House, Tirade on China, but a Vote to Keep Trade as It Is
The House railed long and fervently today against China's arrest of Harry Wu, China's use of prisoners as factory workers, China's sale of missile blueprints to its allies and China's use of forced birth control.
But given the opportunity, it declined to show its displeasure in unmistakable fashion: by revoking China's preferred trading status with the United States.


Just in Case You Missed It: Legislating, Council Style
THE CITY COUNCIL, so long a legislature-in-training that the city had gotten used to it, did a little serious business this week.
It was most illuminating.
In one afternoon, some of New York City's lawmakers figured out how to make political profit from their votes by levying an ill-disguised tax on developers.
And others embarrassed themselves and their colleagues when they won what they wanted by losing.
Now that's legislating.


At the Bar; For many, the most frightening part of the Simpson trial will come when it is over.
Hard as it may be to believe, the O. J. Simpson trial will one day come to an end.
And that, psychologists say, will leave a nation of befuddled people who suddenly have a void in their lives and time on their hands.
"It will be even worse for a lot of people," said Dr.
Joseph Gerstein, the president of Smart Recovery Self-Help Network, a nationwide nonprofit organization based in Willoughby Hills, Ohio, which supports self-help groups.
"They've become obsessed, and they'll face an awful emptiness in their lives."


AES Corp.(AESC,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


World News Briefs; Pakistani Goes to India In Effort to Free Hostages
A prominent Pakistani politician, known for his support of separatist insurgents in the disputed state of Jammu and Kashmir, is to meet with Indian officials here at the request of Islamic militants who kidnapped five Western tourists, officials and diplomats said today.
Maulana Fazlur Rahman, a member of Pakistan's Parliament and the leader of the influential Jamiat-e-Ulem, an Islamic party that supports Prime Minister Benazir Bhutto, said on Wednesday that he would "do everything" to persuade the militants to free the captives.


Revco D.S. (RXR,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Jun 3


Midnight Strikes for the U.S. in America Cup
Ending a stunning string of victories at the America Cup that captivated the soccer world, the United States succumbed to Brazil, the world champion, by 1-0 tonight in a hard-fought semifinal match.
Brazil, which outran and outplayed the Americans but never shook them off, will now face host Uruguay for the championship in Montevideo on Sunday.
Uruguay beat Colombia by 2-0 on Wednesday.


Art in Review
'Color' 'Sign, System, Sensibility'
Stark Gallery  560 Broadway (at Prince Street)  SoHo  Through today
You can't go home again.
The work in this exhibition, organized by the painter Richard Kalina, suggests that artists are going back to color, but that color itself can no longer be treated as a purely formal issue: real-world references and meanings keep leaking in.
Two drawings by the Washington Color School veteran Gene Davis provide a reminder of the heroic 1960's, when the stripe seemed like the ideal vehicle for the investigation of "pure" color.
But close on their heels comes a 1995 "painting" by Polly Apfelbaum in which strips of colored velvet are superimposed on a striped bed sheet.
The viewer moves abruptly from the heights of abstraction to the Lower East Side of Manhattan, where the walls of shops are lined with bolts of discontinued fabrics.


Spanish Leader Is Accused In Killing of Basques in 80's
A member of the conservative opposition who was once a member of Prime Minister Felipe Gonzalez's Socialist Party said today that the Spanish leader knew about the death squads that killed 27 people connected to the Basque separatists in the 1980's.
After two hours of closed testimony before an investigating magistrate, the official, Ricardo Garcia Damborenea, former general secretary of the Socialist Party in the Basque country, said at a news conference that he had personally talked to Mr.
Gonzalez about the political strategy behind the shadowy hit squads -- "not once, but several times."


KeyCorp (KEY,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


International Briefs; 3 Opel Officials Resign Over Inquiry
Adam Opel A. G., the German subsidiary of the General Motors Corporation, said yesterday that two senior members of its supervisory board and a top manager had resigned in connection with an investigation into corruption at the company.
Ferdinand Beickler and Friedrich Lohr both resigned from the auto maker's supervisory board.
And Peter Enderle, Opel's production chief, took early retirement.


SALOMON INC. (SB,N)
Salomon Inc. posted a loss yesterday for the second quarter of $60 million, or 73 cents a share -- slightly less than the Wall Street firm had predicted -- as losses in its commodities and bond trading activities offset gains in its investment banking division.
Salomon had said earlier in the month that it would report a loss of $65 million for the quarter.
In the corresponding quarter of 1994, the firm recorded its widest quarterly loss ever, of $204 million, or $2.08 a share.


Northwest Airlines Corp.(NWAC,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Art in Review
Peter Keetman and Fotoform  Howard Greenberg Gallery 120 Wooster Street (near Prince Street) SoHo Through July 29
A crisp formalism runs through the black-and-white images of Peter Keetman, a leading member of the postwar generation of German photographers.
In images from the 1950's and 60's, Mr.
Keetman, now 79, emphasized the geometric patterns of subjects like a stack of pipes or a pile of Volkswagen bumpers.


Quarterly Reports Show Uneven Profitability for Baby Bells
Paced by growth in local phone lines and cellular customers, two of the nation's seven regional Bell companies yesterday posted net gains and one reported an operating profit for the second quarter.
A fourth Baby Bell said profit fell because of increased competition.
The Bell Atlantic Corporation said second-quarter net income rose 7.7 percent, and the Ameritech Corporation posted a 13 percent increase.
The BellSouth Corporation reported a 7.8 percent increase in operating profit, but charges resulted in a loss for the quarter.
Profits of the Pacific Telesis Group fell 6.5 percent.


Abroad at Home; What Should We Do?
More and more Americans are coming to believe that this country must act to stop the horror in Bosnia.
Some who long opposed involvement find it unbearable to see the latest victims of Serbian aggression and know that the world's greatest power is doing nothing about it -- nothing about nationalist fanatics, in Europe, who hang young boys because they are of a different religion.
What should we do?
The only serious answer is to supply elements of force to resist the aggressors.
Force is the one thing the Bosnian Serb leaders respect.
All along they have attacked only when they were confident that the West, especially the United States, would not intervene.


LAST CHANCE
Here is a sampling of shows and exhibitions that are to close soon:  Closing This Weekend "HAMLET," Belasco Theater, 111 West 44th Street, Manhattan.
Featuring Ralph Fiennes; directed by Jonathan Kent.
Through tomorrow.
Performances: Tonight at 8; tomorrow at 2 and 8 P.M.
Tickets: $25 to $65.
Information: (212) 239-6200.


International Briefs; Mum's the Word At Smith New Court
Smith New Court P.L.C. remained close-mouthed yesterday at its annual meeting about its takeover talks, leading to speculation that a purchase of the stockbroker could still take some time.
"Unfortunately, I am advised I will not be able to make any statement," the company's chairman, Michael Marks, said at the meeting.
Smith New Court is in talks with both Merrill Lynch &amp; Company and Commerzbank A. G., the German bank.


FAMILY-AID PLAN REJECTED IN HOUSE
The House Appropriations Committee voted today to dismantle a 26-year-old program, long supported by Republicans, that provides family planning advice for poor and low-income women.
The committee adjourned without taking up an even more contentious issue, an amendment that would allow states to choose whether to use Medicaid money to pay for abortions in the case of rape or incest.
Current regulations require states to make the money available in such cases.


Susan Smith's Lawyer vs. the Electric Chair
David Bruck is not at all flamboyant, and his soft voice does not always make it to the far reaches of a courtroom.
Although courteous and pleasant in one-on-one conversation, he has only a modest talent for banter.
He might not be the one to liven up a backyard barbecue.
All he seems to care about (other than his family, anyhow) is fighting the death penalty and saving the lives of those who face it.
As the lawyer for Susan Smith, on trial in Union, S.C., for drowning her two children, he is now on center stage, where he seems a good deal less comfortable than, say, F. Lee Bailey.


Growing Up Troubled, In Terrifying Ways
THE beggar on the New York subway has a body truncated at the waist and he rolls on a cart, chanting "I have no legs!" in a singsong as he passes.
Just for a moment, he attracts the notice of Telly (Leo Fitzpatrick) and Casper (Justin Pierce), who look young and healthy but are actually much more damaged than this legless man.
As Larry Clark's "Kids" so harrowingly demonstrates, these two are part of a spiritually dead teen-age culture built on aimlessness, casual cruelty and empty pleasure.
Mr.
Clark's vision of these characters is so bleak and legitimately shocking that it makes almost any other portrait of American adolescence look like the picture of Dorian Gray.


Stuart Peerce, 63, New York Corporate Lawyer
Stuart B. Peerce, a partner in the law firm of Donovan Leisure Newton &amp; Irvine, died yesterday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 63.
The cause was stomach cancer, his family said.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.75
8.75
7.25
DISCOUNT RATE
5.25
5.25
3.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
5.75
5.82
4.30
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.42
5.40
4.31
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.42
5.39
4.72
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.40
6.40
7.24
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.86
6.86
7.54
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.71
7.70
8.35
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.19
6.18
6.39
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Federal Good Ol' Boys
The national attention now focused on the Good Ol' Boys Roundups -- annual rural gatherings of law-enforcement officers -- has developed into one of the odder public relations battles of recent memory.
An Alabama militia group, eager to discredit the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms, has provided news agencies with evidence of racist signs and behavior at past roundups.
The founder of the boozy annual events, a retired A.T.F. agent, says the evidence was doctored to make the racist displays appear more commonplace and more recent than they actually were.
Gene Rightmyer, the former agent who hosts the gatherings, protests that the racist sign shown in a video purporting to be of this year's event actually appeared briefly at the 1990 event and that he ordered the sign removed.
He identified a nasty little group called the Gadsden Minutemen as the source of this bad publicity.
He said he reprimanded participants in 1990 who staged an overtly racist skit for the event's "Redneck of the Year" contest.


Nucor Corp.(NUE,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jul 1


SGS-Thomson Microelectronics N.V.(STM,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jul 1


Eaton Corp.(ETN,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Pacific Telesis Group (PAC,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Gillette Co.(G,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


In Battle Over Public Lands, Ranchers Push Public Aside
The high alpine country near the grave of Ernest Hemingway is some of the prettiest public land in America, with its flower meadows, wild horses and views of the tallest mountains in Idaho.
Signs inform visitors that it is a land of "many uses," overseen for the public by the Federal Bureau of Land Management.
But Congress is now poised to grant ranchers virtual control over this and almost every other part of the 270 million acres of Federal land where grazing permits have already been issued.
People who hunt, fish or hike say the concept of sharing the use of public lands is being shoved aside for a small special interest.


Smith Intl.(SII,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Compaq Earnings Rise 17%; Apple Net Income Down 25%
The Compaq Computer Corporation yesterday reported second-quarter earnings that exceeded Wall Street analysts' estimates and helped restore some measure of calm to the market for technology stocks.
But Apple Computer Inc.'s earnings for its fiscal third quarter -- reported after the stock market had closed -- fell far short of estimates, and its shares fell in after-hours trading.


Occidental Petroleum Corp.(OXY,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


100 Works by Women, Not Intended for Women Only
The painter Elizabeth Murray is the first woman to participate in the "Artist's Choice" exhibition series at the Museum of Modern Art.
And the show she has compiled from the museum's collection -- a sprawling, episodic roundup of art by 70 women dating from 1910 to the mid-1970's -- is so logical and obvious in concept that it feels positively daring.
Even without the inclusion of any overtly polemical work, the show, titled "Modern Women," is deeply political.
A retrospective sweep of decades of accomplishment generally slighted by history could not be otherwise.
More important, the show is so full of visual revelations and intellectual challenges that the revolutionary nature of its collective spirit is clear.


A Thing of Wonder


574 Carjackings in '94
For the first time, carjackings in New Jersey have been tracked for a full year.
Figures collected by the state police show there were 574 carjacking cases reported in 1994, the State Attorney General's office said yesterday.
During the last six months of 1993, there were 306 carjackings, The Associated Press reported.
The survey also showed that 87 of New Jersey's 567 municipalities reported at least one carjacking in 1994.


Arrest in Woman's Death
The plan was to meet at his house and then hook up with friends at a bar in Fort Lee.
Instead, officials said, William David Jones beat his friend Susan Kanner to death late Wednesday afternoon in the basement of the house he shared with his mother.
The authorities said there were signs that Ms.
Kanner, a nurse who lived in Ridgefield Park, may have been sexually assaulted.
Mr.
Jones, a part-time tennis instructor, is under arrest.
Mayor Fred Berenbroick said only one other homicide has occurred in Leonia since 1974.


Watson Shoots a Superb Round While Nicklaus Suffers
From one end of the golf spectrum to the other, the first round of the 124th British Open provided something for everyone today.
It ranged from the sublime story line to the frightful spectacle, from Tom Watson, Ben Crenshaw, John Daly and Mark McNulty all going around the Old Course in 67 strokes to Jack Nicklaus taking a 10 on one hole.
There have been wilder rounds in the 124-year history of the Open.
But not many.
Watson, 45, Crenshaw, 43, McNulty, 41, and Daly, 29, are an unusual quartet of leaders at five under par.
Three old guys and a good old boy on the Old Course?
Why not?
The ball takes funny bounces over here, something to which Nicklaus will attest later.


Extreme Artifice Directly From Life (in New York Between the Wars)
One of the last wishes of Florine Stettheimer, an American painter who died in 1944 at the age of 73, was that all the work in her studio be destroyed upon her death.
This was no small thing, as Stettheimer, who was independently wealthy, never sold her paintings -- although she occasionally gave them to friends -- just as she declined all offers of solo shows.
Luckily, her sisters, Carrie and Ettie Stettheimer, ignored the request.
Florine Stettheimer's witty, deliriously beautiful canvases, which chronicled a weird maidenly life spent with her adored mother and sisters on New York's between-the-wars cultural front, were saved for posterity.
Indeed, they were rather quickly placed on prominent display: in 1946, the Museum of Modern Art mounted a retrospective instigated by one of the artist's closest friends, Marcel Duchamp, and organized by another, the art critic Henry McBride.


Restaurants
Great carved dragons guard the entrance to Korea Palace, giving the restaurant a fancy and slightly forbidding air.
The limousines parked in front only add to the impression.
So it is surprising to walk inside and find that the restaurant has the casual, bright, utilitarian look of a converted coffee shop.
The tables are bare and the small colored lights dangling from the ceiling look left over from the 60's.
And while the air is perfumed with garlic, chilies, sugar and sesame, the efficient metal hoods over each booth inhale all the smoke generated by customers' barbecuing their own meat.
If you would like something a little more upscale, that can be arranged.
The entire back of the restaurant is occupied by small private dining rooms, each equipped with an intercom.
But the private dining rooms can be hot in the summertime, and even in winter Korean meals are entertaining enough to make it far more fun to sit in the large dining room where you can watch what everybody else is eating.


Genuine Parts Co.(GPC,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Corrections
Two articles in Business Day yesterday about the stock market's selloff, and several related charts, misstated Wednesday's closing figure for the Nasdaq composite index.
It was 952.83, down 35.70 points.


Suicide at a Hotel
A 31-year-old man committed suicide yesterday by jumping from a glass-enclosed elevator at the Marriott Marquis Hotel near Times Square and falling 45 floors.
The man, whom the police identified as George Carragonne, a Manhattan resident, entered the lobby and asked if the building was the tallest in the area.
After being told it was, he took an elevator to the 45th floor, according to an Emergency Medical Services official.


Haselrig Joins Jets After 2 Lost Seasons
Carlton Haselrig remembers the reaction when the Pittsburgh Steelers took him on the 12th and last round of the National Football League's 1989 draft.
"I think a lot of people took it as a joke," he said.
And why not?
Even though he won six National Collegiate Athletic Association heavyweight wrestling titles at Pittsburgh-Johnstown, he did not play football because the school had no team.


Lawyer Living High Life Is Said to Have Ties to Mob
Over the last decade, Dennis J. Pappas proudly assumed all the trappings of a successful lawyer and financial adviser.
He wore $2,000 custom-tailored suits, glided around New York City and Long Island in chauffeured limousines and dashed around the world in private jets for meetings and holidays.
But all that wealth and high living, the authorities asserted yesterday, flowed from his being the financial wizard for the Colombo crime family.
As the 48-year-old lawyer lay in a hospital bed suffering from a heart ailment yesterday, he was indicted on Federal charges of laundering at least $5 million for the Colombo family and fleecing four banks, two insurance companies, two New York City companies and two Pennsylvania physicians of more than $1 million.
And investigators said that $6 million merely represented the money they could trace.


Artist as Nihilistic Victim
"Postcards From America" was shown as part of last year's New York Film Festival.
Following are excerpts from Stephen Holden's review, which appeared in The New York Times on Oct. 8.
The film opens today at the Quad Cinema, 13th Street, west of Fifth Avenue, Greenwich Village.
If any American artist in the past decade can be said to have lobbed verbal hand grenades into the culture, it is David Wojnarowicz, the New York-based artist and poet who died of AIDS two years ago.
In his writings, paintings, photographs and installations, Wojnarowicz transmuted his rage as an H.I.V.-positive gay man into explosively visceral polemics that railed against society's hatred of homosexuality, his fatal illness and governmental indifference.


Lukas Is Taking Aim At Saratoga Openers
After moving a million pounds of equipment 180 miles north from Belmont Park, the New York Racing Association was unloading its trucks today and setting the stage for the 127th season of racing at old Saratoga Race Course.
But opening day on Friday will offer a decidedly youthful twist with the first in a series of races for 2-year-old colts and fillies that could identify the early leaders in next year's Triple Crown races.


A New Tide Of Refugees From Zepa Is Awaited
International relief officials waited here today for the first influx of Muslim deportees from the enclave of Zepa amid confusion about how many would be coming and when they would arrive.
As darkness descended in this small mountain town, which is near the front lines and was hit with three mortar shells today, the officials said the Bosnian Serbs had told them that 3,500 women and children they were expelling from Zepa would arrive before midnight, but other aid workers said the refugees would not arrive before Friday morning.


Charles Miller, 44, Editor
Charles Miller, editor at large and former managing editor of Artforum magazine in New York City, died on July 12 at Beth Israel Medical Center in Manhattan.
He was 44, and lived in Greenwich Village and East Hampton, L.I.
The cause was AIDS, said his companion, Gregory M. Griffin.


Compuserve Picks Martin/Williams
Compuserve Inc., the computer on-line service in Columbus, Ohio, owned by H &amp; R Block, said yesterday that it had selected Martin/Williams in Minneapolis to handle its account, which had been at Sive/ Young &amp; Rubicam in Cincinnati, a unit of Young &amp; Rubicam Inc., for the last 13 years.
The billings were estimated at $8 million to $10 million.


Senate Panel Approves Flag Amendment
The Senate Judiciary Committee today approved a constitutional amendment to allow the states to make it a crime to desecrate the American flag.
But the committee's chairman, Senator Orrin G. Hatch, left open the possibility that the language might be changed to clear up ambiguities and help win more votes.
The measure, approved overwhelmingly by the House in June, now goes to the full Senate.
Mr.
Hatch, a Utah Republican, said the measure faced an uphill struggle but predicted it would garner the 67 votes necessary to send a constitutional amendment to the states for ratification.


Arco Cemical (RCM,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


New York State Open Goes McDougal's Way
Playing at 7,175 yards, the Monster course at the Concord Resort spreads fear even to golf's long hitters, but Ron McDougal becomes inspired by its challenge and has usually found a way to tame this layout.
The 32-year-old McDougal, the assistant to Nelson Long at Century Country Club in Purchase, N.Y., for the last six years, captured the $65,000 New York State Open here this afternoon with a 54-hole total of eight-under-par 208.
That was four shots better than Mark Mielke, the head pro at Lawrence Golf Club on Long Island and the winner of this tournament in 1992.


Corrections
An art-show listing in Weekend last Friday misstated the closing date of "Hollycroft Invitational '95" at the Hollycroft Foundation in Ivoryton, Conn.
It is Sept. 5, not Aug. 3.


Alexander &amp; Baldwin Inc.(ALEX,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Ameritech Corp.(AIT,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Schlumberger Ltd.(SLB,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Allegheny Power System Inc.(AYP,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to June 30


Tandy Corp.(TAN,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Crane Co.(CR,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Sealed Air Corp.(SEE,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Excel Industries(EXC,A) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jul 1


34 Arrested in Drug Sweep
Wrapping up a four-month undercover investigation dubbed "Operation Street Surprise," law enforcement officers conducted a drug sweep on the border between Linden and Roselle yesterday, arresting 23 adults and 11 juveniles.
Neighbors cheered while they watched the early-morning raid, The Associated Press reported.


G.M. Rise Bucks Quarter's Auto Earnings Trend
If they ever played Broadway instead of Wall Street, the Big Three auto companies might consider calling their act The Perils of Pollyanna.
With their widely varying second quarter earnings reports this week, they demonstrated the danger in their business of excessive optimism.
The Ford Motor Company and the Chrysler Corporation, which had breathlessly predicted robust sales this spring, built too many cars and trucks and watched their earnings slide in the second quarter as they ladled out rebates and other incentives to entice indifferent buyers.


Finding Brett Weston's Own Identity
Throughout his long life, Brett Weston, who died two years ago at 81, was never able to escape the shadow of his father, Edward, the Modernist hero renowned for his sensuous close-ups of rocks, vegetables and other natural objects.
The two men worked in similar styles and photographed similar subjects; so close were they that in the years before his death in 1958, Edward Weston entrusted much of his darkroom work to his son.
Nevertheless, in the course of his career Brett Weston produced many photographs that, while echoing characteristics of his father's images, have their own distinguishing qualities.
The current presentation at the Burden Gallery of the Aperture Foundation, "Brett Weston: Voyage of the Eye," including an extensive selection of his later work, provides a welcome opportunity to assess his achievement.


Irish Hurdle Raised
To the Editor:
The assertion by Peter Innes, director of British Information Services, that the Irish Republican Army's disarming must precede British-Irish peace talks is disingenuous and discouraging (letter, July 17).


Memorial Service for Firefighter


5 Killed When Hit by Car


Adventure-Filled Tour Around the World, Free
Can't afford to take the children to London this summer?
Or Paris?
No Middle Eastern bazaars?
No Bombay?
No Far West?
No ocean cruise?
Before the tears flow too copiously, consider this possibility: an adventure-filled, romantic world tour, absolutely free.
Through Aug. 5, there are 10 departures weekly at the Promenade Theater, where Theaterworks/USA has raised the curtain on its latest production, a thoroughly captivating version of "Around the World in 80 Days."


B. R. Gross, 58, A Professor Of Philosophy
Barry R. Gross, a professor of philosophy at the City University of New York who was known as one of the earliest scholarly critics of affirmative action programs, died last Friday in Princeton, N.J.
He was 58.
Professor Gross, who taught at CUNY's York College and lived in Manhattan, apparently had a heart attack while working at the headquarters of the National Association of Scholars.
He was the group's national program director and treasurer as well as president of its New York City affiliate.


Federal Signal Corp.(FSS,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Anger Over Mayor's Comments
Comments that Frank Maddaloni, the Mayor of Roxbury Township, made on Wednesday about a 118-acre camp have irritated sensitive feelings in Jersey City.
Mr.
Maddaloni wants to buy the camp from Jersey City so that local youth can use it.
"The idea of transporting inner-city kids all the way up here seems to me to be inviting problems while adding to the work of our police, fire and rescue units," Mr.
Maddaloni said in a statement.


Tidewater Inc.(TDW,N) reports earnings for 1st qtr to Jun 30


Sports of The Times; Baseball's Sad Song Plays On
SUBSTITUTE one Willie for another, McCovey for Mays, and the singer-songwriter Terry Cashman suddenly has fresh material to reprise his once-popular (though terrifically annoying) jingle about "Willie, Mickey and the Duke." The times, however, they are a-changin', and baseball's songs are increasingly sounds of sadness.
In Dallas last week, Mickey Mantle presented himself to a national television audience as the portrait of an American icon turned withered alcoholic.
In Brooklyn yesterday afternoon, Duke Snider and Willie McCovey stood in front of a United States District Judge named Edward R. Korman and admitted that they, like the soon-to-be Yankee Darryl Strawberry, were income-tax cheats.


Mother Was Remorseful, Witness Says
An F.B.I. agent held Susan Smith on her lap like a child, wiped her tears and told her she was not a bad mother in the hours after she confessed to drowning her two toddlers.
The agent, Carol Allison, testified today in Mrs.
Smith's murder trial that she did not believe Mrs.
Smith was faking her remorse when she finally broke, after nine days of interrogations, and confessed that she rolled her red Mazda into a lake with her two sons strapped inside.


Everyone Agrees: Seles to Return at No. 1
The controversial ranking proposal that doubles as a welcome mat for the WTA Tour comeback of MONICA SELES, who returns after being stabbed during a match more than two years ago, received the official stamp of approval yesterday from ANNE WORCESTER, the Tour's chief executive officer.
According to Worcester, Seles will be co-ranked No. 1 for her first six tournaments, a condition never opposed by other top players.
But Worcester confirmed that the entire 18-month transition period during which Seles will receive additional special ranking privileges did not meet with unanimous approval.


2 Marketers Expand Ties With Agencies
Two large advertisers have expanded relationships with agencies on their rosters.
Mars Inc. in McLean, Va., named D'Arcy Masius Benton &amp; Bowles in New York to handle advertising for two new lines, Kan Tong packaged rice and Eastern Traditions packaged Middle Eastern rice dishes.
The billings were not disclosed.
The brands, part of the Uncle Ben's food group, had been at Bates Worldwide, a unit of Cordiant P.L.C., until Mars ended its longtime relationship with that agency in February.
D.M.B.&amp; B., which handles the Uncle Ben's account, was awarded the new lines after a six-week review that also included Merkley Newman Harty in New York, part of the Omnicom Group, and the Richards Group in Dallas.


Angels Scoring Early and Often These Days
Angels 10, Blue Jays 3
Tony Phillips had two of California's seven first-inning singles as the Angels batted around for the second time in as many games against Toronto, scoring six times in a 10-3 victory over the Blue Jays last night.


INSIDE
Status Quo on China Trade
Members of the House of Representatives railed against China over human rights abuses and other issues, but voted to kill a bill to revoke its favored trade status.
Page A3.
U.S.-Japan Air Accord
Washington and Tokyo reached an agreement in their dispute over air cargo routes, defusing another bitter trade conflict.
Page D1.
Brazil Defeats U.S.
The dream run of the United States soccer team ended last night when Brazil held on for a 1-0 victory in the America Cup semifinals.
Page B9.


Times Co.'s Profit Jumped 26% To $43.3 Million in 2d Quarter
The New York Times Company reported yesterday that its second-quarter earnings rose more than 26 percent, reflecting higher profits in the company's newspaper, broadcast and forest products groups.
The company said its net income totaled $43.3 million, or 45 cents a share, up from $34.3 million, or 32 cents a share, in the comparable quarter of 1994.


I.B.M. to Dress Some Software In Lotus-Products Wrappings
Eager to maintain momentum from its $3.5 billion purchase of the Lotus Development Corporation, I.B.M. announced yesterday that it would fold several of its existing offerings into Lotus products and make the Lotus brand name the centerpiece of its desktop and network software business.
As expected, the company said it would focus its efforts on expanding the sales of Notes, the Lotus software that allows people to collaborate over computer networks.
I.B.M. said it would kill its own competing product called Workgroup as well as electronic mail software that competed with cc:mail, Lotus's more successful offering.


So Young and Self-Conscious
"We are young," Supergrass proudly declares in its current Top 10 British hit, "Alright." Its songs are about the hopes and frustrations of young people who want to break free of boredom, get out and have a good time.
Yet its music has vintage charms, modeled on an English rock pantheon: David Bowie, the Rolling Stones, the Beatles and the Who.
At the Mercury Lounge on Tuesday night, as part of the Macintosh New York Music Festival, Supergrass revved up some of the best ideas of rock's last three decades.
The band is a trio, sometimes abetted by a keyboardist outside the spotlight; as the trio concentrated on its instruments, their exuberant musicianship became showmanship.
In fast, tuneful songs, Danny Goffey on drums and Mickey Quinn on bass built muscular, eruptive crescendos like the early Who.
Gaz Coombes on guitar moved from insistent strumming to wailing leads, singing with Mr.
Bowie's yelps or Mick Jagger's nasal swagger.


Ametek Inc.(AME,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


People
Margaret Coughlin was named to the new position of vice chairwoman at Pamet River Partners, Boston.
She was previously president of Cone/Coughlin Communications, Boston, which has been renamed Cone Communications.


Big Merger Of Eastern Banks Is Seen
In yet another blockbuster bank merger, the Bank of Boston Corporation has agreed to merge with the Corestates Financial Corporation of Philadelphia, lawyers and investment bankers familiar with the transaction said yesterday.
The merger would create a financial institution with assets of about $70 billion, ranking it among the top 15 banks in the country.
Spokesmen for both banking companies declined to comment last night.
The deal would be structured as a merger of equals, in which neither bank would pay a premium to acquire the other.
The headquarters would be in Boston, which has been a prerequisite for the Bank of Boston's board.


4 Metro-North Unions Reach Tentative Contract Accord
Four Metro-North unions reached tentative contract agreements with the railroad yesterday, drawing angry charges from other unions that the four had been bought too cheaply, and further fragmenting the unions' united front.
After five hours of predawn talks with the Metropolitan Transportation Authority, the railroad's parent agency, the unions representing mechanics, machinists, firemen and oilers, and sheet-metal workers accepted an enriched variation of the railroad's offer of a 10.3 percent wage increase over four years.
All four unions agreed to give Metro-North greater scheduling flexibility, and the Transport Workers Union, which represents rail car mechanics and car cleaners, agreed to allow the use of part-time cleaners, one of the most controversial of the M.T.A.'s work-rule demands.


380 Children, and Very Little Time for Golf; Part Fond Father, Part Salesman, Camp Owner Finds Each Day a Long One
Jerry Halsband, the owner of Raquette Lake Boys and Girls Camps, never waits for reveille.
By the time the sun rises in an orange-pink haze over Constable Point -- about 6 A.M. -- he is at his desk, reviewing notes from the day before.
There are misbehaving campers who need to be spoken to, prospective parents to be cajoled into sending their children, leaking bunk house roofs to be patched and audio equipment to be procured for the senior play.


St. Jude Medical Inc.(STJM,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Transactions
Baseball  American League
AL -- Ordered New York Yankees pitcher Jack McDowell to purchase an undisclosed amount of tickets to be given to fans.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Westinghouse and CBS Discuss Terms for a Deal  Although many issues remain unresolved, Westinghouse Electric and CBS are getting together this morning to negotiate the terms of a takeover offer for the network.
A proposal could come within weeks, executives close to the discussions said, but key issues remain unresolved, including the price to be paid for CBS shares and how quickly a takeover could win regulatory approval.  [ Page D6. ] Mesa Keeps Poison Pill  The board of Mesa Inc. ignored the demands of dissident shareholders and rallied behind its chief executive, T. Boone Pickens, by refusing to make more than minor revisions in a plan to fend off takeovers.
The board also heard investment bankers describe plans for the company's whole or partial sale as Mesa tries to revive its stock price and avoid defaulting on debts.  [ D2. ] Market Settles Down; Indexes Rise  The stock market returned to a relative calm, with the main indexes inching up as traders snapped up stocks made cheaper by Wednesday's rout.
After a brief drop, the Dow industrials closed at 4,641.55, up 12.68.  [ D6. ] I.B.M.
Revival  A marathon effort to revitalize 42d Street turned an important corner as entertainment companies led by Walt Disney and Madame Tussaud's of London announced plans to open glittering family attractions.  [ A1. ] Exxon Earnings Surge  Exxon reported that earnings in the second quarter were buoyed by almost every major segment of its business.
Occidental Petroleum and the Sun Company also reported strong quarterly earnings.  [ D16. ] Profits Up at Drug Concerns  Merck, Bristol-Myers Squibb, Warner-Lambert and Schering-Plough all said that earnings rose in the second quarter, bolstered by increased sales volume.  [ D2. ] Results Mixed at Baby Bells  Paced by growth in phone lines and cellular customers, Bell Atlantic and Ameritech posted net gains in the second quarter.
BellSouth had an operating profit but a net loss, and profits fell at Pacific Telesis.  [ D3. ] China Keeps Trade Status  After a noisy debate, the House voted to extend most-favored-nation status to China.  [ A3. ] Sears Earnings Up 11%  Sears, Roebuck said its second-quarter net income rose 11 percent to $559 million, or $1.41 a share.
Sales rose in both the apparel and hard-goods lines, analysts said.
With Allstate spun off, the quarter was the first in which Sears's earnings came almost entirely from its retail operations.  [ D3. ] Koreans Make Play in U.S.
LG Electronics agreement to buy a controlling stake in Zenith, announced Monday, was only the latest American investment by a South Korean conglomerate.  [ D5. ] New Prudential Allegations  A new book asserts that Prudential Securities continued to pay millions of dollars to James J. Darr, the former head of its limited partnership division, even after fraud was discovered in the partnerships.  [ D2. ]


Reagan-Era View of Nicaragua Lives On
To the Editor:
Re your July 16 news article on the Nicaraguan Army makeover: You quote sources identified with the Nicaraguan right -- the Foreign Minister and the head of a conservative human rights group.
Only in the last paragraphs do you cite a Sandinista source, the new army head.


Baush &amp; Lomb Inc.(BOL,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jul 1


Paul Revere (PRL,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Bank of Boston (BKB,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Home Video
Film and video guides make fat books, but for true seat-of-the-pants movie browsing, nothing beats surfing the guides on CD-ROM.
In three new CD-ROM editions of large guides, the searches lead in all directions.
The 22,000 movies in Video Hound Multimedia, for example, can be searched by title, genre, cast, director, awards, screenwriter, year of release, rating and seven other classifications.
As with other such guides, searches can be mixed and matched for cross-reference.


Disney Getting a House of Its Own on Broadway
The Walt Disney Company figured out a way to make a dancing candelabrum come alive on Broadway.
But can it do the same for a stampede of 1,000 gazelles?
The stampede is a pivotal scene in Disney's animated musical hit "The Lion King," and now, with the agreement on renovation of the New Amsterdam Theater, Disney officials say "The Lion King" is one of several Disney properties and original musicals they are considering bringing to the New York stage, beginning as early as the spring of 1997.


Howe Confronts a Lingering Rumor
Steve Howe was angry, agitated and annoyed yesterday while discussing an issue that is almost two months old.
Imagine how perturbed he was when he discovered in May that there was speculation in the Yankee organization that he was distributing amphetamines to some teammates.
Any rumor or innuendo linking him to drugs is bound to upset Howe, who has been suspended by baseball seven times for drug violations.
With all the controversies that have afflicted the Yankees this season, his travails are unusually even by Bronx Zoo standards.


America West Airlines Inc.(AWA,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Chelsea Journal; After Years Of Tarnish, City Finds Its Knight
Guy Santagate, who will be sworn in next month as Chelsea's first city manager, said he is glad that his new office is being painted.
He had not asked about the color.
Any color is fine, he said.
"I'm basic," he said, digging into his fried-fish lunch at a local restaurant overlooking the Mystic River, with the huge gas tanks and warehouses looming along the shore.
"Give me a desk and a telephone."


A Spiritual Quest in Cyberspace?


For Mother, A Day Brings A Birth And a Death
For Nauden Hinds, Wednesday should have been a joyous day to remember: it was the day her fifth child was born.
But instead, it was a time of sorrow.
That same afternoon, her only daughter fell to her death from the window of a Harlem apartment building.





COLGATE-PALMOLIVE CO. (CL,N)
The Colgate-Palmolive Company reported sluggish second-quarter earnings yesterday, citing lower profits in Mexico.
The company, which makes Colgate toothpaste, Ajax cleanser and other consumer products, earned $143.2 million, or 95 cents a share, compared with $142.5 million, or 93 cents a share, in the quarter a year earlier.
But the previous year's results included a $5.2 million charge.
Before the charge, Colgate earned $147.7 million, or 97 cents a share.


Butler Stays Hot; The Mets Do Not
Even when you are a team on a roll as the Mets have been lately, it's difficult to achieve success when your pitching can't keep the baseball in the park.
Right-hander Dave Mlicki, who has given up more home runs than any other Mets pitcher this season, continued to be victimized by the long ball tonight.
Making his first appearance in 15 days, Mlicki allowed two home runs, a two-run blast by Ray Lankford and a three-run rocket by Darnell Coles that helped the Cardinals to an 8-6 victory at Busch Stadium.


New Yorkers Can Expect More Medical Errors; How're You Doing?
To the Editor:
I was pleased to read in "Medical Errors Bring Calls for Change" (Science Times, July 18) about Dr.
Ernest A. Codman and his desire to measure medical care a century ago in Boston by sending out follow-up postcards to check on the effectiveness of medical treatment.


Bosnian Exit Strategy
President Clinton was right to turn down France's request for American helicopters to ferry French reinforcements into the besieged Bosnian town of Gorazde, even though his decision will probably hasten the U.N.'s departure from Bosnia.
Those helicopters would have required American spotters and ground crews, punching a hole in the Administration's policy of keeping American ground troops out of Bosnian combat zones.
However flawed the President's record has been on other aspects of the Bosnian crisis, he deserves credit for avoiding American combat fatalities.
It would be reckless to jeopardize that achievement now in a long-shot bid to halt the Bosnian Serbs from consolidating their stronghold in eastern Bosnia.


In Brooklyn, Both Sympathy and Dismay
George Mullane, a Bay Ridge bartender who remembers sneaking into Ebbets Field as a teen-ager, shrugged at the news that one of his baseball idols had pleaded guilty to tax fraud yesterday.
"I know it's wrong what Duke Snider did, don't get me wrong," Mr.
Mullane said in the hazy, neon darkness of the Brooklyn Dodgers Bar on Third Avenue.
"But he's no different than anyone else in baseball these days. There's money out there to be had, and Duke just got on the bandwagon. He also just happened to get caught."


Mesa Board Backs Pickens Vs. Dissidents
Mesa Inc., threatened with a takeover by dissident shareholders a few weeks ago, demonstrated today that it had recovered the power to set its own course.
In a four-hour meeting here, the board of Mesa rallied behind its chief executive, T. Boone Pickens.
It refused to make more than minor revisions in a plan to fend off takeovers.
The so-called poison-pill plan prevents hostile investors from raising their combined stake past 10 percent by giving other shareholders the right to buy more stock at a 50 percent discount when the 10 percent threshold is reached.
The board also heard investment bankers describe plans for the company's whole or partial sale.


Inside Art
Airport '95
Bookstores, cafes and exercise studios aren't the only unconventional places to find interesting art.
Now airports are, too.
Adorning the walls of the newly renovated Tower Air terminal at Kennedy International Airport are works by artists like Frank Stella and Robert Rauschenberg.
This was no afterthought: part of the terminal's $8 million renovation included creating proper spaces to show paintings, sculpture and prints.
Jeffrey Deitch, a private dealer based in New York, masterminded the project.
"I've been concerned that the art business has not found enough new collectors to replace those from the 80's who have disappeared," he said in a telephone interview this week.
"Making a terminal into a giant art gallery means that thousands of people will see the works every day."


International Briefs; Strike at Air France
Striking flight attendants forced Air France to cut its summer schedule yesterday by 30 percent for a second day.
Three unions called on 6,100 members to stay off the job until last night to protest work conditions at the money-losing airline, which has been trying to increase productivity and trim its work force.
Air France has said it cut its losses last year to 2.3 billion francs, or about $470 million.
That compares with a loss of 8.48 billion francs in 1993.
About a third of the state-owned carrier's flights were canceled on Wednesday. (AP)


CompuCom Systems Inc. reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


CHRONICLE
Taking an Olympic dive is nothing for ratcheting up the nerves compared with a theatrical opening, or so says GREG LOUGANIS, the four-time gold medalist.
Mr.
Louganis is now in rehearsal for the starring (and sole) role in "The Only Thing Worse You Could Have Told Me," the Off Broadway play by Dan Butler.
It is a view of contemporary gay culture as seen through numerous characters in 14 vignettes.


Illinois Tool Works Inc.(ITW,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


First Major Film With an NC-17 Rating Is Embraced by the Studio
For five years movie studios have viewed the highly restricted NC-17 rating as commercial death.
The rating, which bars films to viewers younger than 17, is seen as especially damaging to a film's prospects because many theaters in malls are reluctant to show films with that rating, newspapers and television networks are nervous about promoting them and video chains like Blockbuster have said they will not rent or sell these films.
But today, after "Showgirls," a film about Las Vegas strippers, was given an NC-17 by the Motion Picture Association of America ratings board, MGM/UA, the studio that made the film, said it welcomed the rating.
It is the first time that a big-budget studio film ("Showgirls" cost $40 million to $45 million) is being released with an NC-17 rating.


Northrop Grumman Corp.(NOC,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Bristol-Myers Squibb Co.(BMY,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Tosco Corp.(TOS,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Susan Smith's Lawyer vs. the Electric Chair
David Bruck is not at all flamboyant, and his soft voice does not always make it to the far reaches of a courtroom.
Although courteous and pleasant in one-on-one conversation, he has only a modest talent for banter.
He might not be the one to liven up a backyard barbecue.
All he seems to care about (other than his family, anyhow) is fighting the death penalty and saving the lives of those who face it.
As the lawyer for Susan Smith, on trial in Union, S.C., for drowning her two children, he is now on center stage, where he seems a good deal less comfortable than, say, F. Lee Bailey.


Moore Is at It Again, Rattling Pillars
With baseball cap and sly smile, Michael Moore looks like the kind of amiable giant that the cartoonist Al Capp used to create for L'il Abner.
But beware.
Beneath that angelic-seeming facade lurks irreverence, satire, just plain old adolescent devilment and the rest of that stuff that invariably tends to rattle average pillars of the community.
Mr.
Moore's 1989 film, "Roger and Me," which turned an unflattering spotlight on General Motors plant closings in Flint, Mich., is among the highest-grossing documentaries ever.
In 1994, Mr.
Moore started the weekly magazine show "TV Nation," on NBC.
The reviews were enthusiastic, but the ratings for two limited seasons failed to impress the network.
Now Fox Broadcasting, evidently accelerating efforts to lose its get-no-respect image, is giving "TV Nation" an eight-week trial run.
It begins tonight at 8.


Surgery for Jaguars' Boselli
TONY BOSELLI of the Jacksonville Jaguars, the No. 2 overall pick in the N.F.L. draft, has suffered a more serious knee injury than originally thought and will undergo arthroscopic surgery today.


Micro Warehouse Inc.(MWHS,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Applied Magnetics Corp.(APM,N) reports earnings for 3d qtr to Jun 30


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  Banc One Corp., Columbus, Ohio, is selling $600 million of notes in two parts through Salomon Brothers.
The first part consists of $300 million of notes due in 2005.
The notes are priced at 99.367 to yield 7.09 percent.
The second part is $300 million of notes due in 2025.
The notes are priced at 98.993 to yield 7.838 percent.
The noncallable issue is rated A1 by Moody's Investors Service Inc. and A+ by the Standard &amp; Poor's Corp. and Duff &amp; Phelps.
Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corp., known as Freddie Mac, is selling $75 million of notes due in 2005 through Merrill Lynch &amp; Co.
Callable in five years, the issue is priced at par to yield 7.215 percent.


A Touch of Glass Amid the Blooms


Schering-Plough Corp.(SGP,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


CALIFORNIA BOARD ENDS PREFERENCES IN COLLEGE SYSTEM
Ignoring President Clinton's declaration on Wednesday that affirmative action "has been good for America," the governing regents of the University of California voted tonight to stop admitting students, hiring professors and awarding contracts on the basis of race and sex.
Their decision, on a vote of 14 to 10, came at the end of a 12-hour hearing that was punctuated by angry debate and accompanied by demonstrations on the street and inside the hearing room.


Allstate Corp.(ALL,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Third World Migrants Risk Hell for a Dream
With dreams of a safe and prosperous life in a faraway country, Williappan Ratnarajah sold his family home in war-racked Sri Lanka and paid a casual acquaintance $10,000 to smuggle himself and his younger brother to Germany.
The months-long journey from Colombo, the Sri Lankan capital, to Moscow through Kiev and Bucharest ended in horror last week when his brother, Salam, 24, was one of 18 Sri Lankans who suffocated to death in the back of an airless, padlocked container abandoned on the hot plains of Hungary.


U.S. Wins Support From Britain For Plan to Bomb Bosnian Serbs
On the eve of a critical allied meeting on Bosnia, the United States won support from Britain today for a plan to threaten the Bosnian Serbs with extensive NATO air strikes if the Serbs continue attacks on "safe areas," even if they retaliate against Western hostages.
But France, which like Britain has thousands of troops among the United Nations peacekeeping force in Bosnia, still had not agreed to the plan hours before the multinational conference here was to start.


For Children
Dance Program  Central Park Summerstage  Rumsey Playfield  Midpark at 72d Street  Manhattan  (212) 360-2777  Recommended ages: 9 and up  Tonight
Hip-hop music is not in the same league, of course, as the sugary good-naturedness of many children's recordings.
But older children often prefer the sexy tunes of hip-hop over a sweet song about, say, bugs in one's bed.
Hip-hop has a pop-music aura, and like some television sitcoms, it gives children clues about the grown-up world.
Besides, hip-hop is great dancing music.


Free Shakespeare? Well, Not Exactly
To the Editor:
Frank Rich's defense of public arts funding in general and of the Public Theater's annual Shakespeare in the Park in particular was eloquent but inaccurate, as anyone who has had to wait unsuccessfully for tickets can attest (column, July 15).


Deadline Extended Again in Bid for Legent
Computer Associates International Inc. extended the deadline for its $1.74 billion bid for the Legent Corporation for a third time yesterday, as it continued to negotiate with the Justice Department's antitrust division, which is reviewing the deal.
The offer, which would have expired last night, is now set to expire at midnight Tuesday.


Suit Over Landfill Leaks
Twelve years ago, a landfill near the Gloucester County town of Pitman became the first toxic dump to be cleaned up under the Federal Superfund program.
Yesterday, a class action suit was filed in Superior Court that contends that cancer-causing chemicals leaked from the dump into streams feeding Alcyon Lake, exposing people who swam in the lake and their offspring to disease and fertility problems.
Among the named plaintiffs is Pamela Cobb, who attended a Girl Scout camp at the lake in 1970 and later had several miscarriages and ovarian cysts.
Named as defendants are the owners and managers of the landfill, two hauling companies and a half-dozen chemical companies, factories and plants.


The Taming of Broadway's Shrew
SHE'S eccentric, but what great star of silent films wouldn't be after years of public indifference?
Certainly her Hollywood-bizarre, fur-trimmed wardrobe indicates that she's no slave to commonplace haute couture.
She's the kind of woman who might wear pantaloons or a lampshade with the confidence of someone who sets the fashions that others follow.
That needn't be crazy, just self-assurance to an extreme degree.
Don't worry that her fondness for wigs and turbans suggests that she has a problem with thinning hair.
Like everyone else, when she gazes into the mirror, she sees only the image she holds in her mind.
That image is easier to see when supplemented by a wig or a turban.
Her imperious manners can't be ignored, but she's no more neurotic than a spoiled child.
The truth is that she's really a victim.
She's not mad; she's a vulnerable if overprivileged waif.


Torchmark Corp.(TMK,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Control Data Systems Inc.(CDAT,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Tevye and Other Comforts in a Crumbling World
A BRIDGE OF LONGING The Lost Art of Yiddish Storytelling  By David G. Roskies  419 pages.
Harvard University Press. $37.50.
In the 1880's, Sholom Aleichem, the beloved storyteller of the doomed kingdom of Eastern European Yiddish life, edited and published "The Jewish People's Library," a handsome literary almanac that included stories by the best Yiddish writers of the time.
In David G. Roskies's view, the almanac was a landmark in Jewish culture, but not for the reason it might seem most natural to assume.


Cheers for Mattingly Are Contrast to Controversy
Every day brings new distractions with the Yankees, enough damaging news to turn stomachs and turn their clubhouse into a chaotic and crumbling room.
Jack McDowell was reprimanded by the American League yesterday for his finger-flipping incident at Yankee Stadium and instructed to purchase $5,000 worth of tickets in an attempt to make peace with the fans he offended.
Unfortunately for the fans, McDowell's ticket avalanche did not begin last night because Don Mattingly belted his first homer since May 4, drove in two runs for the first time since that same game and the Yankees clubbed three homers in an 8-4 victory over the Royals.


10 Gang Members in Harlem Are Indicted
For more than five years, the drug gang conducted what prosecutors called a reign of terror in central Harlem, murdering rival gangsters, shooting bystanders and terrorizing the neighborhood surrounding Lenox Avenue and 142d Street.
Gang members even entered Harlem Hospital Center in hospital whites last year, prosecutors said, in an unsuccessful effort to stab a rival drug dealer whom they had failed to kill a few days earlier despite shooting him 15 times.


Advanta Corp.(ADVNA,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Election Monitor Criticizes Haitian Vote for Widespread Fraud
The Carter Center, normally a strong supporter of President Jean-Bertrand Aristide of Haiti, said today that last month's elections in Haiti were riddled with fraud and that the Clinton Administration should not back a series of reruns and runoffs that many Haitian political parties are threatening to boycott.
In its first formal comment on the elections for parliamentary seats and municipal posts, the center released an unusually harsh report today, saying that the Government had failed to seal ballot boxes and that the election commission "stiff-armed" parties that complained about the vote, which Mr.
Aristide's supporters claimed to have won.


Market Place; Westinghouse is an unlikely collection of assets.
THE Westinghouse Electric Corporation, which is negotiating to buy CBS Inc., is many ways, a very sophisticated company.
It has scientists capable of designing miniature atomic clocks to improve the accuracy of the instruments it sells to the aerospace industry.
It has developed a new type of solid-state fuel cell that may one day provide low-cost power in remote areas.
And it owns a very profitable broadcast group, which it now seem to be trying to grow in the most dramatic way possible.
Whether it can do that without the sale of substantial assets is an open question.


Hearings Set On Examining School Crime
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani's commission on school safety announced yesterday that public hearings to investigate crime in the school system would begin in late summer or early fall -- precisely when the school board will be in the middle of its search for a new schools chancellor.
While school officials said they hoped the timing of the hearings would not complicate the search, school safety has long been a source of tension between the Mayor and the Board of Education.
Schools Chancellor Ramon C. Cortines decided to resign the day after the Mayor created the safety commission and gave it the power to subpoena witnesses and documents from the school board.


Diamond Shamrock Inc.(DRM,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Kaiser Aluminum Corp.(KLU,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


On My Mind; Bombs for Bosnia
In the name of Heaven, where is the plan for peace?
Where is the document that presents the best, calmest, fairest proposals of the West to all sides in Bosnia and promises support only to those who accept it after decent negotiation?
There is no document.


International Briefs; Hotel Venture in India
The British hotel and gambling concern Ladbroke Group P.L.C. said yesterday that its Hilton International hotels unit would enter India with an investment of up to $330 million.
Ladbroke, which owns Hilton hotels outside the United States, has signed an agreement with India's Bharat Hotels Ltd. to take over management of the Holiday Inn Crowne Plaza in New Delhi by December and the management of two new hotels to be developed by Bharat in Bombay and Goa.
The agreement also includes the development of hotels in at least eight other Indian business and resort centers.
The pact could create as many as 6,000 jobs. (Dow Jones)


MCN Corp.(MCN,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Delay in Strike Threat Is Good News
Ever since he became a Metro-North conductor in 1986, Travis Douglas Ford has approached his job with thespian flair, delivering a detailed weather report as he collects tickets in each car.
But this morning, as commuters boarding the 8:35 A.M. train at Larchmont settled into their seats for the run to Manhattan, he added an especially dramatic touch.
"Ladies and genetlemen," Mr.
Ford said, "I have some news for you. Both sides have agreed to a moratorium and there will not be a strike for at least four months."


Executive Changes
ERNST &amp; YOUNG INTERNATIONAL , New York, named its chief executive, Michael A. Henning, to the additional position of chairman.
GREAT WESTERN FINANCIAL CORP. , Chatsworth, Calif., named A. William Schenck 3d executive vice president for its retail banking division.


Merck &amp; Co. (MRK,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Sun Co.(SUN,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Editorial Notebook; Don't Kill the C.E.A.
The Council of Economic Advisers helped persuade President Kennedy to cut taxes and thus spur a recovery -- a decisive case of applying the theories of John Maynard Keynes to public policy.
The council warned President Johnson that he would ignite inflation if he persisted in paying for the Vietnam War by borrowing rather than taxing -- advice he ignored with disastrous consequences.


High-Wire Lending Acts
So much for the adage "Once bitten, twice shy."
Bridge loans, the short-term debt that tides a borrower over until longer-term financing is in place, nearly crushed several large securities firms in the aftermath of the mergers-and-acquisitions binge of the 1980's.
Now these loans are making a comeback.


Bosnia Serbs Surround 'Safe Area' but Defenders Are Defiant
Bosnian Serb troops encircled the town of Zepa today, preparing to complete their conquest of the so-called protected area in eastern Bosnia as defiant Government troops refused to lay down their weapons.
On Wednesday some civilian leaders of the town surrendered to the Serbs, but without the agreement of the 600 to 1,000 Bosnian Government soldiers in the enclave or of the Government.
When the troops ignored an ultimatum from the Serbs to turn in their weapons by 7 tonight, the Serbs lobbed shells into the village, United Nations officials said.


New Yorkers Can Expect More Medical Errors
To the Editor:
Re "Medical Errors Bring Calls for Change" (Science Times, July 18): Despite the inability of the trade-sponsored Joint Commission on Accreditation of the Healthcare Organizations to monitor hospital care effectively, Gov.
George E. Pataki has now proposed to eliminate all annual hospital inspections by the New York State Department of Health, on the assumption that triannual joint commission inspections are enough.


FPL Group (FPL,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Bemis Co.(BMS,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Case Corp.(CSE,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Companies Reach Deal for Renewal In Heart of 42d St.
After 15 years of false starts and dashed hopes, a marathon effort to revitalize 42d Street turned an important corner yesterday as a group of entertainment companies and developers announced plans to open glittering attractions along the shadowy strip that was once the heart of American theater.
Nearly 100 years after enterprising theatrical producers like Oscar Hammerstein and Florenz Ziegfeld began developing glorious and ornate theaters just west of Times Square, the Walt Disney Company said it was firmly committed to anchor the next millennium of entertainment on the street.


A Student Is Robbed of Life, and a City of Hope
PATERSON needed Cindy Del Carmen Villalba.
She talked up the old factory town as though it were a major tourist attraction, or should be.
She proudly told the uninitiated about her adopted city's mix of cultures, its history in the labor movement, its claim to William Carlos Williams, a favorite poet.


In Idaho, a Wily Opponent Who Takes On Ranchers
Last year Jon Marvel set out to prove that there is nothing that ranchers who graze at the public trough fear more than free enterprise.
In the process, he prompted the Idaho Legislature to pass a measure particularly designed to stop him, and he may ultimately force a constitutional crisis in the state.
An architect who lives at the southern edge of Sun Valley, Mr.
Marvel has spent years fighting Idaho's livestock industry.
He has spoken at hundreds of hearings, saying that public lands are being offered to ranchers for a pittance and citing biological reports of environmental damage.


Mother Was Remorseful, Witness Says
An F.B.I. agent held Susan Smith on her lap like a child, wiped her tears and told her she was not a bad mother in the hours after she confessed to drowning her two toddlers.
The agent, Carol Allison, testified today in Mrs.
Smith's murder trial that she did not believe Mrs.
Smith was faking her remorse when she finally broke, after nine days of interrogations, and confessed that she rolled her red Mazda into a lake with her two sons strapped inside.


Engelhard Corp.(EC,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Convicted Mexican Links Ex-President to Assassination Plot
The former congressional aide convicted of organizing the assassination of a governing-party leader last fall has accused former President Carlos Salinas de Gortari of having joined in the plot, both out of personal rivalry with the politician and to protect ill-gotten wealth.
In an interview published today, the former aide, Fernando Rodriguez Gonzalez, offered only second-hand and somewhat vague evidence against the former President, whose elder brother, Raul, has been jailed on charges of contracting the killing out to Mr.
Rodriguez's boss, a fugitive congressman.


Trisha Brown Adds Her Own Special Moves to a Bach Musical Offering
In the 1938 French film "Hotel du Nord," Louis Jouvet tells Arletty, who plays his mistress, that he wants to skip town.
"I need a change of atmosphere," he says, and she retorts, memorably: "This is the first time anyone has called me atmosphere."
Whether classical music is now mistress to Trisha Brown's choreo graphy will be seen in the future.
But she has obviously opted for a change in atmosphere in "M. O.," a monumental and brain-tickling dance piece that the Serious Fun festival presented on Wednesday night at Alice Tully Hall.


Virginia Mae Morrow Dies at 70; Created Bridey Murphy Hoopla
Virginia Mae Morrow, the Colorado woman whose hypnosis-induced recollections created a sensation in the 1950's, died on July 12 at a hospice outside Denver.
She was 70.
The cause was cancer, her husband, Richard, said.


Stringer, Highly Praised, Is Aiming High
President FRANCIS L. LAWRENCE of Rutgers introduced C. VIVIAN STRINGER in her first formal appearance on campus yesterday in New Brunswick, N.J., saying, "After a long search, we feel we've brought the best women's coach in the nation in."
In 23 years of college coaching, Stringer has taken 11 teams to the N.C.A.A. tournament, including two Final-Four appearances, one with Iowa and one with Cheyney State.
Her 520 career victories is fourth-highest in women's college basketball.


The Corner as Trap, Symbol, Vanishing Point, History Lesson
The video monitor is wedged into a corner, behind an overturned table with its legs protruding like spikes from a barricade.
On the walls above hang two birth certificates for the same man, Daniel R. Piper.
One gives his race as white, the other as octoroon.
His daughter, the artist Adrian Piper, appears on the screen below, wearing a blue sweater and a simple string of pearls.
As the viewer settles into one of the chairs facing the screen, her monologue unfolds: "I'm cornered. If I tell you who I am, you become nervous. If I don't tell you who I am, then I have to pass for white." In a racist society, Ms.
Piper suggests, no personal interaction is free of racial shame or hatred.
But any obsession with racial purity must run up against the historical reality of intermarriage.
"What if you find you're part of the great black majority?" she asks.
Will you try to pass as white, or proclaim your blackness?
And if it turns out that you're part of the "white minority," what will you do then?


Yesterday in Washington
REGULATIONS The Republican drive to curtail Federal regulations of the environment, health and safety collapsed as negotiations for a compromise stalled and Senate Democrats refused for the third time this week to allow the matter to be brought to a vote.
WHITEWATER In the days after Vincent W. Foster Jr.'s suicide, Justice Department officials complained bitterly that the White House was improperly limiting and ruining the investigation into his death, documents obtained by the Senate Whitewater committee show.


Andersen and Falcons Agree to Terms
The six-time Pro Bowl kicker MORTEN ANDERSEN, cut by the New Orleans Saints a day earlier, agreed to contract terms yesterday with the Atlanta Falcons.
He was scheduled to take a physical before signing today, Coach JUNE JONES said.
If Andersen passes the physical, the Falcons would waive kicker NORM JOHNSON.


Alltel Corp.(AT,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


A Look at Hugh Grant Before His Big Success
"An Awfully Big Adventure," a determinedly offbeat film from the director Mike Newell, has had a rough time crossing the Atlantic.
An enterprising film maker with the nice habit of refusing to repeat himself, Mr.
Newell has adapted an extremely odd and particular novel by Beryl Bainbridge, about a theatrical troupe in Liverpool just after World War II.
One of his stars is Hugh Grant, who also appeared in Mr.
Newell's last film with such triumphant results.
However, there is absolutely no danger that anyone will mistake their current collaboration for "Four Weddings and a Funeral II."


Art in Review
Peter Halley and Ettore Sottsass
Jay Gorney Modern Art  100 Greene Street (between Spring and Prince Streets)  Through July 28
What Peter Halley and Ettore Sottsass have in common -- aside from vastly overinflated reputations -- is a fondness for incongruous textures, shapes and colors.
The Day-Glo rectangles at the heart of Mr.
Halley's paintings are painted on Roll-a-Tex, a commercial material providing impasto by the yard.
Mr.
Sottsass's famous "Casablanca" sideboard (more of an armoire, really), designed in 1981, is covered with plastic laminate bearing a black-and-white design like the cover of a schoolboy's composition book; a series of angled shelves protrude from the cabinet like the legs of a huge, rectangular beetle.


Senate Backs Measure to Have Reporters Reveal Outside Income
Asserting that the news media should be as accountable as they are powerful, the Senate today passed a resolution calling for reporters to disclose the sources and amounts of their outside income.
The nonbinding resolution, offered by Senator Robert C. Byrd, Democrat of West Virginia, was inspired by recent news reports that certain reporters had received "thousands of dollars in speaking fees from the very groups they cover," Mr.
Byrd said.


Retired N.B.A. Players Criticize Plan by Agents
A team of retired National Basketball Association stars lashed out yesterday at the agents who represent a select group of players attempting to decertify their union.
"In the midst of these euphoric times emerges a small group of agents and players threatening the game that has been so good to all of us," Bob Cousy said at a midtown news conference staged by the National Basketball Retired Players Association.


U.S. and Japan Reach Accord On Air Cargo
The United States and Japan said today that they had reached a basic agreement to settle a dispute over air cargo routes, thereby defusing another in a series of bitter trade conflicts between the world's two largest economies.
Under the agreement, the Japanese Government will immediately grant the Federal Express Corporation the right to fly seven new routes through Japan to other points in Asia.


McDonald's Corp.(MCD,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Textron Inc.(TXT,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


On Not Regulating School Choir Music
To the Editor:
Frank Rich (column, July 12) unwittingly makes a case for a Religious Equality Amendment.
In the test case he discusses, a Federal court blocked the singing of two religious songs by a choir performing at graduation ceremonies, insisting that only "secular" songs be sung.


At Wykagyl, McGann Takes 2-Shot Lead
Michelle McGann would prefer that people pay more -- or at least as much -- attention to her golf game as they do to her colorful hats and golf outfits.
For her first six years on the L.P.G.A. tour, the 25-year-old McGann had been more renown for her millinery and bright clothing than for her golf game.


The Spoken Word
PATTI DAVIS, Barnes &amp; Noble, 2289 Broadway, at 82d Street.
Ms.
Davis, daughter of President Ronald Reagan, will read from her book "Angels Don't Die: My Father's Gift of Faith." Tonight at 8.
Free.
Information: (212) 362-8835.


NL Industries(NL,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Art in Review
'(Dis)oriented'  Shifting Identities of Asian Women in America
Steinbaum Krauss Gallery  132 Greene Street  SoHo  Through July 29  Henry Street Settlement  Abrons Art Center  466 Grand Street  Lower East Side  Through July 28


Daly Keeps His Composure, and His Share of the Lead
It sort of figures that it would be here, at the home of golf, the most traditional of British Open venues, that the modern game's most unconventional golfer would toss aside the customary and blast his way into a share of the lead.
That's just what happened today at the Old Course, on a bright, blustery and cold afternoon.
This is where the new John Daly tamed some old demons and decided to show the world that he is a more mature golfer, a more patient player and a real threat to win his second major championship.


Midland Co.(MLA,A) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Union Electric Co.(UEP,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Sequent Computer Systems Inc.(SQNT,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jul 1


Dennis Alan Anderson; Child Psychiatrist, 41
Dennis Alan Anderson, a child psychiatrist at Long Island Jewish Medical Center in New Hyde Park, Queens, died on Wednesday at Cabrini Hospital.
He was 41 and lived in Manhattan.
The cause was AIDS-related, a hospital spokeswoman said.


'People-izing the News' And a Bit of Ambition
Despite the promise of the title, "Naked News" doesn't take it all off.
But these four prime-time hours Sunday on Arts &amp; Entertainment do provide some peeks at goings-on in local and international television news, talk radio and a famous tabloid newspaper.
The new semi-expose by Nicolas Kent, a British producer best known for his 1991 "Naked Hollywood," begins with the tale of Donya Archer, a 26-year-old news anchor who is apparently on her way up from small market to middling market to great big market.
When we meet her, she has just signed on at a Fox station in York, Pa., and is dreaming of Los Angeles.


Unisys Corp.(UIS,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Psychiatrist for Susan Smith's Defense Tells of a Woman Desperate to Be Liked
Before Susan Smith had taken more than a few steps up a boat ramp after rolling her car into the lake with her two children strapped inside, she was already wondering what people would think of her, already forming her alibi, a forensic psychiatrist hired by the defense testified today.
What would seem to be a sign of selfishness, of cold-blooded behavior, was instead a sign of the 23-year-old Mrs.
Smith's desperate need to be liked, a need that manifested itself in the months before the killings in a series of sexual encounters with some of the most unlikely people, her lawyers tried to show today.


CHRONICLE
Former Gov.
HUGH L. CAREY of New York is in Lenox Hill Hospital recuperating from back surgery to treat an old compressed nerve problem.


Scotts Co.(SCTT,NNM) reports earnings for 3d qtr to Jul 2


Mine Safety Appliances Co.(MNES,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Nashua Corp.(NSH,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


CHRONICLE
TRAZANA BEVERLEY remembers the night 20 years ago when she turned to a co-star in "For Colored Girls Who Have Considered Suicide/ When the Rainbow Is Enuf" and said, "Do you think this play will go anywhere? Do you think Joe Papp will pick it up?" The groundbreaking play by Ntozake Shange about being a black woman in America was being performed in the back room of a Lower East Side club.
Ms.
Beverley's question was prophetic.
Mr.
Papp brought the play to the Public Theater in 1976, and it later moved to Broadway.
In 1977, she won a Tony award for her performance.


Busy Cab Meter
Eapen Kollal wanted his checkbook back, but it was with his ex-wife in Troy, Mich., and he was at Kennedy International Airport, where he had just arrived from India.
So, the police said, he hailed a yellow cab and went to get it.
Cost of a round trip? $2,000.
But his check bounced.
Article, page 23.


Watsco Inc.(WSO.B,A) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Executive Changes
ATG CYGNET INC. , San Jose, Calif., a supplier of automated optical storage library systems, named Bruce J. Bergman president and chief executive.
HOLIDAY INN WORLDWIDE , Atlanta, a unit of Bass P.L.C., named John Sweetwood to the new position of executive vice president and chief marketing officer.


Riverwood Intl.(RVW,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jul 1


New York State Electric &amp; Gas (NGE,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Ralcorp Holdings Inc.(RAH,N) reports earnings for 3d qtr to Jun 30


Einstein's Son? It's a Question of Relativity
It has been 16 years since the strange letter turned up in the editorial offices of Evening Prague, one of this city's major daily newspapers.
"I would like to thank you and the country on behalf of the Einstein family," the handwritten note began, "for the celebration of the anniversary of my father's 100th birthday. I am very grateful."


Corrections
An obituary yesterday about Stuart B. Peerce, a partner in the law firm of Donovan Leisure Newton &amp; Irvine, misplaced part of a sentence in some copies.
The affected paragraph should have read:


UST Inc.(UST,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Geneva Steel Co.(GNV,N) reports earnings for 3d qtr to Jun 30


Vencor Inc.(VC,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Foremost Corp. of America (FCOA,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Forced H.I.V. Testing Won't Help Newborns
To the Editor:
Re your July 17 news article on how the debate on testing newborns for the human immunodeficiency virus has raised the profile of Representative Gary L. Ackerman:


Yellow Corp.(YELL,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Woman Is Sentenced in Slaying
Lanise Sutton, 20, was sentenced yesterday to 40 years in prison for fatally stabbing a Willingboro teen-ager, Cherrell Bel, with a steak knife in 1992.
Ms.
Sutton, who pleaded guilty in April to aggravated manslaughter, must serve at least 20 years before she will be eligible for parole.
JOE SHARKEY


Rabbis Must Affirm Justice for Women
To the Editor:
Your July 11 news article on the decision by Orthodox Jewish judges that Sarah Leah Goldstein was free to marry anyone she chooses does a yeoman job of explaining a religious dilemma that for many readers must remain unexplainable.
It reports a father's claim of biblical right to betroth his 11-year-old daughter to a man whose identity he would not reveal and so use her as a weapon in a divorce battle against his wife.


Western Resources Inc.(WR,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


The World's Biggest Dollhouse
Toys "R" Us opened the ultimate toy box here yesterday a warehouse as big as 14 football fields.
The warehouse, the company's largest worldwide, will serve 53 stores in New Jersey, New York, Connecticut and Pennsylvania.
It will employ between 200 and 450 people, depending on the time of the toy season.


Palmer Waves Farewell


Cap-Conscious Approach Helps the Giants' Signings
The Giants came to terms with or signed a number of their draft picks yesterday, among them their second-round choice, offensive tackle Scott Gragg.
They also signed their starting center, Brian Williams, whose new contract might be a model for veterans in the future.
Gragg agreed to a three-year deal worth about $1.3 million, including a $450,000 signing bonus.
A second-round pick out of the University of Montana, he becomes the biggest player on the team -- 6 feet 8 inches and about 315 pounds.


Dominion Resources Inc.(D,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


League Change Sits Well With Fernandez
Phillies 7, Cardinals 0
Sid Fernandez struck out 10 in six shutout innings for his first victory in more than a year as the host Philadelphia Phillies shut out the St.
Louis Cardinals, 7-0, last night.


Medical Data Show Dole Is Remarkably Fit
Although Senator Bob Dole of Kansas, the majority leader, has a number of physical handicaps and medical conditions, they are "stable or controlled" and his health is "excellent," his doctors said today.
Mr.
Dole is seeking the Republican nomination for President.
If elected, at his inauguration on Jan. 20, 1997, he would be 73 1/2 years old -- the oldest man to take the Presidential oath of office.


Business Digest
U.S.
Drops Demand For More Microsoft Papers  The Justice Department abandoned its demand for more documents from Microsoft, but said it was continuing its study of Windows 95 and Microsoft Network and implied that it would decide whether to file a suit within the next several weeks.
In a two-paragraph letter, the Government said it had become apparent that it would have to rely on information already available if it wanted to make a decision before Aug. 24, which is the official introduction date for Windows 95.  [ Page 35. ] Blinder Comments Lift Yields, Dow Closes Unchanged  The yield on 30-year Treasury bonds rose to 6.96 percent, from 6.86 percent, as prices tumbled in a late afternoon selloff.
Traders took comments by the vice chairman of the Federal Reserve, Alan S. Blinder, to mean there would not be another interest rate cut this summer.  [ 45. ] The Dow industrials ended a roller-coaster week unchanged, at 4,641.55, as the expiration of stock and index options came to the market's rescue in late trading.
For the week, the Dow lost 67.27 points.
The Nasdaq index, which had also been whipsawed during the week, rose 1.20 points yesterday to 961.77.
Technology stocks were mixed.  [ 37. ] The dollar rose against the yen as traders continued to be wary of dollar purchases by the Bank of Japan in an effort to weaken the yen.
The dollar rose to 88.52 yen and also climbed to 1.3856 marks.  [ 36. ] Senate Passes Budget Cuts  A revised $16.4 billion package of current-year budget cuts won final approval in the Senate.
President Clinton said he would sign the bill, which restores some cuts made to education, job training and environmental programs.
The $16.4 billion is the largest midyear budget cut in history.
Most of the reductions come from such programs as aid to low-income people, youth and education.  [ 8. ] Poor Reviews for Bank Deal  The proposed merger between Corestates Financial and the Bank of Boston was greeted coolly by investors and analysts, as the shares of both companies fell.
Some investors moved to block the deal, which the boards of both banking companies were expected to approve at meetings tomorrow.  [ 37. ] Smokeless Tobacco Suit Filed  A lawsuit accusing five makers of smokeless tobacco of trying to addict young people and damaging their health is expected to be filed in Federal court in Wichita, Kan.
The suit has the potential of involving about 30,000 state residents and could cost the companies more than $1 billion if it is successful.  [ 35. ] Coram and Lincare Call Off Deal  Coram Healthcare and Lincare Holdings ended their agreement under which Coram was to have acquired Lincare.
The deal was valued at $1.4 billion when it was announced in April.
But Coram's stock price has fallen about $10 since then, forcing down the value of the takeover to $537 million.  [ 47. ] Esmor Center Criticized  An investigation by the United States Immigration and Naturalization Service has found that an immigration prison in New Jersey, run by Esmor Correctional Services, was run like a secretive fief where guards preyed on immigrants.
The paper's editor, Shelby Coffey 3d, noted, however, that the paper would have the country's largest news staff, more than 1,100, even after the cuts.  [ 6. ]


Lamson &amp; Sessions Co.(LMS,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jul 1


One Price Clothing Stores (CNPR,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jul 1


Shaw Industries(SHX,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jul 1


Sports of The Times; No Teams? It's a Fan's N.F.L. Dream
I'M thinking of moving to Los Angeles.
Not for the sun, mudslides or Dancing Itos.
No, I'm pining for L.A. for pro football on television.
But only if the National Football League doesn't blindside me.


Oak Industries(OAK,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


U.S. Drops Demand for More Microsoft Documents
The Justice Department's antitrust division abandoned its demand today for more documents from the Microsoft Corporation, but said it was continuing its study of the company's new Windows 95 computer operating system and implied that it would decide whether to file a suit within the next several weeks.
Today's action came just three days before the Government and Microsoft were to argue over the document request before a Federal judge in New York, and it marked the latest display of brinksmanship in the long-running battle.


Fate of Raiders' Move Now Rests With League
Al Davis won the approval of National Football League owners today to move the Raiders from Los Angeles back to Oakland, but it is still not a done deal.
A major financial hurdle, involving how much of the personal seat licenses revenue the league will get from Oakland, has to be cleared before the Raiders actually return after a 13-year absence.
Davis and Commissioner Paul Tagliabue, in a show of unity, appeared at a news conference following the vote in which 23 of 30 teams voted in favor of the move and 5 abstained (Washington, Jets, Raiders, St. Louis and Tampa Bay).
The 49ers and the Cardinals left the meeting before a vote could be taken.


Suncor Inc.(SU,A) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Senate Rejects Effort to End Preference Programs
In the first legislative test on affirmative action since President Clinton's endorsement of it earlier this week, the Senate has soundly rejected an effort to end set-aside programs run by Congress and other legislative agencies.
By a vote of 61 to 36, the Senate late Thursday night defeated an amendment to an appropriations bill covering the legislative branch that would have prevented agencies including Congress, the Congressional Budget Office, the Library of Congress and the General Accounting Office from setting aside contracts exclusively for companies owned by women and minorities.


CHRONICLE
Who says that modern dancers and drag queens don't mix?
LAURENCE FERBER, the executive producer of the month-old "Biggers &amp; Summers" talk show on the Lifetime cable channel, decided the other day that they don't.
REBECCA JUNG and REBECCA ANDERSON, dancers with Pilobolus, the inventive dance company currently appearing at the Joyce Theater, were booked for the show on Thursday and arrived at the channel's studio in Queens ready to perform "Duet," a dance about the various relationships between women.


New Rules Cut Estate Taxes For the Inheritors of Houses
A little-noticed provision in the Pataki administration's new budget gives residents of the state a substantial break on estate taxes, allowing heirs not to pay tax on the first $250,000 of the value of an inherited home.
For taxpayers who own houses as their primary assets, the change -- tucked away among approximately $600 million in income and business tax cuts passed in the budget last month -- could more than triple the worth of assets that heirs could inherit without paying state taxes.
The heir of a person with a primary residence valued at $250,000 and an estate worth another $250,000 will now pay $7,500 in inheritance taxes, $12,000 less than under the old rules, the State Tax Department said.
The change affects heirs other than surviving spouses, who pay no inheritance taxes.


Kulicke &amp; Soffa Industries(KLIC,NNM) reports earnings for 3d qtr to Jun 30


Varian Associates Inc.(VAR,N) reports earnings for 3d qtr to Jun 30


Fremont General Corp.(FMT,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Corrections
An obituary of Dr.
Jonas Salk on June 24 misstated the rank given him by the French Legion of Honor.
He was an Officer, not the lower rank of Chevalier.


U.S. Can Corp.(USC,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jul 2


Forest Fire Rages Outside Athens


Rexel Inc.(RXL,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Corrections
An article on July 15 about the history of New York Newsday, which published its last issue on July 16, misstated the length of Long Island in some editions.
From the western border of Nassau County to the eastern end of Suffolk County, it is more than 100 miles, not 50.


Warner-Lambert Co.(WLA,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


No Headline


Ernest Mandel, 72, Is Dead; Marxist Economist and Writer
Ernest Mandel, a Marxist economist at the center of a debate on free speech and academic freedom during the Nixon Administration, died on Thursday at his home in Brussels.
He was 72.
Dr. Mandel died of a heart attack, said his wife, Anne.


Corrections
An article on Wednesday about the health of President Boris N. Yeltsin of Russia referred incorrectly to the writer of a work used as the basis for a television skit about Mr.
Yeltsin, the type of work and the accepted translation of its title.
The writer was Gorky, not Gogol.
It is a play, not a story.
And while it has been known as "At the Bottom," it is commonly translated as "The Lower Depths."


Minerals Technologies Inc.(MTX,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


And Step on It: Man Skips Out on a $2,000 Taxi Fare
Eapen Kollal wanted his checkbook back.
The only problem was that his checkbook was with his ex-wife in Troy, Mich., and he was at Kennedy International Airport, freshly arrived on a flight from India.
So, the police said, Mr.
Kollal hailed a yellow cab on Tuesday afternoon, and asked to be let off on Pelican Street -- in Troy.


Seeking Governors' Votes For a State Song Candidate
To the Editor:
The article about the singer and song writer John Gorka ("Telling Stories, Going Farther," July 9) included a discussion about a state song.
On Jan. 1, 1989, I received a copyright for the lyrics to "Salute to New Jersey" and immediately mailed a copy to Gov.
Thomas H. Kean, asking that it be considered as the state song.
His reply: "Thank you. . . . Best wishes for the future."


Santa Fe Energy Resources Inc.(SFR,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


NEWS SUMMARY
International 2-5  ALLIES PLEDGE UNITY ON BOSNIA
The U.S., Britain and France, uniting after weeks of disarray, pledged a broad and sustained campaign of air attacks if the Bosnian Serbs attack Gorazde, a Muslim enclave the U.N. is trying to protect. 1  U.S.
PLAN CALLS FOR QUICK ACTION
The Clinton Administration's military plans on Bosnia would launch NATO air strikes as soon as Serb forces massed for a Gorazde attack. 1  SERBS KEEP HITTING 'SAFE AREAS'
Bosnian Serbs continued to shell U.N.-designated "safe areas" across Bosnia even as the West pledged to launch air attacks if the shelling continued. 5  A QUESTION OF RELATIVITY?
Everyone thought all of Einstein's children were dead -- until Ludek Zakel Einstein came along with a tale of babies switched at birth and the sworn statement of the woman who raised him that he was in fact the great man's son. 1  RUSSIA AND REBELS REACH ACCORD
Russian and Chechen negotiators said they have reached an agreement that will guarantee the separatist region "the broadest form of statehood," but not the total independence it sought.
Details of the accord were not released. 3  BONN REBUFFS U.S.
ON REACTOR
Bonn has brushed aside U.S. efforts to halt the construction of a nuclear research reactor that would use bomb-grade uranium in what American critics call a "brazen violation" of efforts to halt the spread of nuclear weapons. 3  France's President is in Africa, leaving many problems behind. 5  Beit El Journal: Jewish settlers establish their own radio voice. 2  National 6-9  WARNING SIGNS AT WACO
Congressional hearings into the raid on the Branch Davidian compound in Waco, Tex., focused on warnings that apparently fell on deaf ears.  1  THE AGE QUESTION
Senator Bob Dole, about to turn 72, faced questions about whether his age should be a factor in his Presidential ambitions.  1  NEWSPAPER CUTS BACK
The Los Angeles Times announced that several of its sections and 150 news-gathering positions would be eliminated.  6  TURMOIL AT PLANNED PARENTHOOD
At a time when issues it is concerned about are in the spotlight, Planned Parenthood is in the midst of internal upheaval.  6  A NOSE FOR HOT ISSUES
Gov.
Pete Wilson of California has always shown a knack for finding the right issue at the right time, and the debate over affirmative action at state universities may be a case in point.  7  DUELING SENATORS
A committee chairman threatened retaliation against Senator Barbara Boxer for her demands involving the case against Senator Bob Packwood.  9  A $16 BILLION CUT
The Senate approved and sent to President Clinton a bill cutting more than $16 billion from current spending.  8  IMAGE UNDER SIEGE
A rowdy campout in Tennessee is the latest public relations disaster for the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms.  8  WHITEWATER AGREEMENT
The White House reached a preliminary agreement with a Senate special committee on Whitewater to provide a more complete disclosure of the files removed from the office of the deputy counsel to the President after his suicide.  8  Metro Digest 21  ABUSE FOUND AT DETENTION CENTER
Racing: Saratoga opens summer season.  32  Sports People.  30  Obituaries 26  Ernest Mandel, a Marxist economist and writer.
Editorials/Op-Ed 18-19  Editorials  Drawing lines in the sandbox.
Republican gift fraud.
Milking consumers.
Letters  Frank Rich: Back to camp.
Russell Baker: Spreading the rubble.
Marjorie Garber: The suits, minus their suits.
Charlotte Fahn: A park dies in Brooklyn.
Steven Gutkin: Is Colombia's drug war for real?
Chronicle 20  Bridge 15  Crossword 12


Owens &amp; Minor Inc.(OMI,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Planned Parenthood President Resigns
At a time when both abortion rights and Federal financing of family planning are under attack in Congress, Planned Parenthood, which has long led the fight for both, is in upheaval.
Pamela J. Maraldo, who succeeded Faye Wattleton as president two years ago, resigned yesterday after apparently failing to muster a vote of confidence at a board meeting last weekend.


Seafirst Corp. reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Bridge
The American Contract Bridge League keeps careful track of young players who become life masters, and recently reported that the age record had been lowered to 10 years, 2 months.
But there are no records at the opposite end of the scale.
The oldest player ever to become a life master in the New York metropolitan area may be Irving Walsey of Manhattan, who at the age of 85 achieved the rank during the New York Winter Regional tournament at the end of December.
He had gathered one-quarter of his qualifying master points during 1994.


Lear Seating (LEA,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jul 1


Police Officer And Friend Are Charged In Shooting
A 22-year-old police officer was charged with attempted murder yesterday after the police said she handed her gun to her boyfriend, who then shot his uncle in the heat of a bitter quarrel in a Brooklyn alley.
The officer, Simona Patterson, who joined the force in 1993 and still had probationary status, was on pregnancy leave at the time of the incident.
She and her boyfriend, DeShawn Smart, 24, face assault and other charges in addition to the attempted-murder charge.


An Army Says Cheerio To Palmer
They hung out of the windows and over the barricades.
They stood on the balcony at Rusacks Hotel and on the rooftops of the ancient gray buildings.
In the grandstands lining the first fairway, they rose and gave him an ovation for the ages.
After 23 appearances, the first coming here in 1960, Arnold Palmer played his final round in the British Open today at the Old Course.
And so the whole town of St.
Andrews turned out to say goodbye.


McKesson Corp.(MCK,N) reports earnings for 1sr qtr to Jun 30


Radioactive Spill on the Hudson
The Indian Point nuclear power plant dumped a small amount of radioactive material into the Hudson River on Tuesday after Consolidated Edison workers left a valve open, allowing thousands of gallons of clean water to wash over soil contaminated by previous leaks.
The amount of radioactivity released was well below the limit allowed under the plant's operating license, a spokesman for Consolidated Edison Company, Michael J. Spall, said yesterday.
But the plant is reviewing its procedures to prevent a recurrence.


A Time to Mourn


More Verdi, This Time a Tragedy
It is hard to imagine an operatic world without "Rigoletto," "La Traviata," "Aida" and "Falstaff." But that is what Vincent La Selva and the New York Grand Opera have invited listeners to do in the first two seasons of their seven-year festival, Viva, Verdi in Rumsey Field in Central Park.
Their chronological march through Verdi's 28 operas reached 7 on Wednesday evening with "I Due Foscari," a lyric tragedy completed in 1844, when the composer was 31.
Verdi's second collaboration with the librettist Francesco Maria Piave, after the great hit "Ernani," which was recently presented by the same forces, "Foscari" was less well received.


Sungard Data Systems Inc.(SNDT,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


William I. Kaufman, Food Writer, 73
William I. Kaufman, a food and wine connoisseur and former television producer and director who wrote some 150 books about those and other subjects, died on Sunday in Livingston, Mont.
He was 73 and lived in Eugene, Ore.
The cause was a heart attack, said Michael Thoele, a family friend.
Mr.
Kaufman was in Montana researching children's rodeos.


New-Age Guru's Book Has Another's Phrases
Several passages in "Ageless Body, Timeless Mind," a best-selling book by Deepak Chopra, the New Age advice sensation, are very close in form and content to passages in a book by another author, and Dr.
Chopra's publisher has announced it will revise part of one chapter of "Ageless Body."
Dr.
Chopra's book, which is about living longer, was published in 1993.
The earlier book, "The Methuselah Factors," by Dan Georgakas, which also offers advice on how to live longer, was published in 1981.
The similar passages discuss people in the Caucasus Mountains.
Mr.
Georgakas complained that about a third of the material in a nine-page section of "Ageless Body" came from his book, either directly or indirectly.
A report of the unattributed passages appeared in The Washington Post yesterday.


COMPANY BRIEFS
E-Z SERVE CORP., Houston, said an overwhelming majority of the shareholders of the convenience-store chain Sunshine-Jr.
Stores Inc.
Panama City, Fla., had agreed to its $20.4 million acquisition proposal.
PARAGON TRADE BRANDS INC., Federal Way, Wash., a maker of private-label diapers, said it would now buy 15 percent of Mexico's Mabesa de CV rather than the previously agreed-upon 49 percent, because of Mexico's economic problems and Mebesa's disappointing financial results.
VALLICORP HOLDINGS INC., Fresno, Calif., will acquire the holding company for Commerce Bank of San Luis Obispo, CoBank Financial Corp., for about $16 million.
WATERFORD WEDGWOOD P.L.C., Waterford, Ireland, the crystal maker, said it planned to buy Stuart &amp; Sons Ltd., producers of Stuart Crystal, for $:4.24 million, or $6.8 million.


Ultimate Ensemble, Renewed at Age 20
STILL signifying musical comedy and psychodrama in remarkable fusion, "A Chorus Line," now 20 years of age, is in terrific shape in the Theaterfest staging at Montclair State University.
Roger Bennett Riggle is the director and choreographer -- it is precisely to the show's point that the two are one -- and he appears in thorough charge of the innovative devices of the musical's originator, Michael Bennett.
Movement, lighting and scenic effects connect; remember, this is the show about "the music and the mirrors and the chance to dance." The beginning of a story and a section of lyrics interweave.
One person's tale segues to another's song.
Cinematic cross-cutting takes to the stage.


Nevada Power Co.(NVP,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Whitney Cancels the Biennial Exhibition in Prague
The Whitney Museum of American Art announced yesterday that it had canceled plans to send the 1995 Biennial exhibition to Prague.
The show was to be among the inaugural exhibitions this month at the new National Gallery of Modern Art, in the renovated Veletrzni Palace in the Czech capital.
But the building is not yet finished, and that was one concern that led the Whitney's director, David A. Ross, to cancel. 'I finally had to make a decision," Mr. Ross said. "To take a Biennial as an opening show is stacking the deck.
It's just too ambitious an undertaking."


Senate Approves Cutback In Current Federal Budget
Having endured a Presidential veto, an unexpected filibuster by two freshman Democrats and at least three pronouncements from the majority leader that it was a dead issue, a revised $16.4 billion package of current-year budget cuts won final approval in the Senate today.
President Clinton said that this time he would sign the new bill, which restores cuts made to education, job training and environmental programs.
It includes something else that Mr.
Clinton badly wanted: $7.3 billion in emergency aid for Oklahoma City and for natural disaster relief to 40 states, including California and Texas.


New Hearings for 2 in Trade Center Case
A Federal appeals court has ordered new hearings in the cases of two of the four men convicted of bombing the World Trade Center, to determine issues that were not dealt with during the men's trial, a lawyer for one of them said yesterday.
The lawyer, Lawrence Mark Stern, said that the order increased the two men's chances of success in appealing their convictions, because it made possible more grounds for the appeal.
The order was issued Tuesday but did not become publicly known until late yesterday.


Olajuwon Eligible for U.S. Olympic Team
The superstar center HAKEEM OLAJUWON was declared eligible yesterday to play for the United States, his adopted country, in international basketball competition.
He is eligible to play for the United States at the 1996 Summer Games, the sport's international governing body, FIBA, announced in Munich, Germany.


DPL Inc.(DPL,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Yanks Win Amid Signs That Mattingly May Leave
Imagining Don Mattingly in anything but a Yankee uniform and playing anywhere but at Yankee Stadium would be almost sacrilegious for the adoring fans who cheer every play he makes.
But with his contract in its final few months, Mattingly is offering signs that he is ready to leave New York.
Meanwhile, the Yankees are offering signs that they are not ready to throw away the season just yet.
Buoyed by an impressive substitute starting effort from Dave Eiland, who earned his first major league victory since 1991, and two four-run bursts, the Yankees defeated the Texas Rangers, 8-3, last night at the Stadium.


Hope Creek Nuclear Plant Cited
The Nuclear Regulatory Commission cited the Hope Creek nuclear power plant yesterday for four violations in the April release of radioactive material.
One violation was failing to inform workers until the following day that the areas they had worked in were contaminated.
No fine was imposed because Public Service Electric and Gas Company, the owner of the plant, took prompt corrective action and because Hope Creek has a good enforcement record, the N.R.C. said.


Pride Petroleum Services Inc.(PRDE,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Lug Wrench Heavyweights
You won't see any bull-riding or broncobusting, but there will be some fancy road-weaving and parts-repairing as drivers and mechanics from New Jersey Transit and private bus companies compete today in the annual bus "roadeo" at the Route 9 transit garage.
The main event for drivers is obstacle-course navigating, while mechanics will compete in fixing tricky defects.


Praxair Inc.(PX,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Cyrix Corp.(CYRX,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Warnings of a Disaster in Waco Were Ignored, Witness Testifies
Congressional hearings on the Branch Davidian raids focused today on warnings that the Federal authorities did not heed, including the forebodings of a Texas social worker who feared that a Federal siege would surely fulfill the sect leader's vision of Armageddon.
Joyce Sparks of the Texas Department of Child Protective Services told a joint hearing of two House subcommittees investigating the Federal raids that the Davidians' leader, David Koresh, had told her of his vision.


Mexico Empowers Its Poor Communities
To the Editor:
"Anti-Poverty Program Under Fire in Mexico" (news article, July 3) leaves the false impression that the main activity of the National Solidarity Program was building sports facilities.


West Co.(WST,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Insteel Industries(III,N) reports earnings for 3d qtr to Jun 30


Zurn Industries(ZRN,N) reports earnings for 1st qtr to Jun 30


Titan Wheel Intl.(TWI,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


CD's Make Going Out Feel Like Staying At Home
We live in a box culture.
We spend most of our time in boxes: in cars, in office cubicles, in rectangular rooms in rectangular homes.
And in our boxes, we while away the hours looking at boxes: televisions, computers, microwaves and more.
The Macintosh New York Music Festival, which tonight ends its six nights of rock performances at 15 clubs linked by the Internet, pointed to a future in which even live music will be boxed for audiences who no longer need to leave their homes.
In performances this week at the Knitting Factory and Irving Plaza, Laurie Anderson, the Residents, Todd Rundgren, Emergency Broadcast Network and Jaron Lanier worked with computers, television sets and video screens.
Some displayed CD-ROM's they had developed, others integrated live music with computer technology.
The main result was an audience of clubgoers craning their necks to stare at a screen pulled down over the stage.


Bank Merger Plan Unpopular With Investors and Analysts
The proposed merger between the Corestates Financial Corporation and the Bank of Boston Corporation proved unpopular yesterday with investors and analysts, some of whom worked to block the deal.
Meanwhile, the Mellon Bank Corporation was considering how to continue its pursuit of Bank of Boston.


Keystone Consolidated Industries(KES,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


At the Casinos
What's happening on stage at all the Atlantic City casinos this week.
Tickets are available through Ticketmaster, (800) 736-1420.
Bally's Park Place Boardwalk and Park Place. (800) 225-5977.
PARK CABARET "Legends in Concert," impersonations of Neil Diamond, Judy Garland, Whitney Houston, Tom Jones, Elvis Presley, Tina Turner, Madonna, Elton John and the Blues Brothers.
Sunday through Thursday at 7:30 and 10 P.M.; Saturday at 8 and 10:30 P.M.
Tickets: $20; $25 on Saturday.
COMING UP Frankie Valli and the Four Seasons, Aug. 1-6.


White House Reaches Agreement on Giving More Information on Dead Official's Files
Averting a constitutional clash, the White House announced today that it had reached a preliminary agreement with the Senate special committee on Whitewater to provide a more complete disclosure of the files removed from the office of the Deputy Counsel to the President, Vincent W. Foster Jr., after he died.
Mark Fabiani, an associate White House counsel, said that "an agreement in principle" had been reached to let lawyers from the committee examine the material that had been edited from Mr.
Foster's papers.


Smallest Casino Would Grow
The casino business upped the ante again yesterday when the Grand Casino-Hotel, smallest of the city's 12 gambling halls, announced an $88 million expansion.
The Grand will break ground in January on a 14-story, 300-room hotel tower adjoining its existing 23-story hotel.
Seven casinos are now involved in major construction or expansion projects.


Stepan Co.(SCL,A) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


U.S. INQUIRY FINDS DETENTION CENTER WAS POORLY RUN
An investigation by the United States Immigration and Naturalization Service has found that a privately run immigration prison in New Jersey, the scene of an uprising last month, was run like a secretive fief in which poorly trained and abusive guards preyed on immigrants, with little control from their supervisors.
After releasing the report yesterday, the immigration service said it would not renew its contract with the company to run the center in Elizabeth, and does not plan to reopen an immigration jail in the area. .
After the June 18 violence, the center's 315 immigrants were transferred to other detention centers and county jails.


Chirac Tour Affirms Ties With Africa
With a crisis in Bosnia involving France's peacekeepers, plans for renewed French nuclear testing under attack worldwide and myriad domestic issues demanding attention, some French eyebrows reportedly arched when President Jacques Chirac set out on a three-stop tour of black African countries that began today in the Ivory Coast.
For analysts of French foreign policy, however, Mr.
Chirac's trip is both a reaffirmation of his Gaullist roots and a reminder that the links that Paris still maintains with Africa are nearly all that stand between France and a decidedly more humble international stature.


After 2 Years, an Innocent Man Is Free


Wilson Goes Surfing on Affirmative-Action Issue
Few major politicians are better than Gov.
Pete Wilson at spotting a cutting-edge issue early in a race and then hopping on it for a good ride.
Last year Mr.
Wilson rode the immigration issue to a come-from-behind re-election victory.
This time around, as he seeks the 1996 Republican Presidential nomination, he is getting a good ride on the affirmative action issue.


Senate Hears Testimony On Parties And Racism
A rowdy camp-out in the hills of eastern Tennessee became the latest weapon in the fight to undermine the Federal Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms today as the Senate Judiciary Committee held its hearing on assertions of racist incidents at events organized by a retired officer of the firearms agency.
Senator Orrin G. Hatch, the Utah Republican who is chairman of the committee, said he was "deeply troubled" by press accounts that there had been racist signs and skits at the "Good Ol' Boys Roundup" over the last 15 years.


A Family's Ancestor Was a City's Architect
AS the small bus pulled up to a tollbooth of the Bronx-Whitestone Bridge, Edward Embury, who had come here from Denver, shouted to the driver, "Hey, just tell the guy my grandfather designed this bridge; maybe he'll give us a discount."
Mr.
Embury was telling the truth.
His grandfather Aymar Embury 2d had indeed designed the bridge.
Moreover, all but one of the 13 other passengers aboard were also related to the architect, who died in 1966 at the age of 86.


Newtel Enterprises Ltd. reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Admissions Change Will Alter Elite Campuses, Experts Say
While the state's Republican Governor, Pete Wilson, hailed as a "historic achievement" the elimination of affirmative action at the nine-campus University of California, academicians expressed concern today that minority enrollment at the system's elite Berkeley and Los Angeles campuses would decline significantly.
By a vote of 14 to 10, the university's governing Board of Regents, many of them appointed by Governor Wilson and his Republican predecessor, George Deukmejian, late Thursday struck down the use of race, sex, religion, color or national origin as criteria for admission to the university.
A parallel measure on hiring and contracting passed 15 to 10.


CSX Corp.(CSX,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Nazis Bombed Bosnia
To the Editor:
Speaker Newt Gingrich is in august company when he advocates an air campaign to "break" the Bosnian Serbs, promising to "do it in three days" (news article, July 18).
The Luftwaffe spent more than three years bombing Serbian guerrillas across Bosnia.
Despite overwhelming air superiority, they and their local stooges suffered a crushing defeat.
IVAN AVAKUMOVIC  Vancouver, Canada, July 18, 1995 The writer is a retired history professor, University of British Columbia.


DQE (DQE,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Senator Scolded for Pressing Packwood Hearing
The chairman of the Senate Ethics Committee today threatened retaliation against Senator Barbara Boxer for forcing the question of public hearings in the case of Senator Bob Packwood before the committee had made its own decision on how to handle the matter.
In an unusual speech on the Senate floor, Senator Mitch McConnell, the Kentucky Republican who heads the committee, upbraided Mrs.
Boxer, warning that as long as the California Democrat interfered with committee matters, "I will be prepared to discuss and debate Congressional action on misconduct cases in the past and other relevant issues."


Los Angeles Times Cuts Sections and Staff
In what the newspaper's editor, Shelby Coffey 3d, called one of his toughest days in journalism, The Los Angeles Times announced today the folding of several adventurous sections of the paper and the elimination of 150 news-gathering positions.
"But it should be noted," Mr.
Coffey said in a memorandum to the staff, "that even with these difficult reductions, we retain the largest editorial staff in America, over 1,100, with a budget of over $110 million a year for news gathering."


Duriron Co.(DURI,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Hyperion Software Corp.(HYSW,NNM) reports earnings for Year to Jun 30


Michael E. Maher, 86, Founder Of Terminal Company at Port
Michael E. Maher, who parlayed a military assignment into a mammoth civilian stevedoring operation, died on Thursday at his home in Summit, N.J.
He was 86.
At his death he was chairman of Maher Terminals, the New York City area's largest container terminal operator, which helped change the skyline of the New Jersey marshlands.
The red lights of its line of towering gantry cranes wink at motorists on the New Jersey Turnpike as they pass Newark International Airport.


Jews Urge Germany to Use Its Troops
Inverting the often-stated argument that German ground troops should not be sent to the Balkans because of the memory of Nazi atrocities there, two prominent Jews have asked Bonn to send troops to Bosnia.
"Many people hide behind the argument that Germany commited sins in former Yugoslavia and we cannot intervene there militarily," Ignatz Bubis, the leader of the main organization representing Germany's 40,000 Jews, said in a radio interview this week.
"I disagree -- because Germany sinned back then, it has all the more duty to rush to help there."


World Pressure Might Save a Notable Nigerian
To the Editor:
It was announced in Lagos, Nigeria, that in a secret trial a group of prominent people have been found guilty of plotting a coup (news item, July 15).
The most prominent is Gen.
Olusegun Obasanjo, chairman of the African Leadership Forum, member of the board of the Ford Foundation, but particularly, the only former general in Nigerian history who became president and arranged for an orderly transition to civilian rule.


Wickes Lumber Co.(WKS,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jul 1


D'Amato Seeks to Limit Foreign Bailouts
Days after the House of Representatives passed an amendment aimed at cutting off the bailout funds for Mexico, Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato said today that he would introduce similar legislation in the Senate that would prohibit the President from acting on his own in the future to rescue a country on the brink of bankruptcy.
Mr.
D'Amato, the New York Republican who is chairman of the Senate Banking Committee and an outspoken opponent of the Mexican bailout, has tried and failed in the past to cut off much of the $20 billion that the Clinton Administration drew from a special Treasury Department account for loans and guarantees that backed Mexican securities.


Giddings &amp; Lewis Inc.(GIDL,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jul 2


Proposal Puts S.&amp; L.'s Into Banks' Realm
Much of the remaining distinction between banking and savings institutions would be effectively ended under plans that the Clinton Administration is discussing with Congressional Republicans and financial executives, people involved in the negotiations said this evening.
If carried out, the plan would lead to the consolidation of the separate deposit insurance funds, one now backing banks and the other supporting savings and loans.


Ethyl Corp.(EY,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


McGann Stakes Out Big Lead in Big Apple
The Ladies Professional Golf Association, concerned with devising a successful marketing plan, could do a lot worse than put a big part of that strategy into Michelle McGann's golf bag.
Today, the flamboyant 25-year-old McGann fired a three-under-par 68 to take a four-stroke lead at the midway point of the $700,000 JAL Big Apple Classic at the Wykagyl Country Club.
This followed an opening-round 66, and it left McGann at eight-under-par 134.


INSIDE
Planned Parenthood Strife
At a time when some of the main issues on its agenda are being addressed in Congress, Planned Parenthood is in the midst of an internal upheaval that has led to the resignation of its president.
Page 6.
A Budget Cut Revisited
The Senate approved a $16.4 billion package of cuts to the current budget, and it appeared likely that the plan would avoid the Presidential veto that a similar package received earlier this year.
Page 8.
Instinct for Issues
As he has in the past, Gov.
Pete Wilson of California has jumped on an ascending issue early, this time affirmative action in the state university system.
Page 7.
School Bells . . . in July?
While debates rage over everything from student burnout to the need to run air-conditioners, two Trenton schools began an experiment with year-round classes.
Page 21.


Letter: On New York City Police; Misconduct Findings Are Encouraging
To the Editor:
"An Inadequate Police Investigation" (editorial, July 13) says that the New York City Police Department investigation into police misconduct in Washington had "disappointing findings" because "only" seven officers face serious departmental charges.
I disagree.


Suit Expected Over Smokeless Tobacco Use
A lawsuit accusing five makers of smokeless tobacco of trying to addict young people and damaging their health is expected to be filed on Monday in the Federal District Court in Wichita, Kan.
The suit, which will seek class-action status and is believed to be the first of its kind, has the potential of involving about 30,000 state residents and could cost the companies more than $1 billion if it is successful.


Dole Issues Medical Records To Meet Age Issue Head On
On the eve of his 72d birthday, Senator Bob Dole today issued a pronouncement by his doctors that he is in excellent health, an effort by the Dole campaign to disarm rivals who insinuate that he is too old to be President.
Although release of medical documentation has become routine among Presidential candidates, it was highly unusual for a campaign to issue it so early.
But Mr.
Dole's rivals for the Republican nomination have begun to raise the issue of his age, however obliquely, and he is eager to put it to rest.


Religion Journal; Media Reflect Changing Spiritual Lives of Americans
When they turn their attention to coverage of religion in the news, media critics often strike a note of complaint, contending that the subject is underreported.
Too few resources (that is, reporters) are devoted to the beat, they say.
In some instances, that criticism can hardly be disputed.
But one could play the contrarian and point out that something close to 200 reporters around the country, by a recent count of the Religion News writers Association, cover the subject at newsmagazines, newspapers big and small and, lately, a handful of broadcast news organizations.


Northern Border Partners L.P.(NBP,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Observer; Spreading The Rubble
The people ruined so far by the Simpson trial must be numbered in battalions.
I saw one the other day while passing the kitchen TV set.
He was a tow-truck driver.
He'd had the bad luck to be working when the cops ordered the famous white Bronco towed.
He had the bad judgment to pocket some receipts left in the Bronco, apparently thinking they might become valuable collector's items.
He failed to ponder that a celebrity case swarming with the nightmare hordes of justice would leave no receipt unpursued, so was caught.
He had worked many years for that towing company, he said.
And now, fired.
Another poor devil ruined for justice.
How many others?
Hardly a witness has escaped with character unsmeared, professional reputation untattered or dignity undestroyed.
This spectacle has solidified my determination, should I ever be called as a witness in any trial, to skip the country and take up residence in Brazil.


Multimedia Inc.(MMEDC,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


SCEcorp (SCE,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Group Home Residents Are From Families Like Mine, and Yours; Confronting Ignorance
To the Editor:
The campaign to close a group home in Flushing (news article, July 18) is a blatant attempt to condemn the developmentally disabled for what is obviously a community's reluctance to face up to its ignorance.


Transactions
Baseball  American League
BOSTON RED SOX -- Activated Mike Greenwell, outfielder, from the 15-day disabled list.
Optioned Brian Bark, pitcher, to Pawtucket of the International League.


Merrill Lynch Buying Big British Securities Firm
In the latest foreign acquisition of a British securities firm, Merrill Lynch &amp; Company said yesterday that it would acquire Smith New Court P.L.C. for $842 million in cash in a bid to become the world's leading international equities company.
Smith New Court's board said it would unanimously recommend Merrill Lynch's offer to its stockholders, and the Rothschild Group, Smith's most important shareholder, said it would sell its 26 percent stake.


ACCORD IN LONDON
Uniting after weeks of disarray, the United States, Britain and France today pledged a broad and sustained campaign of air attacks if the Bosnian Serbs attack Gorazde, an enclave in eastern Bosnia that the United Nations has declared a "safe area."
After a conference of 16 countries involved in the Bosnian war, Secretary of State Warren Christopher said, "The Bosnian Serb leaders are now on notice that an attack against Gorazde will be met by substantial and decisive air power."


METRO DIGEST
INQUIRY FINDS JAIL WAS POORLY RUN
An investigation by the United States Immigration and Naturalization Service has found that a privately run immigration prison in New Jersey, the scene of an uprising last month, was run like a secretive fief in which poorly trained and abusive guards preyed on immigrants, with little control from supervisors.  [ Page 1. ] NEW YORK CITY


Ignoring Human Rights On the Home Front
To the Editor:
The article about the state's representatives in Washington ("Junior Achievement," July 9) describes Representative Christopher H. Smith as "a strong human rights advocate." What was omitted is that Mr.
Smith, along with Representative Robert Dornan of California, is co-sponsor of H.R. 862, an anti-gay bill aimed at programs meant to prevent AIDS, hate crimes, suicide and discrimination.
While Mr.
Smith may have advanced human rights abroad, it seems he is working to restrict human rights here at home.
RICHARD J. HEID  Trenton


Charles Bruck, 84, European Conductor And Music Teacher
Charles Bruck, a conductor and teacher, died on Sunday in Hancock, Me. He was 84.
The cause was liver cancer, said Nancie Monteux-Barendse, the president of the Pierre Monteux Memorial Foundation.


U.S. and Japan Again Pull Back From the Brink
Once again the United States and Japan went to the brink.
And once again, they pulled back, agreeing to settle a dispute over air cargo rights and thereby defusing another in a series of bitter trade conflicts.
The settlement mirrored the pattern set last month in automobile talks.
In both cases, sanctions against Japan were averted by an agreement that postponed much of the arguing until later.
And in both cases, the two nations offered different interpretations of the agreement.


Uni-Marts Inc.(UNI,A) reports earnings for 3d qtr to Jun 30


A Homeless Man Who Dwelt in Neighbors' Hearts
It only took a few hours for Joseph Romeo, the owner of a Staten Island gas station, to collect enough money from his fellow merchants in Great Kills to bury George Roselli in style.
And so it was that Mr.
Roselli, a 65-year-old handyman who had been homeless for almost 30 years, went to his grave Thursday dressed in a dark pinstriped suit, surrounded by dozens of flowers and dozens of friends in a community that refused to allow him to remain a quiet footnote to the heat wave of 1995.


Beaches that Get U.S. Aid Must Provide Public Access
To the Editor:
The July 16 Jersey column, "A Town Draws Lines in the Shifting Sand," told of the efforts of the Borough of Monmouth Beach to restrict public access to its restored beach.


2 Rappers, Soft and Hard
Rap has expanded far beyond its origins, adapting to any music with a beat.
A well-matched double bill brought 311, from Omaha and Los Angeles, and the Phunk Junkeez, from Phoenix, to the Academy on Thursday night.
Each band includes two rappers; they rhyme and sing to neo-hippie rock (311) or to harsher hard rock (the Phunk Junkeez), both geared to dancers.
During 311's set, Nicholas Hexum, a rapper, boasted about smoking marijuana in Amsterdam.
The music pulls together cannabis-compatible styles from Grateful Dead shuffles to Jamaican ska and dance-hall.
Verses are rapped, choruses sung, as 311's lyrics risk self-contradiction by trying to merge hip-hop cockiness with hippie benevolence.


Republican Gift Fraud
Senate Republican leaders have chosen an odd way to convince Americans they understand their disgust with Washington.
They are preparing to kill a strong gift-ban measure aimed at ending the legal bribery system that permits lobbyists and other special interests to bestow free meals, resort vacations and other gifts on lawmakers to buy legislative advantage in Congress.
More cynically, and with the consent of Bob Dole, the Senate majority leader, they plan to substitute a more permissive measure designed by the G.O.P.'s crafty nemesis of political reform, Senator Mitch McConnell of Kentucky, that would perpetuate much of the old system under the guise of "reform."


Nation's Oldest Fun Park To Get a Brand New Look
For three summers, Lake Compounce has opened for just a few days in efforts to save its title as the nation's oldest continually operating amusement park.
Now, thanks in part to $18 million in state bond financing, the 300-acre amusement park not only has reopened for the entire summer, but also may remake itself into a year-round theme park.
But as it begins investing $35 million in new rides and attractions, the park faces the challenge of winning back patrons put off by the failures of two management companies over the last decade, a time when other amusement parks prospered.


Group Home Residents Are From Families Like Mine, and Yours
To the Editor:
As the sister of a mentally retarded man, I was angered by the article on continuing neighborhood opposition to group homes in the borough of Queens (news article, July 18).


PHOTOGRAPHER'S JOURNAL


Journal; Back To Camp
Every year the scene is so unchanging I could act it out in my sleep.
In front of the Hayden Planetarium on a muggy Saturday morning several dozen parents gather to wave goodbye to their boys as the bus ferries them off for eight weeks of camp.
First-time campers are clutchy.
Old-timers are cocky.
My own sons fret at length about carsickness.
Then the parents give the kids a final hug and shuffle sullenly back to their depopulated urban nests.
But not this year.
When the bus pushed out of the planetarium's circular driveway four Saturdays ago, at last removing the waving boys at the tinted windows completely from our view, one parent interrupted the usual hush by very tentatively starting to clap.
Then other parents joined in, first clapping and finally laughing -- uproariously.


Green (A.P) Industries(APGI,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


2 Trenton Schools Begin an Experiment With Year-Round Classes
Jay Butler, age 9, had a distinctly negative reaction when the Trenton schools heralded their status as the first district in the Northeast to try year-round classes by adopting the motto "The School that Never Closes" for Joyce Kilmer Elementary.
"I thought I would throw up," he said.


No Headline
"I cannot profit from being Einstein's son. I can only lose money. I cannot reverse the course of my life or change it in any way. So why would I lie?" -- LUDEK ZAKEL  [ 1:2. ]


At Camp, They Learn a Lifetime's Values
To the Editor:
In response to "And Then He Kissed Her . . . Gross!" (news article, July 15), about Raquette Lake Camps, I was offended by the shallow and insensitive approach in describing the girls' process of getting ready for their first social.


Dry Run Ends Fugitive's Flight
A friendly greeting was the undoing of Novis Chambers, a fugitive wanted for murder.
He was arrested after he attracted the attention of the police in a passing patrol car.
Corporal Walter Pitts was teaching Officer Jeff Jordan, a rookie, how to run license-plate checks on the police car's computer Wednesday when Mr.
Chambers waved as they passed his car.
For practice, Corporal Pitts had Officer Jordan run down his plates.
The computer quickly spat out the fugitive information.
The police said Mr.
Chambers was toting three assault weapons when captured.
"It was a fluke," Sgt.
Joe Mikajlo said yesterday.
Mr.
Chambers faces murder charges in the death last year of an 82-year-old Weehawken woman who lived next to a building that Mr.
Chambers owned and, prosecutors said, ordered set on fire.


Public Service Co. of Colo.  (PSR,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Tornado Teases, Then Fades
An offshore tornado spun off water spouts that skittered over Great Egg Harbor Inlet around 1 P.M. yesterday, but the main funnel cloud never touched land and soon veered farther out to sea, the Atlantic County Emergency Management office told the National Weather Service.


Chess Match Set at Trade Center
Two of the best chess players in the world are to battle for supremacy near the top of the World Trade Center from Sept. 11 to Oct. 13.
Arrangements have been concluded for Garry Kasparov of Russia to play Viswanathan Anand of India on the glass-enclosed observation deck on the 107th floor, the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey said yesterday.


Milking Consumers
New England senators and governors are pressuring Bob Dole, the Senate majority leader, to submit a pernicious bill to a hasty vote before it clears committee.
The bill creates a compact among Maine, Vermont, New Hampshire, Connecticut, Rhode Island and Massachusetts to raise milk prices above Federal levels.
By some estimates, the cost of a gallon of milk would rise from about $2.50 to between $2.85 and $3.


James River Corp.(JR,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 25


Student Loan Corp.(STU,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Corrections
An obituary on July 14 about Earl Coleman, a jazz singer, misidentified a company for which he recorded.
It was Stash Records, not Slash Records.


With Help, Harnisch Makes It Coors Light
Coors Field is where the Colorado Rockies are supposed to play pinball with the baseball and hammer their opponents into submission.
But tonight, this shiny new ball park, for one game at least, belonged to the Mets, who put on their own hitting exhibition in pounding the Rockies, 12-1, before a crowd of 48,059.


Trinova Corp.(TNV,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Exit Laughing; Russian Jews Bearing Jokes Keep Emigres in Stitches
Yanislav Levinzon, his round eyes beaming panic, is playing a little old Russian immigrant grandfather racked by helpless anxiety.
He is about to take his American citizenship test, but can't for the life of him remember which ocean lies off the West Coast.
Come on, his children prompt him, you remember!
We swam there last year in California!
"Ah!" His face lights up. "The Jacuzzi!"


Kerrigan's Attacker Released From Prison
The man responsible said yesterday that he was sorry for clubbing the Olympic figure skater NANCY KERRIGAN in the leg.
SHANE STANT, 24, left the Santiam Correctional Facility in Salem, Ore., with a new high school diploma, a new ponytail and a new attitude.
"I'm really sorry for what I've done," said Stant, who served 14 months for his conviction on a charge of conspiracy to commit assault.
He was one of five people, including Kerrigan's Olympic rival TONYA HARDING, who pleaded guilty to criminal charges in the attack. (AP)


Inquiry Faults Detention Center
An investigation by the United States Immigration and Naturalization Service has found that a privately run immigration prison in Elizabeth, the scene of an uprising last month, was operated like a secretive fief where poorly trained and abusive guards preyed on immigrants.
Page 1.


Sundstrand Corp.(SNS,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Refurbished Digs Of the Iron Duke Evoke Art and War
Almost lost in the traffic that swirls around Hyde Park Corner, Apsley House has always looked forlorn and abandoned, an odd fate for the London home of the first Duke of Wellington in a land that still relishes his victory over Napoleon at Waterloo in 1815.
Donated to the nation by the Iron Duke's heirs in 1947, the late-Georgian mansion became the Wellington Museum in 1952, the 100th anniversary of his death.
But in recent years, even the inside of the house looked drab; the number of visitors fell off and its valuable art collection was forgotten.
Now, after a three-year closing, a $9.5 million refurbishment has restored the gilded interior of Apsley House to its former extravagant glory.
And with its paintings hanging where Wellington placed them, the museum reminds visitors anew of the age-old link between works of art and military conquest.


At the Casinos
What's happening on stage at all the Atlantic City casinos this week.
Tickets are available through Ticketmaster, (800) 736-1420.
Bally's Park Place Boardwalk and Park Place. (800) 225-5977.
PARK CABARET "Legends in Concert," impersonations of Neil Diamond, Judy Garland, Whitney Houston, Tom Jones, Elvis Presley, Tina Turner, Madonna, Elton John and the Blues Brothers.
Sunday through Thursday at 7:30 and 10 P.M.; Saturday at 8 and 10:30 P.M.
Tickets: $20; $25 on Saturday.
COMING UP Frankie Valli and the Four Seasons, Aug. 1-6.


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS  Agassi Wins in Straight Sets
Andre Agassi continued toward his first tournament title since becoming the world's top-ranked player with a 6-3, 6-4 victory over Mauricio Hadad of Colombia last night in the quarterfinals of the Legg Mason Tennis Classic in Washington.


'No Negligence' in Bus Death
A preliminary police investigation into the death of a 35-year-old retarded woman killed by a minibus outside her home Thursday shows "no apparent negligence" by the driver, Police Chief Richard Voorhees said yesterday.
The driver, identified by the police as Kevin Adams, apparently backed over Virginia Porcelli after dropping her off from a day-workshop program sponsored by the local Association for Retarded Citizens.


Toronto Sun Publishing Corp. reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jul 1


Jason Inc.(JASN,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Marshall Industries(MI,N) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Drawing Lines in the Sandbox
As the search for New York City's next schools chancellor begins in earnest, Mayor Rudolph Giuliani and the Board of Education inspire little confidence in the process.
They are squaring off like kids, drawing lines in the sandbox, when they should be actively collaborating to bring in the best possible leader for the nation's largest school system.
The task of finding a successor to Ramon Cortines would be challenging even without tensions between the board and City Hall.
Despite some impressive improvements in academic performance, the school system is plagued by uncertainty.
Teachers and other staff face the possibility of layoffs to help bridge the latest, $250 million gap in the board's budget.
School buildings are overcrowded and in a terrible state of disrepair.
The city's racial and ethnic divisions, as well as its gritty politics, complicate the search for a new leader.


UNR Industries(UNRI,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Maytag Corp.(MYG,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Teammate's Death Inspires Armstrong To Win Stage of Tour
Lance Armstrong, in an emotional ride that he said was dedicated to and inspired by his dead teammate, won the 18th stage of the Tour de France today, blowing a kiss to the heavens.
"This was for Fabio Casartelli," said Armstrong, the Motorola team's American leader, explaining how he fought off fatigue at the end.
"I was very, very bad in the last bit, but I kept thinking of him. I did it for one person."


5 Fish Dealers Face Eviction From Market
Using its new powers to regulate the Fulton Fish Market, the administration of Mayor Rudolph W. Guiliani moved yesterday to evict five wholesale fish dealers, including two companies that are owned by relatives of purported Mafia figures.
Randy M. Mastro, the Mayor's chief of staff, described the evictions as "a significant step in the administration's drive to improve the market's business operations" and said the dealers had to clear out by the end of the month.


Chechen Pact With Russia Is Reached
Seven months after Russian forces invaded the secessionist region of Chechnya, peace negotiators for both sides said tonight they had reached an agreement that would guarantee the region "the broadest form of statehood," but not the total independence it sought.
Details of the accord will not be released officially before it is to be signed in the next day or two, the negotiators said in Grozny, the Chechen capital.
But the main points were reported tonight on Independent Russian Television.


Picturetel Corp.(PCTL,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Control Board Is Critical Of Giuliani Budget Ploys
In the first independent look at Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani's new budget, the state agency that monitors New York City's finances concluded yesterday that the Mayor would have to do still more to keep the budget balanced, raising the specter of deeper cuts in services later in the year.
The agency, the Financial Control Board, said in its report that the Mayor's $31.1 billion budget relied too heavily on revenue and other factors that he cannot control.
While the Mayor has made great strides in reducing the city's payroll, the agency said, the city still faces "formidable challenges" and a potential budget gap of as much as $873 million because of several unrealistic assumptions.


Beit El Journal; Voice of the Settlers Vs. 'the Ruling Clique'
On his freewheeling radio show the other day, Adir Zik was holding forth on the evils of the Israeli Government.
"They're going to wreck Jewish settlements, and we're supposed to play along?" said Mr.
Zik, a feisty broadcaster at Channel 7, a station run by Orthodox Jewish settlers.
"They've turned Zionism into cynicism!"


Old Glory Wasn't Meant To Promote Car Dealerships
To the Editor:
In "It's a Grand Old Flag, Not Just an Icon" (Jersey column, July 2), Joe Sharkey writes about the proposed amendment to the Constitution to stop desecration of the flag.
My hope is that when the barrage of publicity ceases, Americans will settle down to a routine of decent respect for our national emblem.


Nacco Industries(NC,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Doubts About a Deal Maker; Are Westinghouse and Its Chief What CBS Needs?
After more than two years of dribbling, the Westinghouse Electric Corporation's chief executive, Michael H. Jordan, is about to take his big shot at revitalizing the struggling company.
Any day now, if all goes as planned, Westinghouse is expected to offer $5 billion for CBS Inc.
But, his name aside, there's little about this Michael Jordan that suggests this move will end in a slam-dunk.
The stands are full of doubters from Wall Street and the media industry, many of whom note that CBS, the last independent network, has been available for years without any takers at the $80 a share Westinghouse is prepared to pay.
True, Westinghouse would be buying a money-making business in CBS.
But CBS is a deeply troubled company that ranks last in the ratings among the three big television networks, and more than anything else it needs creative managers who can increase revenues.


Forced H.I.V. Testing Won't Help Newborns; Flaws in AZT Studies
To the Editor:
The recent study casting doubt on azidothymidine's alleged therapeutic benefits for carriers of the human immunodeficiency virus (news article, July 16) contrasts with the majority of AZT studies, in which the drug is claimed to be beneficial.


Unbeaten 2-Year-Olds Star at Saratoga Opener
For the 127th year, horse racing in New York opened its jewel of a summer's season at the old track here in Saratoga Springs, with attendance down but betting up and a pair of 2-year-olds named Maria's Mon and Golden Attraction winning the twin stakes.
In the $100,000 Sanford Stakes for colts, Maria's Mon raced for the second time and won for the second time for his trainer, Rich Schosberg.
And in the $100,000 Schuylerville for fillies, Golden Attraction did even better by winning for the third straight time as the newest young star trained by D. Wayne Lukas, who has won the last five Triple Crown races and is apparently loaded for more.


USG Corp.(USG,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Puget Sound Power &amp; Light Co.(PSD,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Advancing Bosnian Serb Troops Would Be First Bombing Targets
The Clinton Administration's military plans call for immediate NATO air strikes if Bosnian Serb forces mass for an attack on the United Nations-designated "safe area" of Gorazde.
Senior Administration officials said today that bombing would be used first against advancing Serbian troops, their communications and their supplies.
If this failed, American officials envisage a quickly expanding series of air attacks against military targets in other parts of Bosnia.
Destruction of the Bosnian Serb air defenses by NATO bombers would be a prelude to any operation.


Great Lakes Chemical Corp.(GLK,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Germans Rebuff U.S. on Plans for Nuclear Research Reactor
The German authorities have brushed aside quiet efforts by the Clinton Administration to halt the construction of a nuclear research reactor that would use bomb-grade uranium in what American critics call a "brazen violation" of United States and international efforts at halting the spread of nuclear weapons.
The 20-megawatt reactor is to be built at the Munich Technical University and has been the target of a long-running campaign by antinuclear groups in the United States who charge that its construction will place Germany alongside China and Libya in undermining efforts to stop the spread of nuclear weapons.


Florida Progress Corp.(FPC,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Crown Cork &amp; Seal Co.(CCK,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


U.S. Home Corp.(UH,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.75
8.75
7.25
DISCOUNT RATE
5.25
5.25
3.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
5.75
5.80
4.26
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.43
5.42
4.36
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.43
5.42
4.76
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.52
6.40
7.27
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.96
6.86
7.56
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.85
7.71
8.36
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.21
6.19
6.38
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Corrections
A front-page article yesterday about the investigation into the suicide of Vincent W. Foster Jr. referred incorrectly to an electronic mail message by a senior Justice Department lawyer about the White House's handling of the matter.
Further documents provided by the department show that the message by the lawyer, David Margolis, was drafted as a hypothetical list of caustic questions that might be asked by news reporters, not as Mr.
Margolis's own complaints.
Other Department officials confirmed yesterday, however, that the list reflected Mr.
Margolis's anger over the way he believed the White House had interfered in the investigation.
Details and other developments appear today in an article on page 8.


The Town That Smiled
FOR all the bright lights and gleaming facades, all the jangle and bustle, all the billions the casinos have brought to the Boardwalk, Atlantic City's past is far more colorful than its present.
Glance at any of the old black-and-white photos in "Atlantic City: 125 Years of Ocean Madness," a 1979 book by Lee Eisenberg and Vicki Gold Levi, and you're transported to the smiling, giddy, silly time when Atlantic City was the busiest, most popular middle-class tourist resort on the East Coast.
Now in its third printing (Ten Speed Press), the book is still the standard reference for anyone who can't help wondering what things were like before legal gambling came to town.


Rollins Environmental Services Inc.(REN,N) reports earnings for 3d qtr to Jun 30


Chris-Craft Industries(CCN,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


INSIDE


Rare Birthday for Snowy Owls
The blessed event is supposed to take place 1,800 miles north, above the Arctic Circle.
But for the second year in a row, a snowy owl in New Jersey has become a mother.
Minnie, a mottle-chested, permanently disabled resident of the Raptor Trust here in Morris County, hatched a brood of four owlets last month.
Now six weeks old, the oversized fuzzballs are nearly a foot tall and already have wingspans of three feet.
They are not on display for the public.


Amy I. Liebowitz, Francois Cohas
Amy Ina Liebowitz, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Martin Liebowitz of East Setauket, L.I., was married yesterday evening to Francois Cohas, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Henri Cohas of Besancon, France.
Rabbi Dan Isaac performed the ceremony with the Rev.
Robert Smith, a Roman Catholic priest, at the Harmonie Club in New York.
Mrs.
Cohas, 28, is studying graphic design at European Graphic Design, a school in Paris.
She graduated from the Rhode Island School of Design.
Her mother is a genetic counselor for the Association for the Help of Retarded Children in Bohemia, L.I.
Her father is a professor of medicine and vice chairman of the department of medicine at the State University at Stony Brook, L.I.


'Yo!' From the Hip-Hop Hills
I took dis G upstate cole campin To da Poconos, we call da hide-a-ways A pack of franks and a big bag of Frito-Lays -- "Flavor Flav Cold Lampin'," Public Enemy
SAYLORSBURG, Pa.
MENTION the Poconos and certain time-burnished images come to mind.
Hotel suites named Fantasia II.
Stock-car racing.
Candle factories and Christmas shops on Route 611 as it climbs to the town of Mount Pocono, sometimes called the honeymoon capital of the world.
But one image not likely to occur is this one: two African-American men, young musicians in hip-hop gear, bobbing to a ground-shaking beat in a recording studio.


LIVE AND LET DIE
Brickman's account of her father's death from stroke, while tragic for his family, should not represent the usual scenario.
Most stroke patients survive and have at least some improvement.
The reaction to the first symptoms should be to get help within minutes.
New drugs that may protect the brain from damage and improve blood flow are being tested, offering hope for significant recovery of function.
To be effective, these drugs must be given immediately after the onset of symptoms.
A campaign is being organized to alert the public to call 911 at the first symptom of a "brain attack." DARA G. JAMIESON, M.D.
Philadelphia


Top Cuban-American Misuses U.S. Broadcasts, Officials Say
A Federal investigation into Radio Marti -- a Government-financed station that broadcasts to Cuba -- has found that the Cuban-American leader Jorge Mas Canosa improperly interfered with its operations, slanting its news coverage and influencing personnel decisions, officials familiar with the report said.
The report, prepared by the Inspector General of the United States Information Agency, details how Mr.
Mas has systematically interfered in Radio Marti's day-to-day operations and concludes that the radio station has improperly retaliated against employees who protested such manipulation by seeking to dismiss them, the officials said.


No Olympic Favors for Johnson
MICHAEL JOHNSON, the United States champion in the 200- and 400-meter dashes, will not be given any special consideration in his bid to win both races at the 1996 Olympics.


Horse Farm Holds Off Eviction
STANDING by the railing of the riding ring at the Prince Farms Equestrian Center in St.
James, watching her daughter Erin, 11, learn how to control her horse, Kathy McNeill breathed a sigh of relief.
Mrs.
McNeill had just heard that eviction proceedings against the 200-year-old horse farm had been postponed, at least until the season ends.
The camp would operate, and Erin, who had just started lessons, would attend for two weeks in August.


Two Little-Known Players Come to the Fore at the Big Apple Classic
Michelle McGann was the commanding leader midway through the JAL Big Apple Classic.
But today her hitherto flawless game went awry, and she was overtaken by two players, Carin Hjalmarsson and Tracy Kerdyk, from the lower echelon of women's professional golf.
Starting the day at Wykagyl Country Club with a four-stroke lead at eight-under-par 134, the 25-year-old McGann lost it in a hurry.
After reaching nine under with a birdie at No. 3, McGann incurred four bogeys over the next seven holes.
By the time she reached the turn she found herself tied for the lead by Hjalmarsson, a little-known 24-year-old from Sweden by way of the University of Tulsa.
By day's end, Hjalmarsson, in her first year on the Ladies Professional Golf Association tour, had fired a six-under 65 to stand at 205.
That gave her a one-stroke lead over Kerdyk going into Sunday's final round.
McGann finished today in a three-way tie for third place at 208, four strokes behind the leader.


Hot, but Not Wilted
An aroma of fresh herbs, vegetables and seasonal flowers -- and a stylish following -- have made the Union Square Greenmarket a Saturday ritual that not even last Saturday's 100-plus-degree temperatures could spoil.


What's Bill Got That Worked for John, Dick and Yes, Harry
Over the years, people have tried to predict market performance based on such factors as hemline lengths, baseball or football championships and the position of the stars in the sky.
Another favorite tactic is to correlate returns with presidential elections, which may not be so unreasonable after all.
Phoenix Investments, a fund and money management company in Hartford, noted in a recent study that stocks perform best in the third year of a presidential cycle, and the company encourages investors to get in the game before it's too late.


Streetscapes/Phelps Place; A Quiet Cul-de-Sac, Next to a Sleeping Giant
THE Victorian-era houses of Phelps Place, the leafy, picturesque little cul-de-sac in the St.
George section of Staten Island, are Vermont-quaint, the kind that make Manhattanites sigh, "If only we could live here."
But this is New York, where house restorers have to cope with more than just built-up paint and rotten porches -- for instance, the sprawling, derelict apartment complex nestling up against this innocent little street like Frankenstein cuddling a baby.
Before you cluck with sympathy, however, please note that the residents of Phelps Place find their neighbor as much a blessing as a blight.


Clinton Now Tries to Define Role for the U.S. in Bosnia
For Bill Clinton, this was the week to roll the dice on Bosnia yet one more time, as pressures at home and abroad combined to compel him to lay down his strongest threat so far in a bid to halt the Bosnian Serbs' advance without sinking American troops in a quagmire.
In a series of intense behind-the-scenes meetings in the White House and telephone calls to European leaders, Mr.
Clinton finally persuaded the NATO allies to threaten broad bombing strikes against the Serbs if they attacked the United Nations-designated "safe area" of Gorazde.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
OCEAN ENOUGH AND TIME  Discovering the Waters  Around Antarctica.
By James Gorman.
HarperCollins, $25.


McNair and the Oilers Agree to Terms
STEVE McNAIR, Alcorn State's record-setting quarterback who was the No. 3 pick in the National Football League draft, has agreed to terms with the Oilers, Coach JEFF FISHER said yesterday after the first day of training camp at Trinity University.
"My understanding is they agreed in principle," Fisher said, adding he expects a deal to be signed and McNair to report to camp in a "couple of days." Terms of the deal were not disclosed.


Getting the Players Ready for Prime Time
CONSIDER what will happen a minute or two after 8 on Tuesday evening: The conductor Gerard Schwarz will enter from stage left, the way he always does.
The audience will applaud, the way it always does.
And the Mostly Mozart Orchestra will start playing, the way it always does.
Just another concert, right?
Wrong.
This one will be telecast on "Live From Lincoln Center" (Tuesday at 8 P.M. on Channel 13).
And though the 3,000 ticket holders in Avery Fisher Hall may not notice, it will be different.


What's Wrong With Idea Of a Trolley on 42d Street
To the Editor:
The bus is the unsung workhorse of urban America.
It makes totally efficient use of the space it takes up, requires no extraneous equipment like tracks or power lines and goes anywhere there is a paved surface.
I mention this because, as indicated in your July 16 article "Trying to Gauge Feasibility or Folly of 42d St. Trolley," New York may be about to spend hundreds of millions on a perfectly ridiculous project.


Elephant, Ho!


Mahi-Mahi, Fresh and Simple for Summer
SIMPLE and fresh are the only demands summer makes on the dinner menu.
The following array is a good example.
The fish, mahi-mahi, which is available from local waters, is firm and easily grilled.


Natalie Merchant Steps Back From Rock's Cutting Edge
DURING HER 13 YEARS AS singer for 10,000 Maniacs, Natalie Merchant was the hippie chick of alternative rock.
She danced barefoot, sang about political issues in her folkie croon, espoused causes and was largely responsible for the Maniacs' reputation as the world's most politically correct band.
But two years ago, Ms.
Merchant abruptly declared that she was leaving the Maniacs to begin a solo career.
She hired a new manager, accountant, lawyer and band, and then recorded "Tigerlily," an album of straightforward soft rock that is an anomaly in a music scene in which reckless female performers reign supreme.


F.Y.I.
Daffydils of Old Q.  The old song "Lullaby of Broadway" contains the line "the daffydils that entertain/at Angelo's and Maxie's." What were the daffydils and where were Angelo's and Maxie's?
A.
First, the daffydils.
Joe Franklin, the former television host and a living encyclopedia of show-business trivia, says that daffydill was a "pet word for chorus girls" who often performed in the night clubs and restaurants with floor shows (known as "peacockeries," according to a 1935 article in the Times) that flourished in midtown after the repeal of Prohibition in 1933.
Angelo's and Maxie's, on the other hand, may have been stretches of the imaginations of Al Dubin and Harry Warren, who wrote the song for a number in Busby Berkeley's 1935 movie musical "The Gold Diggers of 1935," about a party girl's fall from grace.
The song was resurrected for the 1980 musical "42d Street."
Mr.
Franklin said that while Angelo's might have referred to the 95-year old Italian restaurant on Mulberry Street, Maxie's was just a convenient fiction to provide a rhyme for the preceding line: "The rumble of the subway trains/the rattle of the taxis."
Irv Lichtman, deputy editor of Billboard and musical historian, agrees with Mr.
Franklin, though he thinks there might have been an Angelo's restaurant in midtown somewhere.
To further occlude the mystery, a 1935 phone directory actually lists a Maxie's restaurant at 109 Chrystie Street and an Angelo's restaurant at 160 Pearl Street.
The Story of Susan Q.  I see cabs all over town with bumperstickers that say "I Love Susan" or "Cruisin' with Susan." It can't be the same cab.
So who is Susan?
Does she have any idea she's so popular?
A.She better.
Her husband's the guy who's sticking them on the bumpers.
The stickers are on the herd of 130 cabs from Susan Maintenance, named after Susan Rattner.
She started the company with her husband, Malcolm, in 1982.
The "I Love Susan" stickers started about 5 years ago as Mr.
Rattner's expression of love, but quickly developed into a tagline for their fleet's drivers.
"Drivers would come in and say, "Let's go cruisin' with Susan," recalled Mr. Rattner.
The stickers turned out to be serendipitious.
"People slow down to read the sticker," said Mr.
Rattner.
"Our 'hit in the rears' went down 75 percent." Fountain Follies Q.  As a veteran Central Park runner, I've noticed that random water fountains are not being turned on, and in a few instances, are being uprooted entirely.
Park users count on the fountains to stave off dehydration, especially during these sweltering summer days.
What gives?
A.
The problem might be where you're running.
There are a grand total of 97 water fountains in Central Park (isn't it great that somebody's counting these things?) and 91 of them are "working perfectly," said Bradley Tusk, spokesman for the Parks Department.
Of the six that are down, four are on or near the North Meadow, with another dysfunctional spigot near West 106th Street and another leaky one west of the Great Lawn.
Mr.
Tusk says during the course of an average year, about one in every five fountains has to be repaired, which can mean temporary removal.
That's because vandals steal the bronze housings that cover the pipes, and the exposed pipes break.
Complaints about faulty fountains can be registered by calling (800) 201-7275.
Twisted Tracks?
Q.
The D train from uptown arrives at Rockefeller Center on the west track, and the F train from Queens on the east track.
Between there 42d Street the tracks cross, then at Broadway-Lafayette where the tracks cross again.
Why?
A.
It's easy to understand if you visualize the routes (hint: hands make great subway trains).
Facing downtown, the D comes into Rockefeller Center on the west (your right hand) because it's coming from the Upper West Side and the F comes in on the east (your left) because it's coming from Queens, said Termaine Garden, spokesman for the Transit Authority.
The D switches to the left tracks at 42d Street to run express, and the F goes to the right to service the local stops. (The express track actually runs under the local part of the way from 34th to West 4th.)
After Broadway-Lafayette, the F heads continues east under Houston Street while the D swings down, and to the right of the F to service Grand Street.
JESSE McKINLEY Questions (and answers) may be sent to F.Y.I., The City, The New York Times, 229 West 43d Street, New York, N.Y. 10036.


The Layoff Business: How Popular Is It?
The school board here in suburban Trenton is talking about getting rid of its staff of school janitors and maintenance workers and replacing them with cheaper services from commercial cleaning companies, and thereby hangs a wider tale about what is going on in New Jersey these days as Governor Whitman's cuts in taxes and controls on state spending work their way down from the capital to the local level.
The district, prosperous and middle class in a state full of prosperous, middle class places, has seen its state aid reduced by hundreds of thousands of dollars at a time when enrollments are once again creeping upward.
In earlier years, this pincer movement would have won a sympathetic ear from Trenton and from local taxpayers, who for a decade dutifully passed higher and higher school budgets while the Governor and Legislature down by the Delaware River, whether Republican or Democrat, also dutifully passed on higher and higher levels of state aid.


Claire Keller, Andrew Gallaher
Claire Elizabeth Keller, the daughter of Mary Carolyn and Alan B. Keller of Rye, N.Y., was married there yesterday to Andrew Welby Gallaher, the son of Sheila and Peter Gallaher of Nashua, N.H.
The Rev.
Dr.
Richard E. Murdoch performed the ceremony at the Rye Presbyterian Church.
Mrs.
Gallaher, 24, is the marketing coordinator for Capital Consulting and Research, a marketing research firm in New Canaan, Conn.
Her father is the deputy director of the African division of the United Nations Population Fund in New York.


THE NEW JAZZ AGE
Your celebration of the current directions in American jazz was a deserving recognition of our great music (June 25).
I must object, however, to Frank Conroy's lumping of all pre-be-bop-era jazz as "classical jazz or Dixie." The term Dixie evokes the image of the typical six-piece group, with the three front-line horns backed by a rhythm section playing polyphonic improvisations of "Tiger Rag" and "Muskrat Ramble."


Patient Files Go Electronic As Cost-Saver
Seeking to stem a blizzard of paperwork and raise medical standards, hospitals in the New York City metropolitan area are joining with three big nonprofit health insurance companies to develop a unified electronic information system for patient records.
The system, announced yesterday, would link hospitals, doctors' offices, nursing homes, home care agencies and pharmacies.
It would allow dozens of existing computer networks in hospitals and insurance companies to exchange information.
The sponsors say the program, which they maintain would save money, could help the regional health care system withstand pressures from Washington and Albany as well as from managed health care plans to reduce costs.


Medicare, Turning 30, Won't Be What It Was
Thirty years after its creation, Medicare celebrates its anniversary this summer as a rare creature in the politics of the 1990's: a big, ambitious, exceedingly popular Government program that worked.
Nevertheless, it stands on the brink of extraordinary change.


On Sunday; Will It Be 'Eh? Just Another One?'
JOSEPHINE DORSAINVIL was, first and foremost, a mom.
Her pride in the accomplishments of her five grown children was so fierce and unabashed that once, when a co-worker questioned her assertion that she had a daughter at Harvard, Mrs.
Dorsainvil brought the teen-ager, who was home from college on a break, onto the factory floor the next day just to shut the guy up.
She had come to New York from Haiti 25 years ago, taken a job in a Long Island factory that made plastic bags and began laying the foundation for a new life for her family in New Cassel, a working-class enclave in central Nassau County that is home to many Haitian emigres.
Two years later, she was joined here by her husband, Pierre, a soft-spoken carpenter from Arcahaie (pronounced Ar-ca-YE), the small rural village 20 miles northwest of Port-au-Prince where they had both grown up.
And three years after that came a reunion with their three children (twin daughters, Cynthia and Dolores, were born later) who had been living with relatives in Arcahaie.


Cavarly Berwick and Michael Garrett
Cavarly Evans Berwick, a daughter of A. Scott Berwick of Hunter, N.Y., and Barbara Berwick of Watertown, Conn., was married on Monday to Michael Garrett, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Stanley Garrett of New York.
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani performed the ceremony at City Hall in New York.
Mrs.
Garrett, 26, is a civil engineer at the Mayor's Office of Construction in New York.
She graduated from Cornell University.
Her father is the chief engineer at Hunter Mountain Ski Bowl, a ski resort in Hunter.
Her mother is the showroom manager at the Amsterdam Corporation, a ceramic tile importer in New York.


The Breakaway Kingdom
THE JEWISH WAR By Tova Reich. 270 pp. New York: Pantheon Books. $22.


Correction
An article on July 9 about theatrical and film versions of "Show Boat" and "Sunset Boulevard" misstated the dates for the opening of the first Broadway version of "Show Boat" and for the release of the second film version of "Show Boat." The opening was in 1927, not 1928; the release was in 1951, not 1956.
In addition, the article misidentified the opening song of "Show Boat." It is "Cotton Blossom," not "Ol' Man River." A picture caption with the article misidentified a scene from a "Show Boat" film.
It was a from the 1951 version, not the 1936 one.


A Prison Empire: How It Grew -- A special report.; Parlaying the Detentions Business Into Profit
In the 1980's, James Slattery and Morris Horn ran one of the most notorious welfare hotels in New York City, the filthy, crime-ridden and profitable Brooklyn Arms in Fort Greene.
After the city closed the hotel in 1989, Mr.
Slattery and Mr.
Horn, with no experience in the prison business, bid to open a Federal halfway house in Bedford-Stuyvesant.
Residents protested, and Representative Edolphus Towns began an investigation of the contract.
But Mr.
Slattery and Mr.
Horn hired Mr.
Towns's campaign manager, who lobbied the neighborhood and the politicians for them.
The opposition melted.
They got the contract for their new prison company because, just as the city had been desperate for places to house the homeless, the Federal Bureau of Prisons badly needed a place for former offenders in New York City.


Why Some Are Switching to Nursing
WHY do people with one college degree leave good jobs to plunk down $25,000 for tuition so they can study tirelessly for 16 months in order to get a degree in nursing?
Ask the 20 students enrolled in the College of New Rochelle's accelerated bachelor of science and nursing program, and the answers are as diverse as the students themselves.


Clinton at Odds With Gingrich Once Again
When President Clinton and Speaker Newt Gingrich appeared together at a senior citizens picnic in New Hampshire last month, news accounts suggested that the event might have signaled a new era in political civility.
The President and the Speaker treated each other cordially and even shook hands on a proposal to consider changes in the regulation of lobbying and campaign donations.


Lessons Learned in School-Work Link
WITH a practiced hand and steady eye, David Ferrer examined a group of test tubes containing blood samples to be checked for Lyme disease at the county's Department of Laboratories and Research here.
Such procedures are standard for technicians in laboratories, but David is no ordinary technician.
A recent graduate of White Plains High School, he was earning science credit through his school district's School-to-Work program, part of a recently begun national initiative to aid students' transition from school to the workplace.


Learning Disabled
THE APOSTLES OF SCIENTIFIC literacy are fond of listing important scientific concepts that every child ought to know and that, of course, most adults don't.
Those who feel bad about not having the definition of junk DNA or Bose-Einstein-condensate at their fingertips may take comfort from a new book that argues that scientific literacy is an impossible and unnecessary goal.
The ideal of making every citizen literate in science has been pushed by scientists who want an appreciative audience for their achievements, says the science educator Morris Shamos in "The Myth of Scientific Literacy," published last month.
In his view only people seeking careers as scientists need struggle through a full-blown science curriculum; the rest should be taught science "as a cultural imperative, and not primarily for content."


The Nation; How Affirmative Action Got So Hard to Sell
NOT so long ago, the arithmetic of American civil rights was kindergarten-simple: black people, at least most of them, were the oppressed class, and whites, a good many of them, were the oppressors.
America added a and b, found the sum abhorrent, and in 1965 factored in a revolutionary new x.
It was called affirmative action.
Voila! Differential calculus. Today, we can all feel oppressed.


Julie Goldfield, Mark Yadgaroff
Julie Nan Goldfield, the daughter of Joseph Goldfield of Las Vegas, Nev., and the late Dr.
Joan S. Rivitz, was married last evening to Mark Edward Yadgaroff, a son of Jacob and Lois Yadgaroff of Merion, Pa.
Rabbi Elliot Holin performed the ceremony at the Rittenhouse Hotel in Philadelphia.
Mrs.
Yadgaroff, 29, works in New York, where she is an assistant vice president of marketing at Mothers' Network Inc., a national membership organization.
She graduated from Boston University.
Her father retired as a policy writer for Defense Reutilization and Marketing Services, a division of the Department of Defense in Battle Creek, Mich.
Her mother was a psychologist in Philadelphia.


Drums Along the Potomac
TO RENEW AMERICA By Newt Gingrich. 260 pp.
New York: HarperCollins Publishers. $24.
THE FREEDOM REVOLUTION  The New Republican House Majority Leader Tells  Why Big Government Failed, Why Freedom Works, and How We Will Rebuild America.
By Dick Armey. 318 pp.
Washington: Regnery Publishing. $24.95.


Katherine Zipser and Hew Crooks
Katherine Ernest Zipser, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John P. Zipser of Litchfield, Conn., was married there yesterday to Hew Dalrymple Crawford Crooks, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Arthur H. D. Crooks of Lethbridge, Alberta.
The Rev.
W.
David Dobbins Jr. performed the ceremony at Trinity Episcopal Church.
Mrs.
Crooks, 25, was until recently a sales representative for the corporate division of Tiffany &amp; Company in New York.
She graduated from Trinity College in Hartford.
Her father is a psychiatric social worker at Charlotte Hungerford Hospital in Torrington, Conn.


Mr. Murdoch Goes To Washington
A WEEK from Tuesday, Rupert Murdoch is scheduled to appear before the House ethics committee, where he will be grilled by Democrats about his company's lucrative book deal with the Republican House Speaker, Newt Gingrich.
Over on the House floor that week, perhaps even that same day, Republican lawmakers will be trying to push through a major telecommunications bill that would, among other things, let the media baron buy still more television stations and newspapers in the United States.
In one sense, this is all in a week's notoriety for Mr.
Murdoch -- a man fiercely admired by some as a brilliant entrepreneur and just as fiercely reviled by others as a harsh and domineering mogul.
But the simple fact of this double-barreled, center-stage presence in Congress also represents a new phase in a remarkable career: After years as an outsider in the capital's whirl of money and politics, Mr.
Murdoch has come to Washington.


July 16-22: Good Ol' Boys; Militiamen Crash A Lawmen's Party
Out in the boondocks of Polk County, an all-white neck of the Tennessee woods, hundreds of Federal, state and local law-enforcement officers from all over gathered each spring to gorge on beer and barbecue, play country music and have a good old-fashioned hog wallow.
Now an Alabama militia group has gone and spoiled it all.
The militia men, who hate certain Federal agencies for enforcing gun laws, infiltrated last May's Good Ol' Boys Roundup with a videotape camera.
There were racist T-shirts and paraphernalia on display, they said.
A skit involving Ku Klux Klan garb and a "slave," and a sign briefly posted at the entrance to the 1990 roundup bearing the words "Nigger Checkpoint" all are part of the accusations.


Weeds? Sure. Plenty Of Them.
IN spite of the dry soil and soaring temperatures, some plants are getting along just fine this summer.
They are called weeds.
These particular plants are quite clever.
They huddle near ornamentals as if to disguise themselves, or worse, they grow so close in and under favored plants that they are sometimes not seen.


ON THE TOWNS
MUSIC BRIDGETON'S RIVERFRONT In a series of free Sunday night concerts, the Brown Street Chowder Society performs today at 7 P.M.
Country Blue plays next Sunday.
Routes 49 and 77 in Bridgeton. (609) 451-9208.
COUNT BASIE THEATER The Metro Lyric Opera of New Jersey presents "La Boheme." Saturday at 8:15 P.M.
Tickets: $15-$35. 99 Monmouth Street, Red Bank. (908) 531-2378.


CHATTER: Censor the Internet; An Uncontrollable Force?
What, if anything, should be done to limit sexually explicit material on the Internet?
Since the Internet is international, how can the Government regulate it?
DANIEL KNIGHT Grand Rapids, Mich.


Are America's Wide Open Spaces Too Big for the Small Screen?
HERE's the idea: five young people who have never met board a Winnebago and set off across the country.
Every few days, they get a new clue -- in a pouch around a dog's neck, for example -- that presents them with a new destination and a new challenge, like working at an alligator farm or parachuting out of a plane.
Their adventures, their fights, their accomplishments and their whining -- in short their every move -- is recorded by video cameras.
This is the idea behind "Road Rules," a new MTV series on Monday nights at 10 for the next 13 weeks.
The show draws most obviously on its MTV predecessor "The Real World," a series that put a group of nubile strangers together in a house for several weeks of on-air angst.
But there is also a strong allusion to a more venerable, if often underappreciated television tradition: the road show.
"Road Rules" is "Route 66" with better outfits and more sex.


New &amp; Noteworthy Paperbacks
D-Day, June 6, 1944: The Climactic Battle of World War II By Stephen E. Ambrose.
Touchstone/Simon &amp; Schuster, $16.
Drawing on 1,200 oral histories, the author examines the strategy behind the landings at Normandy and re-creates the scene where Allied troops triumphed, but at a terrible cost.
Last year our reviewer, Raleigh Trevelyan, wrote, "The descriptions of individual ordeals on the bloody beach . . . make this book outstanding."


Truckers Carve a New Route, Crowding a Two-Lane Road
It seemed like some kind of long-distance magic trick.
In November 1993, transportation officials cut the ribbon on the last link of Interstate 287 in northern Passaic County.
Fifty miles away, on the other side of the state, tractor-trailers began to inundate a two-lane road.
But what happened is not really much of a mystery.
The completion of I-287 created a toll-free alternative to the New Jersey Turnpike for north- and southbound interstate truckers, a route that includes a nine-mile stretch of Route 31 in Hunterdon and Mercer Counties.
The 287 link, coupled with several more recent road projects authorized by the state, more than tripled truck traffic along the two-lane portion of Route 31 within 18 months, from 900 trucks a weekday to more than 3,000 a day in March.


Yankee Owner Praises And Rips
Concerned with the growing impression that he is trying to force Don Mattingly out of New York after this season and aware of the potential public relations damage the action could cause, George Steinbrenner complimented the most popular Yankee profusely yesterday while also denying the assertion that he wants the team captain to go elsewhere.
But Danny Tartabull was not treated so delicately by the Boss.
When Steinbrenner was finished comparing Mattingly to Babe Ruth, Lou Gehrig and Joe DiMaggio, he continued to ridicule the disgruntled Tartabull and charged that the designated hitter is faking a rib-cage injury because he does not want to be booed at Yankee Stadium.
The Yankee owner also challenged General Manager Gene Michael and Manager Buck Showalter to publicly voice the derogatory comments about Tartabull he said they constantly air during staff meetings.


Crooning to Fight AIDS, Changing to Beat the Heat
UPTOWN -- Chris Isaak sounded a lot nicer than a dog howling at the moon, at the Beacon Theater on July 13, but his voice did have that middle-of-the-night-and-I'm-all-alone quality.
This handsome singer from San Francisco, whose new album, "Forever Blue," is about being dumped by his girlfriend, was pouring his heart out for Lifebeat, a music-industry organization fighting AIDS.


In the Editing Room, Many Propose, Few Dispose
"HOW DO WE SOLVE THE problem here?" says Richard Halsey.
It is May 12, and the 55-year-old Academy Award winner and film editor is brainstorming over a few seconds of film he wants to insert under the opening credits of "The Net." Wearing blue jeans, a khaki shirt and two earrings, he is manically snapping his fingers, pacing in his black high tops across a temporary editing room in Manhattan that has the dimensions and spare decorating scheme of a three-car garage.
For seven weeks, Mr.
Halsey will spend his waking hours here, editing the $22 million techno-thriller starring the 30-year-old Sandra Bullock.
"The Net," which opens on Friday, is about Angela, a reclusive computer systems analyst who has to hack her way out of trouble after she meets a man (Jeremy Northam) in Mexico and all of her personal computer records are erased.


CHATTER: Censor the Internet; Drawing the Line
What, if anything, should be done to limit sexually explicit material on the Internet?
Our kids have too much smut thrown at them every day without adding another source.
If users persist, drop them from the service.
GRADY J. WILLIAMS Mandeville, La.


If Your Thinking of Living In/Marble Hill; A Bit of Manhattan in the Bronx
YES, you have crossed the Harlem River and, yes, that is the northern tip of Manhattan island that you can see to the south.
But as residents of Marble Hill are quick to point out, you are not in the Bronx: because of a 19th-century public works project that reshaped Manhattan island and severed its topmost land, Marble Hill is across the river and into what logically should be the Bronx.
It is a quirky and little-known neighborhood whose residents consider it a well-kept secret.
Where else in Manhattan can you find a six-bedroom, three-story house on a quiet, tree-lined street with an attic, a basement, an enclosed front porch and a pretty facade for sale for $174,000?
Or a three-family house with six bedrooms on an architecturally magnificent street with an asking price of $295,000?


The World; Chirac Dusts Off An 'Idea of France'
CARDINAL RICHELIEU, Talleyrand, and Charles de Gaulle were all masters of diplomatic leverage, multiplying French influence in the councils of the world and sometimes turning defeat into victory, skills the French admire in their leaders.
Jacques Chirac, an admirer of de Gaulle who was elected President a little more than two months ago, has clearly learned a lot from his predecessors.


Liberties; The Vicuna Lacuna
Al D'Amato's impersonation of a statesman made my head hurt.
And hanging on the words of Howell Heflin was not my idea of how to spend a steamy Friday afternoon.
But accountability of government is a pillar of our democracy.
So I went to hearings all week, and watched Congressional panels on Whitewater, Waco and the Good Ol' Boys Roundup, the racist A.T.F. picnic.


Sophisticated Food in Rustic Ambiance
THE Downtown Grille fuses the rustic laid-back ambiance of Montauk and the sophisticated food of points west.
One noteworthy point west is 107 Forest in Locust Valley, which has the same ownership.
Although Montauk experienced a large influx of stylish new restaurants last season, the four-year-old Downtown Grille met the challenge.
It still serves the best food in town.


TRADE SECRETS: Where Sushi Comes From
Sushi season (catching it) begins off Cape Cod in late June when the highly prized bluefin tuna arrive.
Boats work with spotter planes.
If the pilot spots a fish that the boat captures, he generall receives 25 percent of the proceeds.
Some of the best tuna is taken by boats equipped with harpoons that shock the fish to death.
If the fish fights for some time, the struggle raises the temperature of the flesh, giving the tuna and unwanted quality the Japanese call ya-ke.


Margaret Groarke, Jordan Moss
Margaret M. Groarke, the daughter of Stephen and Bernadette Groarke of the Bronx, and Jordan Bernard Moss, a son of Jay and Sabina Moss of Cedarhurst, L.I., were married yesterday at the chapel of Vassar College in Poughkeepsie, N.Y.
The Rev.
Leslie J. Ivers performed the ceremony, in which Rabbi Burt Aaron Siegel took part.
Ms.
Groarke, who is 33 and is keeping her name, is a doctoral candidate in political science at the City University of New York Graduate Center and is an adjunct instructor of political science at Lehman College in the Bronx.
She graduated cum laude from Harvard University.
Her father retired as a supervisor of carpenters for the New York City Housing Authority.
Her mother is the secretary in the housing office of the Roman Catholic Archdiocese of New York.


Fight for Parking at Beaches Grows More Intense
SOMETIMES the cars wait in line up to the top of that hill," said Joe Disunno, who parks cars at the Atlantic Avenue Beach in Amagansett. He pointed to where Atlantic Avenue intersects with Bluff Road.
The lot has room for 195 cars, and across the road an additional 70 can line up diagonally, to conserve space.


INSIDE
Report on Radio Marti  A Federal investigation of Radio Marti has found improper interference by the Cuban-American leader Jorge Mas Canosa.
Page 10.
United They Stand
Republicans had a bad week on Capiton Hill, but they remain united when it matters, most of all on the budget.
Congressional Memo, page 18.


Crime Lab; Mystery of New York, the Suddenly Safer City
NEW YORK CITY'S murder, robbery and burglary rates have plummeted to their lowest levels in a quarter century -- a development that has become a marvel of American law enforcement.
But Police Commissioner William J. Bratton will not be satisfied until every last criminologist surrenders.
"We'll knock them down like ducks in a row," said Mr.
Bratton, speaking of all the standard criminological theories about how crime waves are tied to the size of the youth population, or to changes in the weather, or to unemployment levels, or to drug use patterns, or to the availability of guns.


The Life and Times Of a Young Rock Band
IT was one of the first warm nights of this cold dark spring.
Sri Kesava, a.k.a.
Kim Shopov, the pigtailed lead singer of Baby Gopal, was pacing a Brooklyn club, as nervous as a teen-ager giving her first really hip and life-defining party.
Ignoring her, a bartender in a "Stupid Is as Stupid Does" T-shirt and an old Polish man ate fried chicken out of Styrofoam containers at the bar.
Their chomping on wings and drumsticks appeared undisturbed by the sounds from the black hole of the back room.
From behind the gold brocade curtains drifted the band State of Execution's acknowledgement of thanks to "everyone who came down to see us." As recompense the band promised to open up with its song "Whore" for the 30 or so present.
The refrain was a predictable "she's a" over and over.
A handful of black T-shirted, shaved heads slammed into each other, moshing and snacking from canisters of Pringles potato chips to keep their energy fueled.
For Sri, things were messing up.
She and her band had arrived at the show about an hour late.
They had apparently been driving around the hinterlands of Greenpoint for some time, perhaps even catching cruel, taunting glimpses of the isle of Manhattan, where they would really rather be playing instead of being ironically relegated to the 996 Club on Manhattan Avenue.
Nonetheless, jumpy and swigging from a bottle of imported water, Sri made her way to the sound and light man, who seemed to have had some power over the doings, and she gamely jockeyed for a spot sooner rather than later among Sour, Pittfall, Struggle Within, Nemenon and State of Execution.


Fond Memories
To the Editor:
James R. Oestreich's article "At Peace in the Lonely Realm of the Oboe"  [ July 9 ]  brought back memories of the week I spent in the Little Switzerland, N.C., retreat known as Wildacres, where I attended a "camp" for saxophonists.


We Can't Afford Luxury of Financing the Arts; Friends and Foes
To the Editor:
With all the political maneuvering last week in the House of Representatives, it was difficult to identify arts supporters from opponents.


'Hello Kitty,' the Club Cat
SHARDA SEKARAN, 18, perched behind the counter of the Alphabets shop on Avenue A and Seventh Street, scanned the red maze of key chains and overnight cases emblazoned with a fetching white feline face.
"You can tell who's going to come in and go straight to Hello Kitty," Ms.
Sekaran said.
"It's typically the people who are dressed up in vinyl with the little hearts on the T-shirts. Pink vinyl is just key."


IN SHORT: FICTION
DAUGHTER OF JERUSALEM  By Sara Maitland. Owl/Holt, paper, $12.


The World; Does Japan Still Need Its Scary Monster?
LIKE many of his generation in Japan, he paid dearly for the aggressive impulses that had killed millions of people and left cities in ruin.
Like them, he was also a victim of the terrible dawn of the atomic age, and then of the cold war.
In recent years, he had been concerned with protecting Japan from environmental disasters as well as economic competitors, but those urges came with powerful doses of violence.
Yes, Godzilla was a troubled, complex creature. He was also a creature of his times.


The Endurance Tony
IF Cal Ripken Jr. can hold out, baseball will celebrate his record-breaking 2,131st consecutive game on Sept. 6.
That night Bryan Hull, a different kind of iron horse, will set his own longevity record.
The gray-haired 57-year-old will make tea in his Hudson Street apartment and walk it over to the Sullivan Street Playhouse.
By 8:25 P.M. he'll be on its tiny oval stage as the old actor in "The Fantasticks." Makeup lining his face, a spotlight catching the wisps of white hair falling from his wig, he'll say with a creaky urgency that seems utterly of the moment: "Sir, the players have arrived."


Rent Hike Set at Waterside, to the Chagrin of Both Tenants and Developer
Last week, the city's Department of Housing Preservation and Development approved a rent increase at Waterside Plaza, the 1,100-unit Mitchell-Lama apartment complex that sits on a concrete platform over the East River.
Neither tenant organizers nor the developer is thrilled.
As of Aug. 1, tenants will pay an additional $36 per room each month.
Rents will go up another $4.02 per room each month on Aug. 1, 1996, and another $4.03 per room on Aug. 1, 1997.
Rents, which include utilities, had not increased in a decade, except on vacant apartments.


Crackdown on Illegal Housing Collides With a Tradition of Helping Others
Last December, fire raced through a crowded single-family house in Orange that had been illegally divided into at least three apartments.
Fire officials are still not sure how many people were living there -- they say at least 17 -- but 9 died in the flames, their efforts to escape thwarted at least in part by the lack of fire exits.
Since that blaze, and another one three weeks later in nearby Irvington that killed 3 of the 18 inhabitants of a one-family house, officials in several communities have cracked down on illegal apartments and rooming houses.


Connecticut Guide
CLEVE GRAY
Among those good things that come in small packages is the exhibition of works by Cleve Gray at the Wadsworth Atheneum in Hartford through Aug. 20.


Safety in Italy
To the Editor
A few words in defense of one of the most beautiful areas of Italy -- Apulia, the region that forms the heel and spur of the boot.
Our last trip to Italy took us to Rome, Naples and Apulia.
We spent three delightful weeks and never had a problem -- people were incredibly kind and helpful and seemed to go out of their way for us.
In Naples I was reminded to take off my jewelry by a cafe owner.
On a number of occasions people took us to our hotel instead of giving directions.


For Aspiring Champions, It's an Uphill Jump All the Way
Last winter, Sydne Vogel came from Alaska to skate in the Lower 48, and the questions her adolescent competitors asked were as amusing as they were uninformed.
Do you skate on icebergs? Do you live in an igloo?


Sharing a Saint: The 2 Worlds of Our Lady of Mount Carmel
In East Harlem last Saturday, nearly 1,000 worshipers clutching votive candles followed a float for two hours bearing a larger-than-life statue of Madonna and child and six girls in lacy Communion dresses.
Eight men in white tuxedos pulled the float, pausing to watch fireworks set off every few blocks and catch their breath in the still, nearly 100-degree air that grew heavier with the smell of gunpowder.
The crowd was gathered for a two-day celebration of the feast of Our Lady of Mount Carmel, which is no ordinary ethnic event, but street religion New York style.
It's an Italian immigrant festival dating to the 19th century that now takes place in El Barrio and is dominated by Haitians who chant to the Madonna in French Creole.


Francie Randolph, Thomas Watson
Penelope Frances Randolph, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Evan Randolph 4th of Manchester-by-the-Sea, Mass., was married last evening to Thomas Aldren Dingman Watson, a son of Nancy Dingman Watson of Truro, Mass., and Aldren Watson of West Hartland, Vt.
The Rev.
Leland Wilkinson, an Episcopal priest, performed the ceremony on the dunes in Truro.
The bride, who is 30 and is known as Francie, owns R Design, a graphic design company in Cambridge, Mass.
She graduated magna cum laude from Harvard University, where she is a candidate for a master's degree in visual education.
Her father is the executive vice president at B &amp; B Marketing, an advertising agency in Wellesley, Mass.
Her mother, Penelope Dixon Randolph, teaches English at the Glen Urquhart School in Beverly Farms, Mass.


Some Familiar Faces, From Foreign Places
IN spite of the dry soil and soaring temperatures, some plants are getting along just fine this summer.
They are called weeds.
These particular plants are quite clever.
They huddle near ornamentals as if to disguise themselves, or worse, they grow so close in and under favored plants that they are sometimes not seen.


Connecting the Dots On an Italian Coastline
The Via dell'Amore, the path between two of the five villages that make up the Cinque Terre on the northwest coast of Italy, has reopened after having been closed for five years.
A favorite haunt of lovers, as its name suggests, the path was cut off by a landslide in August 1990.
It lies between the two southernmost villages, medieval Riomaggiore, founded in the seventh century, and Manarola, set on terraced vineyards.
Although the path is only a few yards wide and half a mile long, the reconstruction took five years because money was tight and because one section had to be enclosed in a tunnel as protection against landslides.


A Classic Tale Springs From the Cupboard
Free Willy 2: The Adventure Home  Jason James Richter, Michael Madsen, Jayne Atkinson, Francis Capra Directed by Dwight Little PG 98 minutes
Willy, last seen leaping to freedom in the 1993 boy-and-his-whale movie "Free Willy," returns with his family.
Jesse, the street child who befriended him, is now a teen-ager living with his foster parents, though he still misses his mother, who abandoned him.
He gets the news that she has died and that he has a half-brother, Elvis, a smart-aleck pipsqueak.
Elvis moves in, the whales are threatened by an oil spill, and the boys bond when they risk their lives to save them.


Connecticut Q&amp;A: Adelma Grenier Simmons; Flavor, Fragrance, Medicine and Magic
SOWN into the rockbound earth of Coventry in Connecticut's northeast corner is a patch of aromatic acreage, Caprilands Herb Farm.
Its creator, the author and educator Adelma Grenier Simmons, has embroidered more than 35 herbal gardens into an estate dedicated to the herb in all its varieties.
She is the author of more than 48 books on herbs, their history and literature and is working on another, called "The Education of a Gardener," meant to start would-be gardeners off in the right direction.


Hero to the Bad and Truly Awful
NO SADDER SPECTACLE CONFRONTS the music reviewer than bare, earnest adequacy in the service of large ambition.
One notes the years of labor, the expenditure of spiritual and material resources, the hopes and the vanities and realizes that a young lifetime has been sacrificed to meager results.
One writes respectfully about such events and usually only once.
Very bad concerts can be as instructive as very good ones.
Singers are usually involved, for no art is more personal or more visceral, nor does any other offer as many opportunities for self-deception.
If singers believe they are good and are actually terrible, one simply goes home and writes nothing.


Votes in Congress
Tally Last Week in Connecticut, New Jersey and New York  Senate 1.
Regulatory Reform: Vote on a Democratic alternative bill that would provide a more restrained approach to regulatory relief than a Republican-sponsored plan.
Rejected 52 to 48, July 18. 2.
Regulatory Reform: Vote to cut off debate and vote on a Republican proposal to limit Federal health, safety and environmental regulations.
Failed, with 58 in favor and 40 opposed (two votes short of the 60 needed), July 20. 3.
Reporters: Vote on a nonbinding resolution calling for reporters to disclose the sources and amounts of their outside income.
Approved 60 to 39, July 20.
Connecticut  Dodd (D) . . . . . .
Y . . .
N . . .
N Lieberman (D) . . . . . .
Y . . .
N . . .
N  New Jersey  Bradley (D) . . . . . .
Y . . .
N . . .
Y Lautenberg (D) . . . . . .
Y . . .
N . . .
Y  New York  D'Amato (R) . . . . . .
N . . .
Y . . .
N Moynihan (D) . . . . . .
Y . . .
N . . .
N  KEY: Y Yea; N Nay; (A) Absent or did not vote; (P) Present.
House
1.
Abortion Coverage: Vote on an amendment to an appropriations bill for the Treasury Department and various agencies that would remove a provision prohibiting Federal employees' health insurance programs from paying for abortions except when a woman's life is in danger.
Rejected 235 to 188, July 19.
2.
Loans to Mexico: Vote on an amendment to an appropriations bill for the Treasury Department and various agencies that would bar the Administration from using the Exchange Stabilization Fund "for the purpose of bolstering any foreign currency." Approved 245 to 183, July 19.
Connecticut  1.
Kennelly (D) . . . . . .
Y . . .
N 2.
Gejdenson (D) . . . . . .
Y . . .
N 3.
DeLauro (D) . . . . . .
Y . . .
N 4.
Shays (R) . . . . . .
Y . . .
N 5.
Franks (R) . . . . . .
Y . . .
N 6.
Johnson (R) . . . . . .
Y . . .
N  New Jersey  1.
Andrews (D) . . . . . .
Y . . .
Y 2.
LoBiondo (R) . . . . . .
N . . .
Y 3.
Saxton (R) . . . . . .
N . . .
Y 4.
Smith (R) . . . . . .
N . . .
Y 5.
Roukema (R) . . . . . .
Y . . .
N 6.
Pallone (D) . . . . . .
Y . . .
Y 7.
Franks (R) . . . . . .
Y . . .
N 8.
Martini (R) . . . . . .
Y . . .
N 9.
Torricelli (D) . . . . . .
Y . . .
Y 10.
Payne (D) . . . . . .
Y . . .
N  11.
Frelinghuysen (R) . . . . . .
Y . . .
N 12.
Zimmer (R) . . . . . .
Y . . .
Y 13.
Menendez (D) . . . . . .
Y . . .
N  New York  1.
Forbes (R) . . . . . .
N . . .
Y 2.
Lazio (R) . . . . . .
Y . . .
N 3.
King (R) . . . . . .
N . . .
N 4.
Frisa (R) . . . . . .
N . . .
Y 5.
Ackerman (D) . . . . . .
Y . . .
Y 6.
Flake (D) . . . . . .
Y . . .
N 7.
Manton (D) . . . . . .
N . . .
N 8.
Nadler (D) . . . . . .
Y . . .
N 9.
Schumer (D) . . . . . .
Y . . .
N 10.
Towns (D) . . . . . .
Y . . .
Y 11.
Owens (D) . . . . . .
Y . . .
Y 12.
Velazquez (D) . . . . . .
Y . . .
Y 13.
Molinari (R) . . . . . .
Y . . .
N 14.
Maloney (D) . . . . . .
Y . . .
N 15.
Rangel (D) . . . . . .
Y . . .
Y 16.
Serrano (D) . . . . . .
Y . . .
N 17.
Engel (D) . . . . . .
Y . . .
N 18.
Lowey (D) . . . . . .
Y . . .
N 19.
Kelly (R) . . . . . .
Y . . .
N 20.
Gilman (R) . . . . . .
Y . . .
Y 21.
McNulty (D) . . . . . .
N . . .
Y 22.
Solomon (R) . . . . . .
N . . .
Y 23.
Boehlert (R) . . . . . .
Y . . .
N 24.
McHugh (R) . . . . . .
Y . . .
Y 25.
Walsh (R) . . . . . .
N . . .
N 26.
Hinchey (D) . . . . . .
Y . . .
Y 27.
Paxon (R) . . . . . .
N . . .
Y 28.
Slaughter (D) . . . . . .
Y . . .
N 29.
LaFalce (D) . . . . . .
N . . .
N 30.
Quinn (R) . . . . . .
N . . .
Y 31.
Houghton (R) . . . . . .
Y . . .
N  KEY: Y Yea; N Nay; (A) Absent or did not vote; (P) Present.


Guarding the Turf, Stepping on Toes; Henry Stern, Passionate and Blunt, Champions the City Parks
There is a certain "Car 54, Where Are You?" quality to careering about the boroughs with Henry J. Stern, New York City's odd duck of a Parks Commissioner, who over two recent days fielded calls from his chauffered Crown Victoria about the mini-crises that roll through a job he would happily keep for life.
He bristled at news that a sulking corporate donor wants a larger sign in Central Park advertising its largesse: "They're trying to push us," he said into the car phone.
"If they're so noble, what do they care if the letters are an inch and a quarter high?"


Gingerly, and Watch the Pincers


Diane M. Swieck, Scott W. Ludmar
Diane Marie Swieck, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Walter Swieck of Camillus, N.Y., was married yesterday to Scott Wallace Ludmar, the son of Joan Ludmar of Fort Lauderdale, Fla., and the late Milton W. Ludmar.
The Rev.
Jon Werner officiated at the Roman Catholic Cathedral of the Immaculate Conception in Syracuse.


Margaret E. Orto,Kevin A. Welber
Margaret Elisa Orto, a daughter of Jane S. Orto of Westfield, N.J., and the late Pasquale R. Orto, was married last evening to Kevin Amir Welber, a son of Efraim and Dina Welber of North Miami Beach, Fla.
Judge Susan Mullen of the Municipal Court of Fanwood, N.J., officiated at the Beacon Hill Club in Summit, N.J.


Intimations of Mortlity
SKINNED ALIVE Stories. By Edmund White. 254 pp. New York: Alfred A. Knopf. $23.


Dividing Palestine
To the Editor:
Morton A. Klein (letter, July 16) writes that the League of Nations defined Palestine as including the Kingdom of Jordan; hence Arabs already have three-fourths of Palestine.
He omits that Palestinian Muslims and Christians made up 90 percent of the population in 1920, and that they should have been allowed (as promised) self-determination.


Dana Schragen, Michael Runyon
Dana Marlo Schragen, a daughter of Laurie Schragen of Mahwah, N.J., and Jerald Schragen of Ramsey, N.J., was married last evening to Michael Brad Runyon, a son of Nancy Scheriff and Guy Runyon, both of Saddle River, N.J.
Rabbi Howard Shapiro performed the ceremony at the Essex House, in New York.
Mrs.
Runyon, 24, graduated from Ithaca College.
She was formerly a meeting planner for the Calvin Klein Cosmetics Company in New York.
Her mother, a real estate broker, is also the manager of the Ramsey office of Coldwell Banker Schlott, real estate agents.
Her father is a lawyer in Ramsey.


DEATH ON THE CNN CURVE
IT WAS FAME that killed Robert O'Donnell, killed him as surely as that shotgun blast he fired into his brain on a dark, dusty, West Texas road, miles and years away from the thing that made him famous in the first place.
Technically, it was the bullet that did it -- a .410 shell, the kind his mother kept at the ranch house to shoot rattlesnakes and warn trespassers.
It certainly wasn't an accident.
You can't shoot yourself in the mouth accidentally with a .410.
The barrel is too long.
And it wasn't someone else's doing.
He left three notes, lined up side by side by the coffee table, two to his two boys and one that simply said, "No help from nobody but family."
So it was the bullet, or depression, or his willful trigger finger that caused his death, this spring, at the age of 37.
But the reason he did it, and the reason no one who knew him was surprised, that is where the fame comes in.
Eight years earlier he had saved a little girl's life, as the whole world watched, and, for a while, he was the center not only of his small universe, but of the real, known universe, the new one that sees everything simultaneously on CNN.
There was a parade, countless television appearances, a letter from the president, a handshake from the Vice President, a made-for-TV movie.
But eventually, the cameras went away, the world's attention moved on and he was left alone -- a man so changed by fame that he no longer belonged in his world, but not changed enough that he could leave that world behind.


Ideas &amp; Trends; Speaking Left To Right
WITH its sharply conservative editorial page and what some readers say is a liberal bent in its news coverage, The Wall Street Journal may be the most famously divided newspaper in journalism.


Politics of Payback: Clinton Offers Aid to Virginia Ex-Governor
In a move some view as payback for an endorsement that helped Democrats to a rare election triumph last fall, President Clinton and Virginia's Democratic Senator have agreed to assist a former opponent, L. Douglas Wilder, in retiring his campaign debts.
President Clinton agreed this week to head the receiving line when the Senator, Charles S. Robb, , holds a party next month to reduce the debt Mr.
Wilder amassed in his four-month campaign for the 1992 Democratic Presidential nomination and in his independent bid last year for Mr.
Robb's seat.


Lisa M. DiLallo, Thomas R. Clark
Lisa Margaret DiLallo, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Joseph DiLallo of Summit, N.J., was married there yesterday to Thomas Richard Clark, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard Clark of Short Hills, N.J.
The Rev.
Thomas G. Arminio performed the ceremony at St.
Theresa of Avila Roman Catholic Church.
Mrs.
Clark, 29, is the coordinating producer of "Moneyline" report on CNN in New York.
She graduated from the University of Arizona.
Her father is an internist specializing in geriatrics in Summit.
Her mother, Lilita DiLallo, retired as a biochemist from the Stritch School of Medicine at Loyola University in Chicago.


Diehard Drinkers Hail the Return of the Idiot
Glenn Wernig was drunk this St.
Patrick's Day and has only hazy memories of the grand reopening of the Village Idiot at its new 14th Street and Ninth Avenue site.
But he does recall a poster announcing the rebirth of this proudly raunchy bar.
It read: "Legends never die."
Although the old Idiot, as people call it, closed in 1993 after seven years on First Avenue and 10th Street, Mr.
Wernig included it in his 1994 guide to Lower East Side bars, "Having a Hell of a Time." Then, the 33-year-old artist wrote, "R.I.P. I miss the Village Idiot!"


They'll Bring Tears to Your Eyes
THERE are going to be lots of peppers this year.
Thirty-six varieties of sweet, 130 varieties of hot.
Varieties from Zimbabwe, Turkey, Thailand, Gambia.
Sixty-five varieties from Latin America alone.
Bird peppers -- peppers whose seeds must pass through the digestive system of a bird to shed their hulls and germinate.
And this year, for the first time, an incendiary device called the Red Savina, hundreds of times as hot as the jalapeno.
The peppers are growing in neat rows at Oak Grove Plantation, Ted and Susan Blew's 160-acre farm in the gentle hills of Hunterdon County.
The farm is organic, profitable, diverse and growing -- a leading supplier of peppers to consumers and merchants through the vast Union Square Greenmarket in Manhattan.
How it got that way is a story about family farmers coping in a time of agribusiness combines and real-estate development -- about finding a niche and building it.


Mall Proposal Pits Residents Against Builder
WHEN Anthony Patone was courting the woman he would later marry, he often walked with her along the village streets that climb from the Hudson River here, sharing plans for their future and dreams of opening a small business in the quaint downtown.
In the 11 years since they met, those dreams have come true, and Mr.
Patone and his wife, Joyce, now own two video stores, one on the main street here and another in nearby Irvington.
Peter N. Rockwood was also charmed by the village and moved here 20 years ago, leaving a marketing job in Manhattan to sell fine wines in the spot where the first Westchester liquor store opened after the repeal of Prohibition in 1933.
He left the wood floors and tin ceiling of the old store intact, and although the business has "not been a runaway success," he said, "I've put my kids through college, made a good living and lived a good life."


French Intellectuals Wanted Truth Told
To the Editor:
In "French War Stories" (Op-Ed, July 19), Tony Judt goes so far in praising President Jacques Chirac for finally admitting French Government complicity in the deaths of 76,000 Jews during the Nazi occupation, and in attacking the French left, that he seriously distorts history.


Big, Expensive and Finally Here


Hasty Puddings
Summer puddings exploit the ooze factor of summer fruit.
That red splotch staining the raspberry container, or the indigo tears at the bottom of the blueberry box, can be elevated and exaggerated, raised to a near art form, when soft summer fruit is baked under a cookie crust or thinly sliced bread.
Given normal circumstances, berries and nectarines, peaches and plums need no intervention.
They are perfect unto themselves, best served as they are bought or found.
The cook might add some cream, or some gelato, but for the most part, summer fruit speaks for itself.


Irish Government Will Try Again to Lift Nation's Divorce Ban
The Irish Government has decided to press for the removal of Ireland's constitutional ban on divorce in a national referendum later this year, officials said Friday.
If the Government campaign succeeds, it will mean that overwhelmingly Roman Catholic Ireland, the only European Union country that still prohibits divorce, would permit it for the first time.
Removing the ban would also make it possible for the thousands of Irish who have obtained foreign divorces to remarry in this country.


The Weight of the Past
AFTER THE WALL Germany, the Germans and the Burdens of History.
By Marc Fisher. 350 pp.
New York: Simon &amp; Schuster. $25.


Sweet, Cold Frenzy in the Hood
MAKING ice cream is just like making a cake, explains Robbie Guyette, the first-shift production supervisor at the H. P. Hood plant in Suffield.
You start off with a mixing bowl, stir in your ingredients and pop it away to finish it off.
But Mr.
Guyette's mixing bowl is a 1,000-gallon stainless steel tank, and his ingredient list starts with 4,000 pounds of milk, 2,400 pounds of cream and a half-ton of sugar.
This is the busy season for Hood's ice cream division off Route 159, a 142,450-square-foot building (with a smiling Harry Hood painted on the front) that opened 30 years ago this summer.
It was the biggest in North America when it opened, and still ranks among the largest, producing 21 million gallons of ice cream each year.
Two shifts a day work at full speed to meet summer demand for everything from Hoodsie cups, the plant's oldest product (introduced in 1946), to Celestial Seasonings frozen tea pops, introduced within the last year.


CHATTER: Censor the Internet; Paying for It
What, if anything, should be done to limit sexually explicit material on the Internet?
Anyone who uses a $2,000 computer to get pictures that are available for a buck and a half at the corner gas station is at least a few pepperonis shy of a full pizza.
ALAN FRASER Cincinnati


Death Urged for Rootless Killer
A stealthy strangler that sucks the life from its victims like a vampire is on a silent, deadly rampage in Bryant Park.
Or at least in the ivy bed in the park's northwest corner.
The villain is cuscuta, more commonly known as dodder.
Its aliases are more ominous, and, according to horticulturalists, more apt: devil's sewing thread and hell bind.


BEHIND THE WHEEL/Chevrolet Suburban, Tahoe and Blazer; Sibling Rivalry in Chevy's Rugged Clan
IF Goldilocks still liked to wander in the woods, Chevrolet showrooms could offer her at least as many off-roading choices as she found on that storied day she came across the bears.
There is the Suburban, the papa bear of four-wheel-drive light trucks; the Blazer, the smallish but feisty sport utility that was redesigned for this year, and now the Tahoe, which is meant to fill the gap in between.


July 16-22: Question of Sanctions; Saddam Hussein Gets No Respect For a Prisoner Release
Saddam Hussein released two Americans who had been held prisoner in Iraq for four months, but the Clinton Administration took the view last week that no thanks were due: David Daliberti and William Barloon, the officials felt, were being let go merely as part of a charm offensive to persuade the world to lift economic sanctions.
Mr.
Daliberti and Mr.
Barloon, who work for American aircraft maintenance companies in Kuwait, were arrested March 13 after crossing into Iraq.
The Iraqis said they entered illegally; the two said they had made a wrong turn.


Haunting 'Splendora' at Bay Street Theater, Honoring Finesse and Surprise
IN Splendora, a dinky make-believe Texas town defined by corruption, ineptitude and budget cuts, an extravagant young woman and a mysterious young man appear one hot summer day, as if out of a storybook past.
In the prologue of a haunting new musical produced by the Bay Street Theater in Sag Harbor, five busybodies in the town square are singing of Miss Jessica Gatewood, remembered.
They evoke the time when she arrived from New Orleans to "put the splendor back in Splendora," by buying house that was once a model of Victoriana, with dolls and knickknacks everywhere.
But "fire ate up her flesh," the gossips tell us about the fate of "Miss Jessie." Whatever happened to her companion, Timothy John, who disappeared without a trace, is left to the imagining.


July 16-22: Zenith Sells; Koreans Buy the Last U.S.-Owned TV Maker
There was an air of inevitability about the decision last week by Zenith Electronics, the last American-owned television manufacturer, to sell control of the company to LG Electronics, a giant Korean competitor.
Zenith was simply too small to compete in the global business of consumer electronics and too strapped for cash to get big in a hurry.
At the same time, the company's reputation for quality and its patents in technologies like high-definition television were assets that management could sell to the highest bidder.
The takeover might have come sooner but for fears of a consumer backlash against whichever foreign company bought the last American entrant in an industry the United States invented.


July 16-22; Instrument of Crime?


A Little Giverny, a Lot of Culinary Skill
RESIDENTS of Fairfield would probably like to keep La Colline Verte a secret.
New as it is, the French restaurant is so so busy that reservations are essential.
The tiny space is jewel-like, with lemon walls, deep blue banquettes, rush-seated wood chairs with yellow backs and the same blue trim: the colors of the dining room in Claude Monet's Giverny.
The ceiling is a blue sky with clouds.
A mural evokes a van Gogh cafe in Arles.


In Hip-Hop Heaven


The Figure From 12 Earnest Viewpoints
THE 12 photographers in "Traces," on view at the Bronx Museum of the Arts here, focus on the figure but in ways that make it a pretext for the show rather than its subject.
This results in an earnest atmosphere, which for a while seems rather Victorian.
But then the viewer realizes that for allegorists of the 19th century, the human form was a means of personifying concepts while for their counterparts today it is more often a vehicle for political and social comment.
Accordingly, "Traces," which was organized by the museum's senior curator, Marysol Nieves, covers all the fashionable issues, from sex and race to identity, individual and collective.
Yet like most contemporary political shows it has nothing to offer in the way of doctrine unless the curator's reverent attitude toward her photographers counts as such.


Sports of The Times; Bronx Zoo Is Alive, But Not Well
TEAR down those big blue letters announcing "Yankee Stadium" and put up "Please Don't Feed the Animals."
In another baseball annex to the Bronx Zoo, the animals don't need to be fed.
They're devouring each other.


Ideas &amp; Trends; In the Bluegrass Nation: For the Twang of It
SITTING in the shade thrown by a cordon of motor homes, M. D. Culpepper, 71, doffed his blue baseball cap, which was hand-embroidered with the words Bluegrass Junkie.
"When my wife died on the first of January, people said I should go to meetings," said the retired Kentucky-born coal miner.
But instead of going to church, Mr.
Culpepper sought solace in bluegrass, a raw-boned form of country music in which the singers play fiddles, banjos and guitars, harmonizing over love, usually lost, and liquor, preferably moonshine.
The blend of hillbilly strings and bluesy laments began 50 years ago with Bill Monroe and Earl Scruggs.


Molly Barnes, Randolph B. Goodman
Maria Thedia Barnes, a daughter of Josephine and Craig Barnes of Santa Fe, N.M., is to be married today in Jackson Hole, Wyo., to Randolph Bernard Goodman, the son of State Senator and Mrs.
Roy M. Goodman of New York.
The Rev.
Suzanne Harris, an Episcopal priest, is to perform the nondenominational ceremony at the Jackson Hole Country Club.
The bride, who is known as Molly, graduated from Stanford University and is studying for a law degree at Boston University.
Her father is a partner in Barnes &amp; Barnes, a law firm in Santa Fe, and is also a private mediator in ethnic disputes between Armenia and Azerbaijan.
Her mother is a psychotherapist in Santa Fe.


Always the Country of the Future
THE BRAZILIANS By Joseph A. Page. 540 pp.
Reading, Mass.: Addison-Wesley Publishing Company. $27.50.


PLAYING IN THE NEIGHBORHOOD
WOODHAVEN  The Sparrow Sings To Calypso Beat
For the uninitiated, The Mighty Sparrow might sound like a new Godzilla opponent or PBS nature special.
But those who have heard the Sparrow's call know that his true claim to fame is calypso.


CHATTER: Censor the Internet; Parental Control
What, if anything, should be done to limit sexually explicit material on the Internet?
There should be no regulations to limit explicit material beyond current law.
No one is forced to search out these materials.
The only protection that children need is parental supervision.
Turn the computer off.
DAVID HEGNER Newton


Ms. Tiedemann, Mr. Squasoni
Catherine Tiedemann, the daughter of Joan Kopf Tiedemann of Baldwin, L.I., and the late John H. Tiedemann Jr., was married yesterday to Douglas Wade Squasoni, the son of Patricia and Harry Squasoni of Ramsey, N.J.
The Rev.
E.
Philip Sebastian officiated at St.
Peter's Lutheran Church in Baldwin.
Mrs.
Squasoni, 33, is an associate product manager at Colgate-Palmolive in New York.
She graduated from Brown University and received an M.B.A. from Columbia University.
Her father was a senior vice president and the general sales manager of ABC-TV in New York.


The Red and the Black
With its poetic allusions to the turn of the century, Yohji Yamomoto's fall collection was simply the best.


NOBLES: Get Ready For Ethelred
August should be a good month for Anglophiles.
The midday sun will be hot enough to share with mad dogs and Englishmen.
And a new computer data base called RoyaList will be released.
It claims to list and cross-index all of the British monarchs and their blood relatives.
Odd bits of trivia are included in the brief biographies, along with vital statistics on dates of birth and death.
For instance, "Ethelred  [ the Unready's ]  mother, Elfthryth, beat him with candles so hard and so often that he had a lifelong phobia of them."


Clintons Interviewed Under Oath By Counsel
President Clinton and his wife, Hillary Rodham Clinton, were interviewed under oath at the White House today by the independent counsel who is investigating the range of issues known collectively as Whitewater, Government officials said.
Mr. and Mrs.
Clinton were interviewed separately by the special prosecutor, Kenneth W. Starr, and some of his aides.
White House officials said the President's interview lasted about three and a half hours and was followed by Mrs.
Clinton's interview, which lasted about two hours.


Teamwork Starts at Top on Giants
Giants fans should send the Cleveland Browns' owner, Art Modell, a thank-you note.
It was Modell who introduced Wellington Mara and Bob Tisch over lunch in New York four and a half years ago, and although there were doubts at the time, that meeting has led to one of the most successful unions in sports ownership.
And as the Giants begin training camp today, the future for Giants ownership -- one that now includes Mara's son John -- has never looked brighter.
"I must admit, I wasn't sure if the relationship would work," said Modell.
"When you have two successful men who are used to doing things their way, these kinds of unions are hard to pull off. But it has proven to be great for them and great for the Giants."


Molly Kremers, Jeffrey Williams
Molly Kathleen Kremers, the daughter of Eileen Montgomery Kremers of Sayville, L.I., and Dr.
Marshall N. Kremers of Huntington, L.I., was married yesterday to Jeffrey Robert Williams, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Robert C. Williams of Alfred, N.Y.
The Rev.
Robert Taylor performed the ceremony at St.
John's Episcopal Church in Oakdale, L.I.
Mrs.
Williams, 25, is the office manager at Edy's Grand Ice Cream Northeast in Albany.
She graduated from Alfred University, from which she and her husband received master's degrees in community service administration.
Her mother is the coordinator of Suffolk County Stop-DWI, a division of the Suffolk County Executive's office in Hauppauge, L.I.
The bride's father is a professor of English at the New York Institute of Technology in Old Westbury, L.I., where her stepmother, Paula Wagner Kremers, is an admissions counselor.


For Safety's Sake and Their Own, Towns Learn to Pamper Pedestrians
New Jersey municipalities used to be primarily concerned with moving traffic through town as quickly as possible.
Now that concern is shifting -- from cars and trucks to people on foot.
By state law, motorists must yield to pedestrians in crosswalks.
But unlike California, where drivers actually do yield -- and are universally berated if they don't -- New Jersey seldom enforces the law.


Politics as a Numbers Game: G.O.P.'s No. 1 Is Threatened
By the standards of Brooklyn politics, Arthur Bramwell is something of an anomaly.
Mr.
Bramwell is the chairman of the Republican Party in one of the most heavily Democratic counties in the nation, a man who came up through a Bedford-Stuyvesant political clubhouse in a party centered around Bay Ridge, and a black man in a party that is mostly white.


THEY FEEL FOR YOU
In the 1960's, Hallmark and all the leading card companies depended heavily upon freelance submissions of humorous card ideas (a practice since pretty well abandoned).
I was one of the 20 or so best-selling freelancers who actually made a comfortable living in this then-lucrative market.
Today, Hallmark may have its rural retreat and its experts, but it amuses me to glance through a rack of cards and still find some of my original gags after all these years.
HARRY PRIVETTE Randolph, Mass.


'The Sorcerer' Will Replace 'The Pirates of Penzance' at Purchase College
JOHN WELLINGTON WELLS, Gilbert and Sullivan's dealer in magic and spells, not to mention blessings and curses and ever-fill'd purses, is en route to Purchase College for performances next Saturday and Sunday of "The Sorcerer," replacing the fully staged production of "Pirates of Penzance" that had been promised, then postponed, precisely for lack of a filled purse.
"The Sorcerer" is not nearly so popular an opera as "Pirates," but it will be given in semi-staged concert form, thus saving a good part of the $400,000 it cost to mount last year's "H.M.S. Pinafore." It also brings back three of the same British singers who sailed the ocean blue -- Ann Howard, Eric Roberts and Gordon Sandison -- and will again have Paul Lustig Dunkel conducting the Westchester Philharmonic.


Hugh Grant Had a Chance To Resist the Media Hype
To the Editor:
Hugh Grant's dilemma -- discussed by four publicists in your July 16 article "The World Series of Damage Control" -- was in deciding whether to succumb to a sickening trend of media hype over the personal lives of public figures or to rise above the fascination swirling around his incident and make peace only with himself.


IN SHORT: FICTION
SPINSTERS  By Pagan Kennedy. High Risk/Serpent's Tail, paper, $12.99.


RESULTS PLUS
SOCCER  Colombia Rips the U.S.
Colombia trounced the United States, 4-1, yesterday in Maldonado, Uruguay, to take third place in the America Cup and avenge its defeat at the hands of the Americans in the 1994 World Cup.


Congressional Memo; After Bad Week, G.O.P. Looks to Budget for Help
The Republicans had a bad week on Capitol Hill.
A Democratic filibuster killed regulatory legislation in the Senate.
Republicans from both houses admitted they had given up on enacting a line-item veto this year.
It became clear that the Republicans could not agree on a broad strategy to oppose affirmative action policies, the senators remained split on welfare and even in the more conservative House Republicans gave up on killing public broadcasting and legal services for the poor.


Permit Revoked for Toys 'R' Us; Store Vows to Fight
In a triumph for the Upper East Side coalition fighting the opening of a Toys 'R' Us superstore, the City's zoning board voted 3 to 2 last week to revoke the project's construction permit.
That forced crews to halt months of work converting a warehouse at 80th Street and Third Avenue for the store.
But the dispute is far from over: Toys 'R' Us vowed to appeal in court.


Suzanne Cucci, James Geary
Suzanne Cucci, a daughter of Arthur M. Cucci of Hicksville, L.I., was married on Friday to James Anthony Geary, the son of Hedy and Robert Geary of Ronkonkoma, L.I.
The Rev.
Peter Liu performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at Our Lady of Mercy Church in Hicksville.
Mrs.
Geary, 25, graduated last month from Queens College.
Her father is a builder at Crescent Installations, building fireproofing installers in Woodbury, L.I.


Mahi-Mahi, Fresh and Simple for Summer
SIMPLE and fresh are the only demands summer makes on the dinner menu.
The following array is a good example.
The fish, mahi-mahi, which is available from local waters, is firm and easily grilled.


Extra-Large Funds Don't Deserve Sneers
BIG funds generally get a bad rap from investment advisers.
Watch out for huge funds, the advisers say, because they will have trouble producing the blockbuster returns that lured all that money in the first place.
Ballooning funds are forced to buy bigger stocks with less potential, the argument goes, and managers cannot make big bets on personal favorites without violating certain rules on concentration.
"All things being equal, I'd choose the smaller fund," said Craig A. Litman, a principal in Litman/Gregory, an investment management firm in San Francisco that specializes in mutual funds.


TEETH: Look, Ma, All Cavities!
Since 1989, Nancy (Dr. Bukk) Albert has cast more than 8,000 sets of plastic Hollywood Style Fake Teeth in the kitchen of her Augusta, Ga., home.
Bukk teeth, as in buckteeth, have model names like Gnarly, Mongrel, Zipper and Incest.
The demented dentata have become popular props for a cult of Southern well-breds (top photo) who appear at dance clubs as clodhopping inbreds (bottom photo, the original Dr. Bukk model).
Maybe they're working out a sense of Southern inferiority.
Or maybe the teeth are just the dental version of a redneck joke.
Folks with bad teeth are among the few remaining acceptable targets of nasty humor.


'Smoke' Was Not Filmed In Yuppified Park Slope
To the Editor:
In your July 9 article "Do the Movies Get New York Right?" Caryn James neglected, as have many reviewers, to point out that the site of the cigar store in "Smoke" was actually not in Park Slope but in the adjacent and less yuppified neighborhood of Windsor Terrace.


Beware the Rosy Reasoning of Tech Bulls
WHEN investors in technology stocks got a wake-up call last week, it came in the form of a bugle blast.
In two turbulent days, the technology-dominated Nasdaq composite index lost 5.3 percent of its value.
While the index rebounded a bit on Thursday and Friday, it still finished the week down 3.7 percent.


Hey, Kids, Get to Know Your Pals in Blue!
IN the recess yard at Our Lady of Perpetual Help grade school, Maple Shade, N.J., we would have been flabbergasted, circa 1959, to hear that kids of the future would be trading cop cards instead of baseball cards.
Back then, the only cop we routinely encountered was a patrolman we nicknamed Bluto, a menacing mouth-breather who looked like a Wurlitzer jukebox that somebody had left a tiny blue cap on top of.
Our entire concept of the criminal justice system was summed up by the phrase "Yikes, here comes Bluto."


Wharton Grave
To the Editor:
I visited Edith Wharton's grave in the Cimetiere des Gonards at Versailles this spring carrying the clipping of Barbara Shoup's article "In Search of Edith Wharton" (Jan. 23, 1994).
Barbara Shoup had reported the grave in poor condition, "weathered, mottled with bird droppings and mold." A caretaker in blue work clothes peered at the photo in the clipping and said he recognized the grave, which had recently been cleaned.
He showed me the location on a cemetery map and pointed up a hill where I found the grave, in glowing white stone, with fresh gravel pebbles around the borders, two pots of Scotch heather at the head.
I told him the grave looked well cared for.
The caretaker told me a movie had recently been made of Wharton's life -- he was probably thinking of "The Age of Innocence" -- and that was why her tomb had been cleaned.
He was cordial and thanked me for visiting.
JACK BRYANT  Cornwall, Conn.


Winding Down With Some Beethoven
TWO popular warm-weather series are already calling it a summer: "Beethoven Bravo" at the Wadsworth Atheneum and Summer at the Center at Wesleyan University.
Chamber Music Plus has not strictly held true to the titular promise of its "Beethoven Bravo" cycle at the Wadsworth Atheneum in Hartford; earlier programs have included works of Faure, Mozart and Kuhlau, among others -- and Tuesday evening at 8, the pattern continues with Beethoven's early Piano Quartet in C followed by Rossini's G major Sonata for Strings and Schubert's "Trout" Quintet.
Among the performers are Renee Jolles, violinist; Lois Martin, violist; Harry Clark, cellist, and Sanda Schuldmann, pianist.
For more details, call 232-0085.


[ APPEARANCES ] ; High Brow
AS SOON AS I WAS OLD ENOUGH TO READ Nancy Drew, I grasped the concept that eyebrows signal emotion.
His brows knit in concentration. . . .
Her brows flew up in surprise.
But it has only been through a series of awakenings that I've come to realize the extent to which eyebrows also signal fashion awareness, grooming philosophy, orientation in time and where one stands in the continuum between herd allegiance and self-expression.
As a kid, I may even have gawked at a few women whose thin, penciled crescents made them seem like escapees from old black-and-white movies, never considering what went into achieving such a look or that young women of my generation might be altering their brows.
Then one day, junior year in high school, L. walked into physics with swollen red bumps over her eyes.
This excited a lot of talk. (L. was a very pretty girl.) It turned out that L.'s mother had caused the swelling by plucking L.'s eyebrows, pulling out the hairs one by one.
I had read that American Indians did this to their beards, one of many fascinating tortures they went through to become warriors.
But it seemed inconceivable that a mother and daughter in Briarcliff Manor would have engaged in such a painful rite.


NEW YORKER'S &amp; CO.
Insider Guides to New York: For Cat Care, Quietude . . .
City &amp; Company, a small publishing company started in January, has almost sold out of its first run of guides to New York for New Yorkers, and is now starting on a new series.
The new titles include a "Guide to Fitness &amp; Health"; "50 Best Places to Find Peace and Quiet"; "Cat Owner's Guide: Everything You and Your Cat Need to Know About Your Life in the City," and "50 Best Night Spots."


THEATER: UP AND COMING -- Caroline Seymour; 'A Difficult Peg to Fit' Finds Her Place in New York
AS JEAN, THE ACCOMMODATING but deeply anguished woman at the center of Mike Leigh's ensemble drama, "Ecstasy," Caroline Seymour is the embodiment of the wan, economically enslaved British working class, circa 1979.
Living in a squalid, one-room flat in north London, working at a gas station, Jean drinks, smokes, has semi-consensual sex with a galoot she hardly knows and lies to herself and to her equally trapped friends that life is bearable.
It is well into the second act before she lets slip a fantasy.
"My character says, 'I want to go to America,' " Ms.
Seymour said in an interview on the set at the Judith Anderson Theater on West 42d Street, where the play has just reopened after a move.
"And every night I think, 'Bloody 'ell, I made it! This girl didn't.' "


LIVE AND LET DIE
Harriet Brickman's story of her father's death highlights two important things to do, under similar stressful circumstances, in this age of medical miracles (Hers: "Live and Let Die," July 2).
First, find a personal physician when you don't really need one, when you are sound in mind and body and can talk about "heroic" measures.
Secondly, identify a hospital in your area that is not a "teaching institution" or a university hospital associated with a medical school.
This might be a community hospital or one associated with a religious order.
This type of hospital will not be populated with medical students, interns, residents, fellows and faculty members.
Teaching hospitals are fine and necessary, but not the place to die quietly and with dignity.
ALBERT A. MACPHAIL, M.D.
East Orleans, Mass.


. . . or Shut Up
I AM NOT PREPARED TO SEE THE party I care for laid out on the rack like this any longer," said the British Prime Minister John Major, using a metaphor of torture to describe the internecine warfare going on in the Conservative Party. "In short, it is time to put up or shut up."
Only a few days before, Christopher Darden, a prosecutor in the O. J. Simpson trial, issued a challenge to the defense's lead attorney, Johnnie Cochran Jr.: "You've been mouthing off for the past 12 months. . . . Now is the time to put up or shut up."


Rangers Say Larmer Is Retiring
STEVE LARMER of the Rangers, a veteran right wing who played an integral role in New York's 1994 Stanley Cup championship, has apparently decided to retire, according to the Rangers.
Larmer, who has played 14 seasons in the National Hockey League, reached the 1,000 plateau in both points and games played last season.


INSIDE
MUTUAL FUNDS /Page 6  Buy small, the investment advisers often say.
Frequently, though, big is anything but bad.
By Carole Gould.
SPENDING IT /Page 9  The invasion of the cyberthieves and other issues of financial privacy.
Off the Rack, by Brett Brune.
EARNING IT /Page 10  Their businesses are modern versions of the mom-and-pop store, and their numbers are growing.
By Constance L. Hays.
VOICES /Page 12  Discovering the American dream: The underappreciated joys of home dis-ownership.
By Jonathan Cohen.


Indelible Visions of a Faded World
AMERICAN INDIANS ONCE hunted the bluffs over the deep glacial lake called Otsego in central New York -- the lake James Fenimore Cooper called Glimmerglass -- and much of what they saw still exists today.
Deer are a hazard on the old road between Cooperstown and nearby Cherry Valley; coyote, lynxes and wolves reportedly roam the forests again.
The hill-and-valley terrain boasts sudden, romantic changes of weather, and the stars are brilliant at night.
Cooperstown, a pristine waterside cluster of Early American houses 70 miles west of Albany, is best known as the mecca of baseball (the sport's Hall of Fame is here) and as the site of the Glimmerglass Opera.
But it is also home to the New York State Historical Association, a century-old research archive whose rich holdings in 19th-century American documents and paintings are housed on the site of a farm owned by Cooper.


Vanya Redux


Agents Turning To Service Fees
HENRY and Olga Yaniz, who own A. A. Yaniz Tours in Hollywood, Fla., do not charge their clients "service fees." "That's a no-no," Mr.
Yaniz said.
"We charge a processing fee." By whatever name, it is $10 for an airline ticket, and the agency has charged it since February without apparent loss of clients, he said.
Such fees are being encountered increasingly since the airlines announced in February that they would cut back agents' commissions on domestic tickets beginning in April, by putting a $50 ceiling on the 10 percent usually paid.
It is still easy to use an agency that does not levy one.
But most agencies are being pinched, and by a year from now, according to Judith Zacek of Newtonville, Mass., a leading consultant in the industry, some will be out of business, still more will be charging fees and the rest may be less willing to search out the right little hotel to go with your frequent-flier ticket.


What Do You Want?


Attack of the Cyberthieves, and Other Assaults
CYBERTHIS. Cyberthat. Could it all be cyberhell?
As we venture through the digital gates into information heaven, it might be wise to recall earthly matters.
Like theft, for starters.


Ms. Haggerty, Mr. Zidar
Marianne Elizabeth Haggerty, the daughter of John F. Haggerty of Forest Hills Gardens, Queens, and the late Elizabeth A. Haggerty, was married yesterday to Thomas Patrick Zidar, a son of Patricia A. Zidar of Bloomfield Hills, Mich., and the late Owen C. Zidar.
The Rev.
Stephen P. Newton performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at the Basilica of the Sacred Heart at the University of Notre Dame in Notre Dame, Ind.
Mrs.
Zidar, 24, and her husband, 26, graduated from Notre Dame, from which the bride also received a master's degree in English literature in May.
The bride's father, who was formerly the chief counsel to the New York State Senate's Republican majority, is now a court-appointed examiner in Forest Hills Gardens for the State Supreme Court's Appellate Division, Second Department.


For Very Strange Bedfellows, Try Redistricting
Late in June, on the day after the United States Supreme Court invalidated Georgia Congressional districting that had created three districts with majorities of black voters, State Representative Billy McKinney, a black Democrat, received telephone calls from three white Republican legislators.
The Court's ruling meant that the Legislature would have to redraw Congressional districts, and the Republicans, whose party in Georgia is overwhelmingly white, wanted to know whether Mr.
McKinney would work with them to try to preserve as many black districts as possible.


Graham Greene, Bigot
To the Editor:
In his review of "Graham Greene: The Enemy Within" (July 2), Martin Stannard does his best to ridicule my criticisms of Greene's racism and other "moral failings," but Mr.
Stannard's snide comments are no substitute for hard evidence.
If he had given serious consideration to Greene's virulent anti-Semitism, he might have been less eager to mock my "politically correct" views.


We Can't Afford Luxury of Financing the Arts
To the Editor:
The logic in "Legislators Against the Arts" (editorial, July 19) seems convoluted.
On one hand you insist that because our constituencies are dependent on the arts, we should be held accountable for voting to phase out the National Endowment for the Arts, but on the other hand you rightly point out that the "arts in New York will not, of course, die without Federal support."


Corrections
An article and a picture caption in the Neighborhood Report on July 9 about old movie theaters in Queens that are used as churches misidentified the theater at Jamaica Avenue and 175th Street.
It was the Carlton, not the Regency.
The article also misstated the type of film shown by the Carlton and another theater, the Valencia, before their closings.
Both theaters showed mainstream films, not pornography.


POSTINGS: 7,500-Square-Foot Addition Planned; City Bar Association To Grow In Place
When the Association of the Bar of the City of New York was trying to find room in its building for more staff members and meeting rooms, it did what lawyers are trained to do: read the fine print.
By careful study of the floor plans, the association has found a way to add 7,500 square feet to the 38,000-square-foot, century-old structure at 42 West 44th Street, across from the New York Yacht Club.
When renovations are completed next year, as part of the group's 125th anniversary, the building should house 150 staff members, many of whom work next door at No. 36.


July 16-22; E-Mail
The Week in Review's electronic mail address is review@nytimes.com


Compromising Positions?
THE publisher of an investment newsletter recommends a stock the same month he receives potentially lucrative warrants for 100,000 shares from the company.
A shareholder/director of three mutual fund companies publishes a mutual fund newsletter recommending funds from those groups.


Corrections
A list in the Neighborhood Report last Sunday with an article about efforts to restore the Van Cortlandt House Museum in the Bronx misstated the museum's availability to the public.
While only two rooms have been renovated and restored, all nine rooms are open to the public.


France Takes Tougher Line On Foreigners
France's new conservative Government ostentatiously deported a planeload of undocumented Africans this week, moving quickly to demonstrate that it will take a tough line against illegal immigration.
But its decision to start expelling large numbers of foreigners has brought loud protests from human rights groups here.


July 16-22; Tax Fraud Trips Up 2 Old Sluggers
Two aging stars from baseball's seemingly more innocent days turned up in Brooklyn last week, but this was no return to the sunshine of Ebbets Field.
Duke Snider, who hit 407 home runs in 18 seasons and starred in center field for the Brooklyn Dodgers in their headiest days, and Willie McCovey, who hit 521 in 22 seasons, were there to plead guilty to tax fraud charges in Federal Court.
In both cases, the accusations involved failure to report tens of thousands of dollars in income from memorabilia shows and promotional appearances over the course of several years; a 1989 sports memorabilia show in Atlantic City figured in both sets of charges.


DANGEROUS WORLD: Virus by Fedex
How do you ship several thousand strains of dangerous viruses 1,700 miles from one sterile lab to another?
By Fedex.
Last December, Yale University lost the two chief researchers at its Arbovirus Research Unit to the University of Texas Medical Branch Center for Tropical Diseases in Galveston.
They wanted to take their work with them.
Arboviruses are those passed to humans by insects, some of which cause diseases like dengue fever and encephalitis.
Earlier in the year, the Yale lab had been the site of a near-fatal spill of Sabia virus, for which a visiting researcher was disciplined.


Work at Home? Secret Vices?
Alphabetizing your CD's.
Conducting a search-and-destroy mission for last night's popcorn.
Tuning in (just for a minute) to Sally Jessy.
Unlike the rest of us, people who work at home have all the comforts -- and distractions -- of home.
What's your secret workday vice?
Send your story to On the Job, c/o Money and Business, The New York Times, 229 West 43d Street, New York, N.Y. 10036.
Or by E-mail to onthejob@nytimes.com.
Include your phone number.
All submissions become the property of The Times and may be republished in any medium.


Susan D. Laney, Garry B. Spector
Susan Diane Laney, an oboist in the Metropolitan Opera Orchestra in New York, was married yesterday to Dr.
Garry Bruce Spector, the senior scientist at Fibertek Inc., a defense contractor in Herndon, Va.
The Rev.
Richard Davis performed the ceremony at the First Presbyterian Church in Tahlequah, Okla.
Mrs.
Spector, 32, graduated from Wichita State Univerisity and received her master's degree in music from Temple University.
She is the daughter of Sandra and David Laney of Tahlequah.
The bride's father is an assistant professor of art history and humanities at Northeastern State University, and her mother teaches music at Greenwood Elementary School, both in Tahlequah.


Some Familiar Faces, From Foreign Places
IN spite of the dry soil and soaring temperatures, some plants are getting along just fine this summer.
They are called weeds.
These particular plants are quite clever.
They huddle near ornamentals as if to disguise themselves, or worse, they grow so close in and under favored plants that they are sometimes not seen.


Christina Gerney and Eric Dillmann
Christina Maria Gerney, the daughter of Brigitte Gerney of New York and the late Arkadi Gerney, was married yesterday to Eric Christopher Dillmann, the son of Susan and Dr.
Christopher Dillmann of Williamstown, Mass.
The Rev.
Paula Peterson, an interfaith minister, performed the ceremony in the rose garden of the bride's mother's house in Southampton, L.I.
The bride and her husband graduated from the Maryland Institute College of Art.
Mrs.
Gerney-Dillmann, 24, is a painter in Manchester, Vt.
Her father was the president of J. Gerney &amp; Company, a former New York-based manufacturers' representative company in the steel industry.


Maria Sophocles, John A. Martin
Dr.
Maria Eleni Sophocles, a daughter of Annette and Dr.
George M. Sophocles of Malvern, Pa., was married yesterday to John Alexander Martin, a son of Barbara and Daniel R. Martin of Scarsdale, N.Y.
The Rev.
Stephen Theophilos officiated at the Greek Orthodox Church of St.
Luke in Broomall, Pa.
Dr.
Sophocles, who is 30 and is keeping her name, recently completed her residency in obstetrics and gynecology at the Greater Baltimore Medical Center in Baltimore.
In September she is to begin practicing at Main Line Women's Health Care Associates, a medical group in Bryn Mawr, Pa.
She graduated cum laude from Duke University and received her medical degree from Thomas Jefferson Medical College.
Her father is an oral surgeon at Paoli (Pa.) Memorial Hospital.


The Other Sides of Paradise
SCOTTIE The Daughter of . . .: The Life of Frances Scott Fitzgerald Lanahan Smith.
By Eleanor Lanahan.
Illustrated. 624 pp.
New York:  HarperCollins Publishers.
INTIMATE LIES  F. Scott Fitzgerald and Sheilah Graham:  Her Son's Story.
By Robert Westbrook.
Illustrated. 502 pp.
New York:  HarperCollins Publishers.


More Planes to Russia, Bahamas and Alaska
Several international routes are being added by North American and Israeli airlines.
Carnival Airlines, (800) 824-7386, has begun nonstop service between New York and the Bahamas.
Boeing 737 flights leave Kennedy International Airport Thursday through Monday mornings; return flights depart late in the afternoon the same days.
Fares start at $119 each way.


Objection!
To the Editor:
As the co-author with Michael Oppenheimer of "Dead Heat" (1990), I object to Gregg Easterbrook's letter of June 25, in which he falsely characterizes our book, which is about the threats posed by global warming, as advancing "dubious claims" and "spurious argument."


On Electronic Highway, Manhattan Is A Destination
YOU can't call it the software industry anymore, because its products go well beyond computer programs.
Multimedia is too all-encompassing, while information technology seems to exclude entertainment products.
Interactive technology probably comes closest, at least until some newly-coined expression -- infoware is a recent one -- takes hold.
But whatever this amorphous industry is called, the people who form its creative backbone -- the ones who dream up the steady stream of products flitting across the internet, powering business computers, starring in interactive television entertainment and fueling the insatiable lust for video games -- are flocking to this city.


Making Room for the Rubenesque
ON a Saturday night at Nell's on 14th Street, fashionably dressed, slim women sip drinks coyly at the bar.
Their eyes dart about, they run their hands self-consciously through their hair.
Men lean against the bar, predacious, chatting nominally with their pals.
The hunters and the hunted exchange glances, sometimes stares.
The scene is quintessential New York City nightlife.
But 30 blocks uptown, the scene has taken a twist of generous proportions.


Bud Feuchtwanger, Irene Kaminsky
Dr.
Irene Kaminsky, a psychologist in New York, was married on Friday to Joseph Bud Feuchtwanger 3d, a management consultant, also in New York.
Rabbi Myron Kinberg performed the ceremony on Cooper's Beach in Southampton, L.I.
Dr.
Kaminsky is also a psychologist at the Jewish Board of Family and Children's Services in New York.
She graduated from Syracuse University and received her Ph.D. in psychology from New York University.
She is the daughter of the late Lydia and Dr.
Anatole Kaminsky.
The bride's father was a physician in general practice in New York.


CHATTER: Censor the Internet; How Much Control?
What, if anything, should be done to limit sexually explicit material on the Internet?
How far do we go in policing the Internet before it becomes a violation of freedom of speech?
What is the punishment if one is found guilty of a conduct violation?
Fines?
On-line banishment?
STEFEN SHADY Palmdale, Calif.


If Your Thinking of Living In/Marble Hill; A Bit of Manhattan in the Bronx
YES, you have crossed the Harlem River and, yes, that is the northern tip of Manhattan island that you can see to the south.
But as residents of Marble Hill are quick to point out, you are not in the Bronx: because of a 19th-century public works project that reshaped Manhattan island and severed its topmost land, Marble Hill is across the river and into what logically should be the Bronx.
It is a quirky and little-known neighborhood whose residents consider it a well-kept secret.
Where else in Manhattan can you find a six-bedroom, three-story house on a quiet, tree-lined street with an attic, a basement, an enclosed front porch and a pretty facade for sale for $174,000?
Or a three-family house with six bedrooms on an architecturally magnificent street with an asking price of $295,000?


Correction
An article on June 4 about archeological digs for tourists in Israel included a telephone number erroneously.
A letter dated July 5 points out that United Tours no longer sets up the digs.
As the article said, arrangements can made through Archeological Seminars in Jerusalem, (972-2) 273515.


New Zealander Brings the Old Course to Its Knees
A freshening wind, the sort the Scots would call a "proper wind," blew hard out of the north across the Old Course today, and a fresh face rode it right into the lead of the British Open.
Michael Campbell, a 26-year-old native of New Zealand who is playing in just his second Open, shot a stunning round of 65 -- lowest of the championship and by three strokes the lowest round of the cold, blustery day -- and charged to the top of a leader board dominated by a golf version of the United Nations.
Nine countries are represented in the first 15 spots.


Nasdaq Index Flirts With 1,000, Perhaps Ahead of Its Time
Though it was hammered for much of last week, the Nasdaq composite stock index reached a milestone early on: It reached 1,000 points for the first time.
True, the event on Monday did not lead to excessive jubilation.
A stock-market rout followed on Tuesday and Wednesday as technology companies, pervasive in the index, turned in earnings that disappointed.


Building a Bridge
The nine-mile bridge that will connect Prince Edward Island to the Canadian mainland starting in May 1997 doesn't have a name yet, but it has its own tour.
The 35-minute excursion explains the technology required to build the link (which will consist of 44 concrete spans on pilings), the environmental safeguards being incorporated into it and the economic impact of the project.


We Can't Afford Luxury of Financing the Arts; Upstate Benefits Too
To the Editor:
"Legislators Against the Arts" (editorial, July 19) accuses me of "joining the anti-arts swing" in Congress.
You then go on to forgive me, saying, in effect, that the arts do not matter that much in upstate New York.
You are wrong on both counts.


Take It From a Composer: This Is How the Music Goes
VIRGIL THOMSON, WHO perfected the art of the sweeping generalization, used to say that conductors who were composers brought something to their music-making that conductors who were just performers, however brilliant, did not.
Composer-conductors might not be as technically proficient or as able to elicit sumptuous orchestral sound as their noncomposing counterparts, but they could show you how a piece of music was supposed to go.
Like many of Thomson's sweeping generalizations, this one, which is brought to mind by some new reissues of Benjamin Britten performances on Decca/London, stands up surprisingly well to analysis.
Think of Eugene Ormandy, a masterly orchestra builder.
Under Ormandy, the Philadelphia Orchestra was renowned for its technical excellence and rich sound. ("One would like to stroke its tone," Thomson once wrote of the string section.) But one did not turn to Ormandy for probing performances.
His work was always beautiful, always musical, seldom revelatory.


CHATTER: Censor the Internet; Against Censorship
What, if anything, should be done to limit sexually explicit material on the Internet?
Young or old, you have to look for sex on the Internet.
People who want to censor the Internet want to censor any discussion or description of sexual life.
That's wrong.
VINCE LEO Minneapolis


T-Shirts Don't Count
Anyone looking for a tacky T-shirt on his next trip to Washington will have to shop some place other than the Mall.
The long strip of parkland between the Capitol and the Washington Monument was cleared of most T-shirt vendors on July 2 when a Federal judge ruled that the only items that may be sold there are printed materials -- books, pamphlets, bumper stickers and the like -- pertaining to a political cause.


Foreign Afffairs; Enter Le Bulldozer
Now this could get interesting.
Jacques Chirac has only been President of France for two months, but in that brief span he has demonstrated that he is going to pose a very different challenge for Washington than his predecessors.
Mr.
Chirac has signaled that he won't be content playing the traditional French role of annoying the U.S., by ostentatiously asserting French independence but ultimately falling in line behind American leadership.
No, no, Mr.
Chirac is hunting bigger game.
He aspires to supplant Washington as leader of the Western alliance, period, full stop, hand over the keys.


The Troubled House of Starting Pitching Includes a Revolving Door
Not even their mothers would think their names are of the household variety.
Some of them materialize so quickly -- and stay so briefly -- that even a scorecard wouldn't help.
Many of them started games in the space of a few days last week: Dilson Torres and Melvin Bunch of Kansas City, Jose Lima of Detroit, Jeff Suppan of Boston, Mike Sirotka of the Chicago White Sox, Rafael Carmona of Seattle, Edwin Hurtado of Toronto, Brian Boehringer of the Yankees, Bryan Rekar of Colorado, Ugueth Urbina of Montreal, Steve Parris and John Ericks of Pittsburgh, Glenn Dishman of San Diego, Bill Pulsipher and Jason Isringhausen of the Mets.


No Headline
"I've been many places, and now they're not better than here. It's not worth moving for." -- LEONID BERSHIDSKY, a Russian journalist.  [ 12:5. ]


July 16-22; The Greeks Knew About Fortune
These days, Democrats in Congress like to take the long view.
Senator Robert C. Byrd of West Virginia, who has been majority leader, minority leader, majority leader again, president pro tempore, chairman of the Appropriations Committee and now is the ranking Democrat on the Appropriations Committee, does it best.


Bluegrass, Rock and Jazz, Live, on the Pier
IF you live around the South Street Seaport, you probably can tell when six o'clock rolls around.
How, you ask?
Is it the crush of harried commuters headed home?
The aroma of the crews cleaning up the Fulton Fish Market?
Or when the angle of the sun is just so?
Nope. It's when the music starts.


CHATTER: Censor the Internet; Don't Seek, Don't Find
What, if anything, should be done to limit sexually explicit material on the Internet?
I haven't seen a bit of porn, because I haven't looked for any.
At my local drugstore, I can't locate a copy of Time magazine without scanning the displays of lewd ones.
At least on the Internet, we have a choice.
JOE ORAWCZYK Yermo, Calif.


Passions Loosed In Queens For Soccer
Ivo Perelman left his studio apartment on the Lower East Side, stepped onto an uptown F train and headed toward the giant television screens of Queens.
A jazz musician and immigrant from Brazil, he wanted to be as close to Latin America as he could get during the America Cup soccer tournament that ends today.
His destination: Jackson Heights.
In a neighborhood that has become a crossroads of a diverse range of Latin American social clubs and discotecas -- where Uruguayan bars abut Ecuadoran, Argentine and Chilean restaurants -- Mr.
Perelman settled into a Colombian restaurant called Chibcha on Roosevelt Avenue.
As he watched the United States-Brazil game on Thursday night, he seemed to inhale the fervor of the other patrons, fellow Latin American immigrants.


The World; Iron Fist Meets Rubber Face
RUSSIANS have always loved a political joke, mostly because the punchline has always been illicit.
Before 1917, people could be put in jail for publicly mocking the Czar.
In Communist times, the slightest crack about party leaders landed people in Siberia. (Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn, not usually known for his sense of humor, was sent to the Gulag for irreverently describing Stalin as "the mustached one," in a letter to a friend.)
Under Mikhail Gorbachev's perestroika, the rules slackened a bit, and high-minded satire began slipping onto radio and television, but never anything as low-down and biting as the average Reagan skit on "Saturday Night Live."


Jackson Hole
Forty years ago, residents thought gambling was a big tourist draw in this western Wyoming resort town.
Games of chance were illegal, but leaders in Jackson persuaded state government and law enforcement to look the other way.
In 1955, however, Gov.
Milward L. Simpson couldn't ignore it any longer, despite local pleas that cracking down would ruin tourism.
Pressured by out-of-state publicity, the governor seized the slot machines and gaming tables at the Wort Hotel.
Jackson's merchants, as it turned out, had little to worry about -- there were plenty of other attractions.
An estimated 1.8 million tourists are expected here this summer to live the cowboy life at a dude ranch, hike nature trails, climb the Tetons or run the Snake River.
The arts have also flourished amid the natural splendor, with the 34th annual Grand Teton Music Festival continuing through Aug. 26 and Western art on permanent display in the National Wildlife Art Museum.


The Week That Was Bad, and Real Bad
Oh, so that is what a really bad day in the stock market feels like.
Until lunchtime last Wednesday, bad days had become so infrequent that professional traders seemed momentarily addled when technology stocks led a lemming-like plunge in midday prices across all the major stock markets.


Devils Raise Prices
The Stanley Cup champion New Jersey Devils may have decided against going south, but their ticket prices have gone north.


FUNDS WATCH
True Candor From Fund Proves Timely
T.
Rowe Price sent a cautionary letter about unrealistic performance expectations to some technology fund shareholders just weeks after John C. Bogle, chairman of the Vanguard Group, wrote a similar one to investors in the Vanguard Index funds.


Fort Totten Proposal: Give It to the Gateway
With a little more than a month to go before the future of Fort Totten is decided, a proposal to convert the historic base into a park is gaining support among community leaders.
Sean Walsh, chairman of the United Civic Council of Queens, a group of civic presidents, has offered a proposal to local community boards and the Queens borough president's office which would merge the base into Gateway National Park.
"This is a practical idea because it's cheaper to run than the military base and what's already out here could stay," he said.


'A Man's World'
To the Editor:
I am writing to protest Stephen L. Carter's affirmation of Ellis Cose's misogynistic polemic on wife beating in "A Man's World" (June 25).


Sasha Penner, Christian Nahr
Alexandra Suzanne Penner, the daughter of former Ambassador and Mrs.
Vernon D. Penner of Casteau, Belgium, was married yesterday to Jochen Christian Nahr, a son of Luzie and Wilhelm Nahr of Bethesda, Md.
The Rev.
Henning Ehlers, the Protestant chaplain at the Supreme Headquarters Allied Powers Europe, performed the ceremony at the Church of St.
Martin in Horrues, Belgium.
The Rev.
Cynthia Skripak, a Methodist minister who is a cousin of the bride, participated.
Mrs.
Nahr, who is 26 and is known as Sasha, was until recently the associate photo editor at Vogue magazine in New York.
She graduated magna cum laude from Tufts University, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa.
Her father, who was the American Ambassador to the Republic of Cape Verde from 1986 to 1989, is the international affairs adviser to the Supreme Allied Commander, Europe and to the Allied Command Europe of NATO in Casteau.


POSTINGS: Photographs by Karl Strauss at Equitable Gallery; A New York City That Has Vanished
Illuminated hands of a clock point to 5:40 on the Metropolitan Life Insurance Tower at East 24th Street.
A light caps the tower.
Street lamps glow below.
It is a moment in 1909, the year the tower by Cass Gilbert was completed, captured in a platinum print by the New York-born photographer and cinematographer Karl Struss (1886-1981).
The vintage print, "Metropolitan Tower at Twilight," is one of more than 100 in "New York to Hollywood: The Photography of Karl Struss," an exhibit opening Friday at the Equitable Gallery, 787 Seventh Avenue at 51st Street.
"Among the most intriguing images are views of the city that no longer exist," said Pari Stave, the gallery director.
"He captured the now-vanished Penn Station and a moment in history when the horse-drawn carriage was being replaced by the elevated train."


A Classic Tale Springs From the Cupboard
Nine Months  Hugh Grant, Julianne Moore, Tom Arnold, Joan Cusack, Robin Williams Directed by Chris Columbus PG-13 100 minutes


CHATTER: Censor the Internet; Don't Mind the Neighbors
What, if anything, should be done to limit sexually explicit material on the Internet?
America, try raising your kids instead of the moral fiber of your neighbors.
Quit worrying about the guy next door and live your own life.
The guy next door doesn't care what you think.
I know.
I live next door.
MICHAEL W. LAMONS Cincinnati


Stalking a Man of Words With Music
THE LEAST LIKELY OF recent American operas, "Modern Painters," will be given its premiere at the Santa Fe Opera on Saturday.
It has for its central character John Ruskin (1819-1900), esthetic dictator, architectural preservationist, social reformer and incomparable poet in prose.
With his "Stones of Venice," his "Seven Lamps of Architecture" and, above all, the 2,000 and more pages of his "Modern Painters" (1843-60), Ruskin gave a new dimension to writing on art for a broad public. (He also campaigned for the old-age pension and for universal state education in Britain.)


Sports of The Times; I'll Take 'They Should Have Known Better' for $50
LIGHTS.
Camera.
Theme song.
Pat O'Brien jogs out and welcomes us to America's newest game show, "Sports Jeopardy," where contestants are given the answers but must guess the questions about the latest misdeeds and public-relations disasters in sports.
This week's "Sports Jeopardy" categories: Locked Out, Let Out, Punched Out, Sold Out, Stoned Out and Freaked Out.


Lisa Peck, Michael Goldberg
Lisa Beth Peck, a trial counsel for the enforcement division of the New York Stock Exchange, is to be married today to Michael Adam Goldberg, an associate at Chemical Securities in New York.
Rabbi Ramie Arian is to officiate at the Brooklyn Botanic Garden.
The bride, 31, graduated from George Washington University and received her law degree from Emory University.
She is a daughter of Carol and Aaron Peck of Virginia Beach, Va.


Puerto Rico Reeling Under Scourge Of Drugs and Rising Gang Violence
It used to be that robberies and the occasional assault were the worst crimes in this coastal town of 40,000 people west of San Juan.
That was before "the massacre of Caserio Zorrilla" or the discovery of the bullet-riddled body of a 12-year-old boy by a nearby river.
"Overnight, a monster awakened," said Sgt.
Eugenio Montes of the police, who specializes in homicide investigations.


New Leader Of Mormons Takes Joy In Changes
Among the big-screen movies showing here, "Legacy," an official production of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, is one of the hottest tickets in town.
Shown 10 times daily on a 62-foot-wide screen, with symphonic Dolby sound, it tells a fictional love story set against the backdrop of the Mormon trek to Utah, a covered-wagon journey beset by winter weather, sickness and vigilante attack.
In the church's estimate, two million people have seen the hourlong film since July 1993.


Berryl C. Fox, Bruce L. Hertz
Dr.
Berryl Caplan Fox, a psychoanalyst in New York, was married yesterday evening to Bruce Lovett Hertz, a senior counsel to the Bank of New York.
Rabbi Ramie Arian performed the ceremony at Estherwood in Dobbs Ferry, N.Y.
Mrs.
Hertz, 37, graduated from Yale University and received a Ph.D. in clinical psychology from the City University of New York.
She is the daughter of Dr.
Joseph Fox and Judge Jean Caplan Fox of Neponsit, Queens.
The bride's father is a dentist in Rockaway Park, Queens.
Her mother is an administrative law judge for the New York City Parking Violations Bureau in Manhattan.


Residential Resales
In the following reports, the "listed at" price is the asking price when negotiations began that ended in the sale.
Time on market is from most recent listing to contract.
MANHATTAN
CARNEGIE HILL  $765,000
1160 Park Avenue (92d St.)  2-bedroom, 4-bath, 2,220-sq.-ft. prewar co-op; 24-hr. doormen, manned elevator, maid's room, dining room, eat-in kitchen, fireplace; maintenance $2,200, 40% tax-deductible, listed at $795,000, 8 weeks on market (Broker: Corcoran Group)  GREENWICH VILLAGE  $301,000
39 East 12th Street  3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 1,700-sq.-ft. triplex co-op in a loft building; 24-hr. doormen, 16-ft. ceilings, exposed-brick walls, h/w floors; maintenance $1,220, 50% tax-deductible, listed at $319,000, 41 weeks on market (Broker: Bellmarc)  UPPER EAST SIDE  $315,000
1056 Fifth Avenue (86th St.)  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,250-sq.-ft. postwar co-op; 24-hr. doormen, dining area, windowed kitchen, 2 exposures; maintenance $1,447, 47% tax-deductible, listed at $335,000, 2 years on market (Broker: Halstead Property Co.)  WEST SIDE  $257,000
180 West End Avenue  (Lincoln Towers)  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,370-sq.-ft. postwar co-op; 24-hr. doormen, dining area, terrace, remodeled kitchen and baths, 2 exposures; maintenance $1,160 including utilities, 58% tax-deductible, listed at $275,000, 1 week on market (Broker: Resident Resource)  BRONX
CITY ISLAND  $265,000
186 Beach Street  3-bedroom, 1-bath Victorian; dining room, eat-in kitchen, rear deck, L.I.
Sound view; taxes $1,000, listed at $275,000, 4 weeks on market (Broker: Jacqueline Kyle Kall)  WAKEFIELD  $177,000
1513 Givan Avenue  2-family, 54-year-old attached brick house; 3 bedrooms, 1 1/2 baths in primary unit; 2 bedrooms, 1 bath in other; eat-in kitchens in both; taxes $1,387, listed at $179,000, 22 weeks on market (Broker: Century 21/Metro Star)  BROOKLYN
CANARSIE  $152,500
116A East 102d Street  2-family, 32-year-old brick house; 2 bedrooms, dinette in primary unit; 1 bedroom in other; eat-in kitchens in each; 1-car garage; taxes $1,300, listed at $159,000, 4 weeks on market (Broker: Sure Home Sales)  MIDWOOD  $377,500
961 East 24th Street  3-bedroom, 3-bath, 65-year-old detached Victorian; dining room, eat-in kitchen, den, parquet floors, semi-finished basement, 2-car garage; taxes $1,900, listed at $489,000, 5 weeks on market (Broker: Jacob Gold Realty)  PARK SLOPE  $375,000
488 10th Street  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 3-story brownstone; dining area, family room, study; taxes $1,300, listed at $405,000, 1 week on market (Broker: Brooklyn Properties of 7th Avenue)  QUEENS
ELMHURST  $155,000
55-14 96th Street  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 60-year-old detached colonial; dining room, finished basement, 1-car garage; taxes $1,100, listed at $168,000, 19 weeks on market (Brokers: F.H. Realty Executives; ReMax/Team)  MALBA  $321,000
144-59 South Drive  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 45-year-old brick and shingle ranch; family room, high ceilings in basement, 1-car garage; taxes $2,546, listed at $349,000, 7 weeks on market (Brokers: ReMax/Universal; ERA/United)  STATEN ISLAND
GREAT KILLS  $210,000
104 Brookfield Avenue  4-bedroom, 2-bath, detached high ranch; dining area, eat-in kitchen, family room, 1-car garage, 40- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,800, listed at $219,900, 26 weeks on market (Brokers: Vitali-Sunshine; Dynasty) LONG ISLAND
BROOKVILLE  $550,000
73 Brookville Road  7-bedroom, 8 1/2-bath, 80-year-old colonial; dining room, eat-in kitchen, den, 3 fireplaces, 3-car garage, 2.3 acres; taxes $11,700, listed at $795,000, 24 weeks on market (Brokers: Prudential Long Island; Douglas Elliman-Jane Hayes)  NORTHPORT  $165,000
107 Waterside Avenue  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 33-year-old high ranch; dining room, family room with fireplace, 1-car garage; taxes $3,200, listed at $174,000, 2 weeks on market (Brokers: Prudential Long Island; Coldwell Banker Sammis)  SYOSSET  $285,000
22 Jean Place  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 35-year-old ranch; dining room, eat-in kitchen, den, 1-car garage, c/a; taxes $6,200, listed at $329,000, 24 weeks on market (Broker: ERA Gatewood)  WILLISTON PARK  $205,000
126 Park Avenue  4-bedroom, 1-bath, 60-year-old colonial; dining room, den, attic, 2-car garage, patio; taxes $3,200, listed at $219,000, 8 weeks on market (Brokers: Atanas; Century 21 Candan) CONNECTICUT
COS COB  $795,000
282 Cognewaugh Road  4-bedroom, 2 full and 2 half bath, 15-year-old center-hall colonial; family room, eat-in kitchen, fireplace, cathedral ceilings in master bedroom, 2-car garage, 2.33 acres; taxes $6,005, listed at $805,000, 2 1/2 years on market (Brokers: Coldwell Banker Schlott; Country Living)  DARIEN  $1.063 million
354 Hallow Tree Ridge  5-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, 23-year-old colonial; dining room, new eat-in kitchen, 3 fireplaces, new roof, skylights, c/a, 2-car garage, 1.53-acre lot; taxes $8,381, listed at $1.075 million, 4 weeks on market (Brokers: Preferred Properties; Scott Associates)  GREENWICH  $760,000
16 Tinker Road  5-bedroom, 2 full and 2 half bath, 27-year-old vinyl-sided ranch; dining room, family room, pool, h/w floors, 2.08 acres on cul-de-sac; taxes $8,908, listed at $825,000, 10 weeks on market (Broker: Coldwell Banker Schlott)  NORWALK  $168,000
28 Rockmeadow Road  (Fillow Ridge)  2-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 8-year-old condo; dining area, family room, eat-in kitchen, fireplace, rear deck, 1-car garage; common charge $149; taxes $3,689, listed at $175,000, 9 weeks market (Brokers: Preferred Properties; William Pitt)  NEW JERSEY
FAIR LAWN  $222,000
37-10 Ferry Heights  4-bedroom, 3-bath, 45-year-old Cape Cod; family room, 1-car garage, recreation room; taxes $4,634, listed at $249,900, 17 weeks on market (Brokers: T.P. Mabey; Coldwell Banker Schlott)  MANALAPAN  $285,000
42 Thomas Drive  5-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 10-year-old colonial; skylights, professionally landscaped, walk-in closets, 2-car garage; taxes $6,395, listed at $323,900, 8 weeks on market (Broker: The Prudential New Jersey)  OCEAN CITY  $320,000
13 Caroline Lane  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 15-year-old colonial; lagoon location, eat-in kitchen, family room, h/w floors, 3 boat slips, taxes $5,372; listed at $379,000, 1 year on market (Broker: The Richards Agency)  OLD BRIDGE  $145,000
47 Emerald Lane  3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 3-year-old patio home; stone fireplace, finished basement, oak cabinets in kitchen; taxes $4,288, listed at $154,888, 6 weeks on market (Broker: Weichert) WESTCHESTER
BEDFORD  $530,000
45 Jackson Road  5-bedroom, 3-bath, 24-year-old ranch; marble entry hall, sunken living room, stone fireplace, tennis court, 2 acres; taxes $8,340, listed at $549,000, 24 weeks on market (Brokers: Holmes &amp; Kennedy; Houlihan/ Lawrence)  NEW ROCHELLE  $200,000
1008 North Avenue  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 46-year-old split level; eat-in kitchen, dining room, fireplace, oak floors, .25 acre; taxes $6,550, listed at $220,000, 50 weeks on market (Brokers: Julia B. Fee; Weichert)  MOUNT PLEASANT  $221,000
10 Pamela Lane  2-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 35-year-old split level; entry hall, dining room, eat-in kitchen, family room, attic, .25 acre; taxes $4,303, listed at $239,000, 11 weeks on market (Broker: Century 21 Wolff)  PELHAM  $157,500
725 Pelhamdale Avenue  2-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 85-year-old cape cod; front porch, entry hall, dining room, rec room, detached 1-car garage; taxes $6,134, listed at $169,000, 28 weeks on market (Broker: C.S. McClellan &amp; Co.)


THEY FEEL FOR YOU
Gerri Hirshey's article on greeting cards left me, appropriately, without words ("Happy  [ ]  Day to You," July 2).
But I found no explanation for a curiosity I have noticed: Mother's Day cards seem to be almost the size of doormats while those for Father's Day have the dimensions of a postage stamp.


Making the Scene At Bryant Park
Restaurants draw singles after work, July 13.


Clinton Regains His Voice With 3 Speeches
Inside the White House they call them "the trilogy" -- the series of highly personal speeches President Clinton has delivered this summer in an effort to re-establish his voice and the power of the President to lead as much through oratory as through legislative agility.
In doing so, Mr.
Clinton has harkened back to 1991, when as governor of Arkansas he went three times to his alma mater of Georgetown University to deliver a series of speeches setting out his vision of a "new covenant" between the government and the American people.


Why the Stocks Aren't Splitting
THE stock market may have sputtered a bit this week, but behind its overall ascent in 1995 lies a mystery: Why haven't companies been splitting their stock left and right?
Through July 14 there have been only 57 splits of three shares for two, or greater, on the New York Stock Exchange, according to Standard &amp; Poor's.
That pace is about equal to the 110 such splits in all of 1994, even though the S.&amp; P. 500 fell 1.5 percent last year and is up 18.6 percent in midyear 1995.
The 1995 pace also looks slow compared with the rate in other bullish periods, like 1993, when there were 142 splits, and 1983, when there were 225.


A Co-op Buyer's Checklist
WHEN Saul Katz bought his house on Staten Island he wanted to insure that his dream home wouldn't turn into a nightmare after the closing.
So he hired a pest inspector to check for termites, a construction expert to check for structural problems, a surveyor to check the property lines and a lawyer to check up on everything else.


The Nation; On Capitol Hill, Politics Both High and Low
SOME of the proudest moments in modern American politics have occurred during Congressional investigations.
Take, for instance, the scene from the Army-McCarthy hearings in 1954, so often replayed on television, when Joseph Welch, the counsel for the Army, unraveled Senator Joseph R. McCarthy with the lament: "Have you no sense of decency, sir, at long last?" Or consider the solemn votes in the House Judiciary Committee 21 summers ago to impeach President Richard M. Nixon.


Lung Power
To the Editor:
While my wife and I agree with all of Margo Jefferson's points about the inferiority of the Broadway musical "Sunset Boulevard" to its cinematic source  [ "Two Ways to Travel From Screen to Stage," July 9 ] , the theatrical version made us think about an issue that Billy Wilder's movie never addressed: Why couldn't Norma Desmond get a job in talkies?


PHOTOGRAPHER'S JOURNAL


A Worry in Queens: Newark Airport's Monorail Might Work
Workers have not quite finished laying the tracks for a monorail system that is to snake from terminal to terminal at Newark International Airport, but the project has already turned into an odd pilgrimage site.
The visitors, though, are not coming joyfully.
They are officials from Queens, and they are trooping out here to see the monorail because they fear that it is a threat to two of their borough's most valuable assets, Kennedy International and La Guardia Airports.
When the system is done by 1999, passengers should be able to use mass transit to travel between Pennsylvania Station in Manhattan and Newark Airport in just 20 minutes.


Old Studio 54 Recycled Again: Virtual Reality
The playground of the future is coming to New York City, and it will be in one of the city's glitziest playgrounds of the past -- the former Studio 54.
"We're bringing the grand lady back," said Rex Shaw, who has teamed up with Herbert Marion to turn the 30,000 square-foot-space at 254 West 54th Street into a multilevel virtual reality center.
The partners, known as the 145A Corporation, squared away the lease a couple of weeks ago, and expect to spend $6 million on the space, once home to the peerless 70's nightclub of Ian Schrager and the late Steve Rubell.


Jennifer Lister, Anthony Oldfield
Jennifer Ann Lister, a daughter of Dr.
Julius Lister of Weston, Mass., and the late Jean Jenkins Lister, was married yesterday to Anthony John Oldfield, a son of Peter and Anita Oldfield of Lewes, England.
The Rev.
Charles Parthum performed the ceremony at St.
Peter's Episcopal Church in Weston, Mass.
Mrs.
Oldfield, 27, is the executive vice president of Agora Cosmetics, a cosmetics manufacturer in New York.
She graduated from Wellesley College.
Her father is the chief of pediatric surgery at the Metrowest Medical Center in Framingham, Mass., and is a visiting surgeon at Children's Hospital in Boston.


Buses With Lifts
To the Editor
I read with interest "Making Way for Wheelchairs" (Practical Traveler, June 11).
Adirondack Trailways, like Greyhound of Canada, has recently added two wheelchair-accessible coaches to our fleet of 100, with a third scheduled for July.
Our service, and that of our affiliates Pine Hill and New York Trailways, extends from New York City to Albany, Buffalo, Syracuse, Rochester, Lake Placid, Lake George, Saratoga, Cooperstown and many smaller communities throughout the state.
We also operate daily service to Toronto from New York City and to Long Island points from Upstate New York.


Passengers Flee Fire On a Subway Train
A motor in the undercarriage of a northbound D train burst into flames yesterday in a Harlem station, filling the platform with thick, black smoke and sending passengers and subway employees scrambling for exits, the police said.
Two police officers, a token booth clerk and five passengers on the train suffered minor smoke inhalation, and four of the injured were taken to St.
Luke's-Roosevelt Hospital Center, the Emergency Medical Service said.


L.I. Vines
Sauvignon Blanc Palmer Vineyards, 1994. About $9


MOVIES THIS WEEK
Love blossoms in different soils in a good batch of films on television this week.
John Ford's dusty STAGECOACH (1939) is a marvelously detailed frontier mural.
Ford's camera misses nothing.
Though the director allots due footage to each passenger, jouncing across Indian terrain, he clearly favors John Wayne as a unworldly cowboy and Claire Trevor as a prostitute.
Their gradually growing love is touching and entirely credible, and is carried into a musical coda.
The picture is so engrossing you may feel like an eavesdropper.
This began the director's cavalcade of great westerns -- Saturday at 10:30 A.M., 3:20 P.M. and 3:35 A.M. on Bravo.


Visionary's Creations Flow From Center in Water Mill
ROBERT WILSON'S stage is all the world.
"There's more government money for the arts in Europe," one of Mr.
Wilson's collaborators, Maita di Niscemi, said, knowing that it is politically expedient to reiterate the obvious.
"And that's why he's more famous in Europe than in America."


Honored by Firemen
Thomas Saccomanno, 9, of Somers, who has Duchenne muscular dystrophy, received a fireman's hat and a plaque when doors were dedicated to him at Engine Company 237 on Morgan Avenue in Brooklyn.
The doors were painted by the graffiti artist Jean 13 in blue, white, gray and black, the favorite colors of Thomas, seated behind his mother, Donna Saccomanno, a trustee of the New York chapter of the Parent Project for Muscular Dystrophy Research.
The event raised $5,000 for the project. (Andrew Lichenstein for The New York Times)


Inquiry Clears Jail of Cover-Up
ALLEGATIONS that official documents at the County Correctional Complex here were altered following two days of unrest last year are unfounded, according to findings released this month by a commission appointed to investigate security and safety issues at the jail.
The 67-page report is the result of months of hearings by the Marbach Commission, appointed by County Executive Andrew P. O'Rourke in December.
The commission -- headed by retired Justice John C. Marbach of State Supreme Court -- began its investigation after reports in Gannett Suburban Newspapers alleged that incidents at the jail on Nov. 29 and 30 were more serious than Department of Corrections officials had portrayed.


The Trouble at Washington Irving High
BLEDY CAPELLAN was 13 when he got lost between the Fort Greene projects and wherever the test for Stuyvesant, Bronx Science and Brooklyn Tech was being held.
Thus he ended up in the struggle for the soul of Washington Irving, the high school on my street.
"Sounds like fate to me," I said.


Facing Homophobia, or Maybe Just Bureaucracy
This languid hamlet overlooking the Hudson River has been rattled by what some residents consider a routine dispute over a nightclub's sprinkler system but others view as a battle for tolerance of homosexuals in conservative rural areas.
The center of the fight is a faded roadhouse along scenic 9W just below Kingston, N.Y., that calls itself the Club.
In an April newspaper advertisement, it promised that it would be the state's largest gay nightclub outside New York City, but it has yet to open.
Two state judges have ordered local officials to let the Club open, but they have balked.
The Club's windows remain boarded, and its new operators are spending their time dealing with vandalism like graffiti warning of AIDS.


Robin Lipsett, Bradley Berggren
Robin Lynn Lipsett, a daughter of Susan and Shelly M. Lipsett of Westport, Conn., was married last evening to Bradley Scott Berggren, the son of Lorraine and J. Philip Berggren of Essex, Conn.
Rabbi Judith Lewis performed the ceremony at the Hyatt Regency Hotel in Old Greenwich, Conn.
Mrs.
Berggren, 28, graduated from the University of Vermont, as did the bridegroom.
The bride received a master's degree in education from Hunter College and teaches the first grade at the Calhoun School in New York.


Jennifer Rhodes, Matthew Kropf
Jennifer Eve Rhodes, a daughter of Drs.
Karen and Robert Rhodes of Wesley Hills, N.Y., was married yesterday in Central Valley, N.Y., to Matthew G. Kropf, the son of Robin Kropf of Alpine Meadows, Calif., and Col.
Arnold Kropf of McLean, Va.
The Rev.
Sidney Kay Wilde, a Unitarian minister, performed the ceremony at the Inn at Central Valley.
The bride and the bridegroom, both 24, graduated from Duke University, where Mr.
Kropf is a candidate for a Ph.D. in economics.
Mrs.
Rhodes-Kropf is a third-year medical student at the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill.


David Scott and Cyndi Wolfman
CYNDI WOLFMAN, the senior producer on "The Gordon Elliot Show," and David Scott, a producer for "Donahue," met six years ago while working on "Geraldo." They have produced talk shows on satanic cults as well as on people without legs, fathers, lovers or the ability to diet.
In a typical workweek, Mr.
Scott, 32, might put together a show, say, about a husband who plotted to kill his wife, while Ms.
Wolfman might oversee one about a bridegroom who jumped out a church window just as his bride was walking down the aisle.


We Can't Afford Luxury of Financing the Arts; A True Advocate
To the Editor:
"Legislators Against the Arts" (editorial, July 19) is right in stating the importance of the National Endowment for the Arts to citizens of New York as well as the rest of the nation.
But you misstate the role of Representative Amo Houghton when you suggest his vote on final passage of the Interior Appropriations bill indicates opposition to continued Federal support for the arts agency.


Miss Dopsovic, Captain Darcy
Elizabeth Ann Dopsovic, a daughter of Richard and Patricia Dopsovic of Brightwaters, L.I., was married yesterday to Capt.
Christopher Joseph Darcy, a son of Joseph and Elizabeth Darcy, also of Brightwaters.
The Rev.
Bernard Blood performed the ceremony at St.
Patrick's Roman Catholic Church in Bay Shore, L.I.
Mrs.
Darcy, 26, is a legislative assistant in the Washington office of United States Representative Rick A. Lazio, Republican of New York.
The bride graduated from Villanova University.


Making A Buyer Aware
To the Editor:
"Making a Buyer Aware" on July 2 gave an excellent account of the problems facing buyers working with seller's agents and the need for disclosure laws that make buyers aware of this conflict.


Family Values
KIDDING OURSELVES Breadwinning, Babies, and Bargaining Power.
By Rhona Mahony. 277 pp.
New York:  Basic Books. $23.
BARREN IN THE PROMISED LAND  Childless Americans and the Pursuit of Happiness.
By Elaine Tyler May.
Illustrated. 318 pp.
New York:  Basic Books. $24.
THE PILL  A Biography of the Drug That Changed the World.
By Bernard Asbell.
Illustrated. 411 pp.
New York:  Random House. $25.


Julie A. Keil, Patrick Q. Riordan
Julie Alicia Keil, a daughter of Susan Mandelbaum and Jeffrey Keil, both of Brooklyn Heights, was married last evening to Patrick Quinn Riordan, a son of John and Mary Riordan of Georgetown, Mass.
Judge Michael J. Dontzin, who is retired from the State Supreme Court in Manhattan, officiated at East Hampton Point, a restaurant in East Hampton, L.I.
The bride, 25, and her husband, 26, graduated from the University of Pennsylvania.
She has a master's degree in social work from Columbia University and one in special education from the Bank Street College of Education.
Her father is the president of the Republic New York Corporation, the bank holding company in New York.


Bands On Tour: Integrity Bound?
FOR TWO DECADES, THE BIG rock tour has been a routine task.
Lately, however, some performers have been trying to find integrity on the tour circuit -- a tough place to make a stand against commercialism.
From Pearl Jam's on-again, off-again summer tour to the annual Lollapalooza Festival, which comes to Randalls Island on Friday, rockers have been trying to make good and do good at the same time.
"If you hate something," Eddie Vedder sings in Pearl Jam's "Not for You," "don't you do it too."
Performers who reach the level of arena headliner can rely on a professional rock infrastructure, from sound and light crews to truckers, T-shirt sellers and security guards.
Since the 1970's, all the musicians have had to do is perform, visit local radio stations and hire someone trustworthy to count the money.


Chaposa Springs Takes Test
They may not be Serena's Song, but they are prize 3-year-old fillies who can run, and nine of them ran the 70th Test Stakes at Saratoga today with Chaposa Springs outsprinting Miss Golden Circle to the wire by 2 1/2 lengths.
The Test Stakes brought together some of the best sprinting fillies in the country as well as some preparing for the Alabama Stakes at a mile and a quarter on Aug. 12, a race that usually looms as a milestone on the road to the championship of the class.
Serena's Song is occupied racing colts these days and may also skip the Alabama because of the distance.
But they are all headed for the Breeders' Cup on Oct. 28 and, somewhere down the line, the horses who ran best today will meet the queen of the class.


Car Mileage Charges: A Feeler That Fizzled
Car rental companies have mostly given up trying to charge renters extra for driving more than 100 miles a day, writing off the attempt as a pricing experiment that did not work out.
Facing rising costs and tough competition, the companies have been looking hard for ways to increase rates, and in April and May Alamo began charging drivers if they put more than 100 miles a day on its cars.
In an example of the copycat school of pricing, others followed.
In June, Budget said that it would begin charging 20 cents a mile on larger models.
Renters were driving its vehicles farther and farther, Budget said, and the auto manufacturers were, in turn, paying Budget less when the rental company sold its inventory back to them.
Avis and Hertz went along in some markets, charging an extra 25 cents for each mile above 100.


Todd Hundley Is Injured As Mets Fall to Rockies
Mets catcher Todd Hundley will be out of action indefinitely after spraining his left thumb and wrist during a home-plate collision with Eric Young in the third inning of New York's 5-4 loss to the Colorado Rockies tonight.
X-rays revealed no broken bones, but Hundley will have a magnetic resonance imaging test Sunday in New York to determine whether there is ligament and tendon damage.
Hundley injured the wrist while making the tag on a hard-charging Young, who was thrown out by second baseman Jeff Kent.


U.N. Chief Focuses on Africa's 'Underdog Conflicts'
Ending a punishing trip across Central Africa, Boutros Boutros-Ghali, the United Nations Secretary General, was characteristically at peace with himself.
For a week, as the United Nations mission in faraway Bosnia was rapidly unraveling, he had been lecturing, analyzing and cajoling his way through three of what he calls his "underdog conflicts," in Rwanda, Angola and Burundi.
He was not repentant, or even defensive, about his priorities.
As his small chartered plane nosed north from Bujumbura to Addis Ababa, he asked a reporter what could he have done in New York or Europe during this time that would have been of equivalent value?Would waiting on the sidelines while the Americans, British and French grappled for a policy have been better than fulfilling a promise to African nations torn by even deadlier civil wars?


Getting the Players Ready for Prime Time
Consider what will happen a minute or two after 8 o'clock on Tuesday evening: The conductor Gerard Schwarz will enter from stage left, the way he always does.
The audience will applaud, the way it always does.
And the Mostly Moszart Orchestra will start playing, the way it always does.
Just another concert, right?
Wrong.
This one will be telecast on "Live from Lincoln Center." (Tuesday at 8 P.M. on Channel 13).
And though the 3,000 ticketholders in Avery Fisher Hall may not notice, it will be different.


Old Favorites In the West Village
AU TROQUET * (212) 924-3413; 328 West 12th Street, corner of Greenwich Street; $$; all major credit cards
This romantic little West Village bistro is a cozy, low-key spot with white-framed windows and lacy curtains, subdued lighting and a charming young French staff.
Its appealing, moderately priced menu includes starters of lean salmon marinated in basil and black pepper; salad of endive with Roquefort; escargots in a cream sauce with garlic and basil, and country pate.
Among the main courses are baby chicken in natural juices with onions and mushrooms; a tasty fricassee of shrimp Provencal (sadly, slightly overcooked on a recent visit); tournedos au poivre; grilled salmon with basil-cream sauce, and a savory roast rack of lamb. (Review: 12/9/ 88; revisited: 7/11/95)


Kristen Shaughnessy, Joseph Bush
Kristen Jean Shaughnessy, the daughter of John and Alice Shaughnessy of Pine Bush, N.Y., was married yesterday to Joseph Patrick Bush, a son of Marilee Bush of Cranford, N.J.
The Rev.
Norris Lee Cook performed the ceremony at the Hopewell Presbyterian Church in Thompson Ridge, N.Y.
The couple are both 27 and graduated from Hofstra University.
She is a reporter and weekend anchor on NY1 News, a cable news channel in New York.
Her father teaches physical education at the Crispell Middle School in Pine Bush.
Her mother teaches kindergarten at Circleville (N.Y.) Elementary School.


Showalter, Once Master of Control, Is Losing It
Buck Showalter has lost control of the Yankees.
Not full control and maybe not even enough control to totally spoil whatever run this flawed team might orchestrate in the next 10 weeks, but he has lost some control and that is a monumental occurrence because the Yankee manager thrives on complete control.
The media guides behind his desk are filed in alphabetical order, his pens are in one holder while his markers are stored in another and his shined cleats are neatly aligned beside his closet.
There is order to everything he does.
Order equals control.
Control fosters adequate preparation.
Preparation breeds the finest chance for success.
This creed is inscribed on Showalter's toothbrush.


Janet Vasquez, Maurice Campbell
Janet Mercedez Vasquez, the daughter of Josefa and Armando Vasquez of Manhattan, was married yesterday to Maurice Anthony Campbell, a son of Daphnie Grant of St.
Albans, Queens.
The Rev.
Calvin Pressley, a United Methodist minister, performed the nondenominational ceremony at Terrace on the Park, a catering establishment in Flushing, Queens.
Ms.
Vasquez, who is 26 and is keeping her name, is a social worker at the Central Brooklyn Coordinating Council, a social service agency.
She graduated magna cum laude from Hunter College and received a master's degree in social work from Fordham University.


Women of Substance
To the Editor:
In his otherwise graceful review of Frederick R. Karl's biography "George Eliot, Voice of a Century" (June 25), John Bayley makes a great deal of Eliot's harsh fictional treatment of conventional women in characters like Hetty Sorrel and Rosamond Vincy.
One line of the review in particular makes me want to rush to Eliot's defense: patronizingly citing Eliot as "naive," Mr.
Bayley claims she "possibly did not grasp how apparent to her readers must have been her dislike of physical beauty in her own sex." The unpleasant implication is, of course, that Eliot, not known for her physical charms, was actually jealous of her own characters (!) and "persecuted" them (Mr. Bayley's own word) to exact revenge.


How a Bus Driver Rescued 4 Couples From New Jersey
To the Editor:
We were four couples from New Jersey, and after seeing an Off-Broadway show we waited at 42d Street and 10th Avenue for the jitney that would take us to the ferry.
Right?
Wrong!


On the Thames Of Fifth Avenue
'An Evening at the Henley Regatta' was the theme of the summer fund-raiser for the Museum of the City of New York, which took place at the museum on July 19.


Bullets, and Zygotes, Over Broadway
She looks like a futuristic Valkyrie, a Power Ranger bolstered by implants and steroids.
Community Board 5 voted her in with a vote of 35 to 3, and 1 abstention (esthetics had nothing to do with it) on May 11.
Gretchen Dykstra, head of the Times Square Business Improvement District, can't wait until she's gone in December.
"Whatever it is, I'm glad it's short-lived," said Ms.
Dykstra.
"I don't personally like it. The image is hard-edged, unfriendly. As a woman I find it offensive."


Real Estate Values
When you've moved three times in four years, you discover the nearly impenetrable codes embedded in New York real estate ads and, more surprising, in your own heart.
This lesson in self-discovery can be disconcerting.
I consider myself progressive in outlook, admiring of technology, suspicious of sentimental backward glances and heavy drapes, and yet I now know that I must have a prewar apartment.
It's not "Old World elegance" (translation: the rooms are all brown) that I'm after.
Rather, it's the complexity of the floor plan and the integrity of the detailing.
Views and pure space, I've learned, do not impress.
Panoramic vistas belong to window seats in jumbo jets.
As for space, too much of it makes me feel -- even worse, makes anyone with me look -- puny.
I would much rather wend my way from room to room as if following an interesting conversation.
To me, a loft is the visual equivalent of a place mat.


Following Southampton's Lead: Fighting an Incinerator
After the town of Southampton, L.I., turned down an energy company's plan to build an incinerator near the Pine Barrens, the company set its sights on East New York.
Now residents and city officials are trying to force the company to look elsewhere again.
"I don't like it," said James Saunders, who lives a few blocks from 895 Essex Street, where the Atlas Bio-Energy Corporation wants to build a wood-burning incinerator to generate electricity.


Vintage Costumes On View in Paris
The rotunda of the Opera Garnier in Paris is inhabited at the moment (and until Dec. 31) by a graceful assembly of black foam mannequins wearing the dazzling costumes of three centuries of opera and ballet.
Accompanied by opera music, the mannequins climb the stairs or lounge on the balustrades in a mise en scene conceived by Alain Germain, a dance theater director.
There are about 200 costumes on display, including a collection of tutus.
The oldest outfit was worn at the court of Louis XIV.
Others, more modern, were designed by Yves Saint Laurent, Picasso and Cocteau.


A Classic Tale Springs From the Cupboard
Clueless  Alicia Silverstone, Stacey Dash, Wallace Shawn, Brittany Murphy, Paul Rudd Directed by Amy Heckerling PG-13 97 minutes
A different group of teen-agers -- with names like Tai, Cher, Dionne and Amber -- spend their time in Beverly Hills shopping for clothes, becoming Betties (desirable women) and dating Baldwins (hunks).
Cher (Ms. Silverstone) performs good deeds: transforming a clueless transfer student and trying to match up her debate teacher (Mr. Shawn) with a female faculty member.


A Bed for When a King Comes Calling
THE LAVISHLY CURTAINED FOUR-POSTER bed, installed in the new English galleries at the Metropolitan Museum of Art, is just about as far from a futon as sleeping gear gets.
And yet this bed was as functional when it was made 300 years ago as the roll-up mattress is today.
What has changed since the 17th century are the concerns of sleepers: minimal now, they were extravagant then.
The bed was just coming into its own as a status symbol when William of Orange became King William III in 1689.
By restoring formality to the court, he inspired the grand beds that soon began appearing in the homes of British aristocrats.


When Parents Offer Extras To Schools
At P.S. 6 on the Upper East Side of Manhattan, parents raised money this year with a concert featuring an alumnus, Peter Yarrow of the group Peter, Paul and Mary.
They also closed off the section of East 81st Street in front of the school for an Oktoberfest and waged a telethon, soliciting donations from parents and alumni.
The total take: about $200,000.
At P.S. 124, in a section of Park Slope, Brooklyn, with a high immigrant population, the P.T.A. sold candy.
It sponsored the school photographs.
And one parent sought help from two major foundations, unsuccessfully.
The P.T.A.'s total earnings: between $3,000 and $4,000.
As a result, P.S. 6 has more computers, more class trips and more new books in the library.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-12  SERBS PRESS ATTACK ON ZEPA  The Bosnian Serbs, in defiance of the United Nations, pressed an attack against the Muslim town of Zepa and refused to allow monitors into the area. 1


Correction
An answer in the Question and Answer column last Sunday about landlords' responsibilities for recycling misstated the minimum number of apartments for which a designated collection area would be required in a building.
It is three apartments, not nine.


The News From Britain, Sort Of
THE ANCHORMAN AT THE DESK IS EX- tremely annoyed because his co-anchor, a younger woman he refers to around the newsroom as "viewer-friendly but intellectually challenged," has been chosen to cover a big story on the road.
He has seniority!
He should get all the juicy stories!
It's only a sitcom plot, though as you watch it you might imagine Dan Rather and Connie Chung speed-dialing their libel lawyers.
They wouldn't have a case, because the show, an installment of the English newsroom satire "Drop the Dead Donkey," was made last year, long before the Dan-Connie falling out.
The series, which has been a hit in Britain for five years, recently arrived here.
It is being shown on Comedy Central, on Mondays at 8:30 P.M. (and repeated Sundays at 11:30 P.M.), a hit-making slot following the channel's most famous British import, "Absolutely Fabulous."


Baby Pigeons Sighted! Urban Mystery Solved!
Whenever a worthy subject receives a better or more complete presentation than has hitherto been accorded it, our civilized life is advanced a little. -- Opening line of "The Pigeon," a 667-page encyclopedia.
I didn't used to be the sort of person who goes around quoting from "The Pigeon." I used to have a perfectly normal attitude toward these birds.
When I moved last fall to an apartment on Manhattan's Upper West Side and discovered that my new neighbors included a colony of pigeons, my first reaction was: Exterminate the brutes!
I cringed at their mating calls each morning.
I watched the squadron of dark flapping figures rising above the courtyard and thought of the sinister flying monkeys in "The Wizard of Oz," although I also agreed with my wife, Dana, when she cursed them as winged rodents.
I attacked them with broom and water pistol.


Vietnam to New Jersey: A Family's 20-Year Quest
It has been 30 years since D. Jacqueline Lee left South Vietnam with her new husband, a Korean businessman.
They moved to Hong Kong, then Switzerland, then Korea, and finally this affluent town in northern Bergen County, where they brought up two children.
Back home in Vietnam, of course, everything was changing rapidly and violently.
Mrs.
Lee, who is now in her 50's, did not know whether her family -- her father, who had been leader of the opposition in the National Assembly of South Vietnam; her stepmother, sister and four brothers -- were dead or alive.
And so for years, she has enlisted every politician and human rights group she could collar to help find them and get them out.


L.I. Vines
Sauvignon Blanc Palmer Vineyards, 1994. About $9


Safety in Italy
To the Editor
After reading Elida Pollex's "warning" (Letters, June 11) to avoid southern Italy because of her unfortunate experience, I would like your readers to know that her misfortune is not an everyday occurrence.


On to an Age Where Rational Doesn't Make Sense
COWARDICE HAS KEPT ME FROM writing about the Millennium, the residential high-rise on Broadway between 67th and 68th Streets that was completed early this year.
I like the building.
But Upper West Siders hate it.
They're outraged by the height of the 46-story building.
They also write mean letters -- more power to them -- and the Millennium isn't so spectacularly great a work of architecture as to merit triggering an avalanche of hate mail by giving it a favorable review.
Indeed, from any rational point of view the building is completely indefensible.
The question I've been turning over, though, is whether it is at all useful to demand that skyscrapers be rational.
I remain a great admirer of the Miesian steel-and-glass tower that defined the American skyline at mid-century.
And my appreciation for this style is, if anything, enhanced by my awareness that Mies's rational esthetic is partly a fraud.
There's nothing rational about the impulse to put up tall buildings.
They're not particularly practical as a building type.
But they are excellent at satisfying emotional cravings: the desire for heights, for views, for feeling superior to your neighbors and for working up a fury among those left standing on the ground.


Martha Clarke's Midlife Dream
IN 1984, THE CHOREOGRAPHER Martha Clarke burst upon the theatrical world with "The Garden of Earthly Delights," a blend of theater, dance and music that was at once beautiful, sensual and terrifying in its re-enactment of the fantastic canvas of Hieronymous Bosch.
His beleaguered humanity suffered the delights of the temporal world, the pitiless retributions of Hell.
Ten dancers cavorted on stage, seemingly naked; they crawled on the floor; tossed about in whirlwinds; they ascended to the rafters.
They literally flew through the air.
Ms.
Clarke appeared to have invented a new art form -- dance-theater, combining movement and narrative with a pictorial analysis of grand themes.
Stanley Kauffmann, writing in The New Republic, said "Garden" transformed "our whole notion of theater." It "epitomizes everything that is unique" about the theater, he wrote, "its grace, its capacity for inspiring awe."


After Frantic Off Season, N.F.L. Gets Down to Business as Not-Quite-Usual
It has been a busy off season for the National Football League, with two new expansion teams set to kick off the 1995 season and a record 179 free agents changing teams.
Six teams changed head coaches and there were 18 new defensive coordinators hired in the league.
New faces, new places (Rams in St. Louis, Raiders back in Oakland) and new ideas will converge in earnest beginning this week when all of the N.F.L. teams will be in training camp.
The Carolina Panthers have been at training camp -- voluntary camp -- at Wisconsin-Steven Points since July 8.
The Jets will be the last team to officially open when they get started on Tuesday.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
SPOTTED DICK, S'IL VOUS PLAIT  An English Restaurant in France.
By Tom Higgins.
Soho, $22.


Mother in South Carolina Guilty Of Murder in Drowning of 2 Sons
A jury tonight found Susan Smith guilty of two counts of murder, one for each of the little boys she left under the water of John D. Long Lake.
Mrs.
Smith trembled but her eyes were dry as a clerk read off the verdict in a state Circuit courtroom.
The 12-member jury took two and a half hours to decide what Mrs.
Smith, 23, had already confessed to, that last Oct. 25 she allowed her car to roll down a boat ramp and into the lake as her two children, strapped in their car seats, cried and screamed inside.


Q. &amp; A.
Binders: Do They Seal Deals?
Q Are there advantages to using a binder in purchasing real estate?
Will a binder hold together a transaction until a detailed contract of sale can be written up and agreed to by the buyer and seller? . . .
Dominic Whitaker, Yonkers.
A Peter Bell, chairman of Balch Realty, a buyer's broker based in Bronxville, N.Y., said that as a representative of buyers only in real estate transactions, he favors the use of binders.


A QUESTION FOR: Tim McCarver
Q: What's the most boring part of baseball?
A: When the pitcher gets on base and they stop the game to bring him a jacket -- so the guy's arm won't get cold.
That's boring.
What does he need a jacket for?
His arm's not going to get cold.
Another boring part is the small talk a first baseman will make with a base runner.
They'll ask: "How ya hittin' 'em? How's the family?" And they could care less.
It's the "Have a nice day" syndrome.
I hated it, and  [ Hall of Fame pitcher ]  Bob Gibson really hated it.
One time, against the Expos, Bob got on and  [ first baseman ]  Ron Fairly told him, "Hey, you're throwing well." Fairly came up to bat a couple innings later and Gibson hit him square in the ribs.
I think more players ought to retaliate like that.


July 16-22; Tax Fraud Trips Up 2 Old Sluggers
Two aging stars from baseball's seemingly more innocent days turned up in Brooklyn last week, but this was no return to the sunshine of Ebbets Field.
Duke Snider, who hit 407 home runs in 18 seasons and starred in center field for the Brooklyn Dodgers in their headiest days, and Willie McCovey, who hit 521 in 22 seasons, were there to plead guilty to tax fraud charges in Federal Court.
In both cases, the accusations involved failure to report tens of thousands of dollars in income from memorabilia shows and promotional appearances over the course of several years; a 1989 sports memorabilia show in Atlantic City figured in both sets of charges.


Where the Thrills of Old Keep Coming Round
THE VIEW OF THE WESTERN Pennsylvania hills and the rusting mills lining the Monongahela River could hardly be better.
But the perch leaves something to be desired: I'm dangling from a steel cable, 200 feet above the pavement.
The idea of the Skycoaster, the hottest ride at Kennywood Park, just east of Pittsburgh, is to simulate bungee jumping.
And I've just remembered that bungee jumping was pretty far down my to-do list, just behind swimming the Bosphorus.


Financing a Legal Education
To the Editor:
I would like to thank you for "Bridging the Income Gap After Law School" (July 2), regarding the need for many law students to finance their educations, and the uphill battle many of them face in repaying those student loans.


Julia Gross, Andrew Judelson
Julia Lynne Gross, the daughter of Norma and Richard Gross of Spring Lake Heights, N.J., was married yesterday to Andrew Rundin Judelson, the son of Lucille Evans of Weston, Conn., and the late Stephen Judelson.
George Hunter Roberts, a town justice of Lewisboro, N.Y., performed the ceremony at Le Chateau, a restaurant in South Salem, N.Y.
Mrs.
Judelson, 26, teaches the seventh grade at Saxe Middle School in New Canaan, Conn.
She graduated from Tulane University and received her master's degree in education from Sacred Heart University.
Her father is an avionics program manager at Vitronics Inc., a contracting company in Eatontown, N.J.


A Singer Lends Her Name to a Camp
On a sunlit summer day, near the still waters of Lake Beaver, 30 children sat nervously under a white tent, waiting to perform for the pop singer Mariah Carey.
They had chosen Ms.
Carey's song "Hero" to sing at the dedication of Camp Mariah, the Fresh Air Fund's career awareness camp that was being named in her honor.
"I met her before," said Sonseray Cummings, a 13-year-old from the Bronx, "She's a regular person. She's a superstar, but she's down to earth."


Value of Insurance Agents
To the Editor:
"Life Insurance Without Those Sales Charges" (June 18) promotes the virtues of fee-only financial planners but gives short shrift to the benefits of working with a professional agent in the purchase of life insurance products.


French Intellectuals Wanted Truth Told; The Children
To the Editor:
It was with great joy that I read your report on President Jacques Chirac's redeeming admission of official French culpability in the fate of thousands of Jews during World War II (news article, July 17).


Out of Burundi, a Star Runner Lights Up the Sky
The memories of most young athletes are stocked with images of their predecessors.
A high school quarterback closes his eyes and sees Joe Montana or Dan Marino.
A youngster dribbles a soccer ball and draws on Jurgen Klinsmann or Maradona.
A sprinter cannot escape Carl Lewis.
But Venuste Niyongabo's sporting memory bank is nearly empty.


Corrections
An article last Sunday about the reaction of staff members to the closing of New York Newsday misstated the timing of a letter from the publisher of The Herald Tribune, John Hay Whitney, to a staff member, Dennis Duggan, who later became a New York Newsday columnist.
The letter, dated Aug. 16, 1966, was written after a decision was made not to resume publication of The Herald Tribune; it was not written after the demise of The World Journal Tribune, which closed in May 1967.


July 16-22: Chicago Politics; In This Heat Wave, The City Didn't Work
The heat wave that claimed more than 400 lives in Chicago this month was unprecedented in the city's history but the political finger-pointing that started before the first funerals was as common as the lies of a cheating husband.
Weather and politics are old allies in Chicago.
At least one mayor, Michael Bilandic, was thrown out of office by the voters in 1979 for the way he handled a snowstorm.
Now, bad weather has put the current Mayor, Richard M. Daley, on the defensive.
For much of last week, he was ducking charges that his administration moved too slowly to warn the city, especially its elderly, about the heat's deadly potential.


Women at Work on Sand Traps and Swings
DESPITE a heavy influx of women in recent years, golf has remained a game dominated by men, and in more ways than one -- the vast majority of teaching golf professionals are men, as are course superintendents and most others connected with the game.
Even in the Ladies Professional Golf Association, which operates the women's professional tour, the commissioner, the deputy commissioner and the special assistant to the commissioner are all men.
And at many country clubs women still are not allowed to play on weekends, or at least not until late in the day on Saturdays and Sundays.
Indeed, not much has changed in the way the game is run since Angela Aulenti was handed a sawed-off 3-iron at the age of 8 at the Longshore Golf Course in her hometown of Westport and began hacking away at some golf balls almost 30 years ago.
Yet, in a way, Ms.
Aulenti has been something of a pioneer.


Reviving the Rialto
Once upon a time, the intersection of Broadway and 42d Street on the island of Manhattan in the city of New York was the glittering "crossroads of the world" -- Times Square, the exciting center of entertainment in America's grandest metropolis.
The glitter turned into sleaze some years ago, when theaters that staged the likes of Ziegfeld Follies became XXX-rated movie houses.
But the good old days appear to be coming back now, in fancy -- and costly -- modern dress.
Led by the Walt Disney Company with a generous helping of city and state subsidies, tentative plans for key elements of the sleaziest block in the neighborhood -- the stretch of 42d between Seventh and Eighth Avenues -- have now become firm.
With the signing of three substantial deals this month, others seem more likely.


True Believers Gather To Honor White Race
Beneath tall, whispering pines and a large swastika banner hanging from a church tower, white supremacists from around the country and Canada gathered here this weekend for the Aryan World Congress, an annual celebration of the white race and anti-Semitism.
Amid Sieg Heil salutes and with Nazi symbols festooning their clothes, participants paid $45 each to enter the gates of the Church of Jesus Christ Christian Aryan Nations for two days of speeches and ceremonies, which will be highlighted by tonight's solemn cross-burning service.


When Business Partners Are Marriage Partners
JAMI AND KLAUS HEIDEGGER met in 1982 when she was an aerobics instructor and he was a rising star on Austria's Olympic ski team.
Three years later they were married, and now they run Kiehl's, a Manhattan-based cosmetics company.
The enterprise, with yearly revenue of $10 million, surely makes money.
But, in the couple's eyes, it makes their marriage, too.


New Jersey Heritage
The Monmouth County Historical Association's annual garden party, July 16.


Yes, Things Have Changed, But the Biltmore Swings On
To the Editor:
Your article about the deejay Ian Bromfield a.k.a.
Hawkman spinning his stuff at the Biltmore Ballroom in Flatbush ("Hawkman's Circuit," July 9) brought back some memories.
Between 1954 and 1963 my three cousins, my brother and I were Bar Mitzvahed at the Biltmore, then run by the always debonair Mr.
Hechtman (as kids, we never called adults by their first names).


DIARY
STOCKS Sugar Blues for the Market Let's see.
The stock market soars, led by technology stocks.
Microsoft, the highest of tech, reports surprisingly strong earnings.
So naturally the market nose-dives, led by technology stocks.
At one point in Wednesday's free-fall, in fact, with the Dow down 130, Microsoft shares were $18 below where they'd been two days earlier.
What happened?
Perhaps it was that dreaded "correction" -- an odd term implying that the notoriously illogical market has some "correct" level from which foolish investors deviate.
Or perhaps it was the Wall Street equivalent of gorging on sweets and then crashing after the sugar high.
In any case, traders pulled out of it and the market held steady for the rest of the week.
Bill Gates won't have to go to work at McDonald's.
GREENSPAN WATCH Flirting With Clarity Alan Greenspan may have had something to do with that market bump, too.
If he ever made himself totally clear, of course, the Dow would probably rise or fall 1,000 points in a day.
There's no remote danger of him doing that, but last week he did skate perilously close to clarity, saying the economy "may have passed the point of maximum risk." In his usual hedging fashion, he added, "We have certainly not yet reached the point" where no risk remains.
But the markets seemed to fix on his optimism, which might mean he has no plans for further interest-rate cuts.
Or it might not.
ELECTRONICS U.S.
TV Maker?
No Such Thing Considering that the average American lives and breathes by the almighty Tube, you'd think making TV sets would be the ideal home-town business.
Far from it.
Yes, many of the names sound all-American: G.E., RCA, Motorola, Zenith, Magnavox.
But G.E. and RCA sets are sold by Thomson of France, Magnavox sets by the Dutch company Philips, and Motorola sets have been renamed Quasars by their Japanese manufacturer, Matsushita.
Zenith held on alone -- until last week.
A South Korean company called LG Electronics, which makes the Goldstar brand, bought control of Zenith.
Now Americans can only sit and watch, at which they're proven experts.
TRANSPORTATION Metro-North Strike: Never Mind For all the fuss, you'd think there had been a strike.
Westchester and Connecticut commuters fretted or stayed home or plotted the least painful trek to the subway's far reaches.
They watched and waited and talked, talked, talked -- the Strike That Wasn't provided endless conversational fodder.
But then Metro-North pulled a trick out of its hat -- a Railway Labor Act cooling-off period -- and, Presto!, no strike threat for four months.
Negotiators can get some sleep now, and commuters, after three days at the edge of their train seats, are left wondering whether the whole mess will be back in November.
And why does no one mention, by the way, that Metro-North hasn't even raised New York fares for over five years?
TOBACCO Is the Marlboro Man Happy?
A survey out last week showed a sharp rise in teen-age smoking -- a big surprise, since that rate had held steady while adult smoking fell.
But now, a tough question: Is this good news or bad for the tobacco industry?
Last month Philip Morris announced a plan to cut smoking by minors, so presumably it would find this news disturbing.
Yet rarely does anyone but a teen-ager start smoking, and if they don't start, there'll be no customers.
But let's take Philip Morris at its word, making the next question this: How do you keep kids from starting?
It's already illegal to sell minors cigarettes, of course, but that means little.
Another survey shows that, nationwide, minors can buy cigarettes 75 percent of the places they try.
And why is Albert Dunlap smiling?
Well, he's chairman of Scott Paper, and he could wind up with $100 million.
Nothing to, uh, sneeze at.
FRAUD Twice Bitten at Towers?
Two years ago, the gloom was deep for creditors of Towers Financial.
Towers descended into bankruptcy; its founder, Steven Hoffenberg, pleaded guilty to fraud, and creditors were out hundreds of millions in an unimaginably vast Ponzi scheme.
Then came that fuzzy, golden moment when the pure of heart ride in and do their virtuous best to patch things up.
A Los Angeles businessman named John Hall entered the scene, with the hope that he'd do all he could for creditors with Towers' tattered remains.
But the fairy tale ends there.
A lawsuit now contends that Mr.
Hall, too, was merely intent on lining his own pockets -- that he siphoned millions from the patched-up venture by having it pay grossly inflated prices for worthless assets.
REGULATION Safety Rules: Hard to Kill Business is dying to get rid of a lot of environmental, health and safety regulations, and it seemed the reigning Republicans would oblige them.
Regulation-slaying legislation, way up there on Congress's checklist, was moving along nicely.
But last week, outnumbered Democrats managed to kill it, borrowing the tactic that had sunk Henry Foster's chance to be Surgeon General: talk it to death.
And as with Dr.
Foster, backers of the bill couldn't quite come up with the votes to cut off debate.
"I regret that we have failed the American people again," said Bob Dole, who would have loved to add the bill to his resume as he applies for that job up Pennsylvania Avenue.
But environmentalists surely saw no failure.
PUBLISHING Let 'em Read Balance Sheets "I like our core businesses," said Mark Willes.
Well, if you say so.
It was a bit hard to tell last week.
Mr.
Willes, after all, is the new head of Times Mirror, whose "core business" is newspapers, and he had just closed New York Newsday, cutting 750 jobs.
Just days later, as part of a broad sweep of the broom, he said he would cut 1,000 more newspaper jobs, including 700 at The Los Angeles Times.
Yes, costs must be cut, shareholders must be kept cozy and warm, and Mr.
Willes, once a General Mills financial executive, is certainly trying to do that.
"Core businesses" -- that's the way business people talk, not journalists.


In the Region/Westchester; How Yonkers Parcels Out Former Iona Campus
AFTER two and a half years of uncertainty, the fate of the 21-acre Yonkers campus of Iona College, near the banks of the Hudson River, was decided last month when the City Council approved the city's purchase of two-thirds of the site for use by its school district.
Iona acquired the campus in 1989 from Elizabeth Seton College, but shut it down just four years later because of financial difficulties and put it on the market.


We Can't Afford Luxury of Financing the Arts; Package Deal
To the Editor:
"Legislators Against the Arts" (editorial, July 19) is misleading, inaccurate and a disservice to your readers.
I voted against the Chabot amendment to strike the $99.5 million in the Interior Appropriations bill for the National Endowment for the Humanities and against the Stearns amendment to cut $10 million more from the $99.5 million in the bill for the National Endowment for the Arts.
Both amendments -- the only ones considered affecting these agencies -- were defeated.


So, Where Is Strawberry?
The wait for Darryl Strawberry, building to ever-increasing dramatic heights, dragged on yesterday without a sighting.
Speculation had raged that the former Met and New York's most noted prodigal son would be called up by the Yankees from Class AAA Columbus in time for today's game.
However, the day passed without the required roster move and so, too, might today, when the Yankees play the third game of their four-game series against Texas.


Gale Kaufman, Michael van Biema
Gale Deborah Kaufman, a vice president of new program initiatives at the New York City Housing Partnership, a nonprofit developer of affordable housing, is to be married today to Michael Stephen van Biema, a director of operations for the New York City Department of Housing Preservation and Development.
Rabbi Donna Berman is to perform the ceremony at the Loeb Boathouse in Central Park.
Ms.
Kaufman, who is 33 and is keeping her name, graduated from Brandeis University and received an M.B.A. from Columbia University.
She is a daughter of Richard and Rosalind Kaufman of Harrison, N.Y.
The bride's father is an international economic consultant and financial adviser in Harrison.
Her mother is a partner in the Jacob D. Fuchsberg law firm in New York, a practice founded by Judge Fuchsberg of Rye, N.Y., who is the bride's maternal grandfather and who retired from the New York State Court of Appeals in Albany.


Soccer as Social Glue
Over the last few weeks, thousands of Central and South American immigrants have ventured to Jackson Heights, Queens, to watch soccer matches beamed from Uruguay.
The America Cup tournament provides them an intense moment of reconnection to their homelands.
Article, page 29.


Law Helps Mental Hospitals Screen for Violence
A new law giving state mental hospitals access to the criminal records of patients will allow the hospitals to intensify their monitoring of potentially dangerous patients, with the aim of preventing violent encounters with the public, officials said yesterday.
The law, signed Friday at the Creedmoor Psychiatric Center in Queens by Gov.
George E. Pataki, was prompted by dozens of escapes by mental patients who had been committed by the courts.
One of the most publicized cases was that of Reuben Harris, who is accused of leaving the grounds of the Manhattan Psychiatric Center on Wards Island in January and pushing a 63-year-old woman to her death under a subway train.


For Guide Dogs, Boot Camp Is Tough (No Chewing Allowed)
BILLIE GATES was led by her instructor into a large room and seated in a folding chair.
Akir was led in to the other end of the room through a sliding glass door.
She sat nervously listening for a moment and then called out in a voice full of anticipation, "Akir, come." In an instant, Akir bolted across the room and jumped on Mrs.
Gates's lap and began licking her face.
This was the first step in breaking down the walls of darkness.
For Billie Gates, a 56-year-old blind housewife from Huntsville, Tex., this joyful encounter was the beginning.
For Akir, a black Labrador retriever, the union with Mrs.
Gates was the result of careful scientific breeding, a strict selection process and rigorous training.
Akir is one of more than 5,000 guide dogs that have been bred and trained by Guiding Eyes for the Blind to enable the visually impaired to live with independence and dignity.


A Classic Tale Springs From the Cupboard
The Indian in the Cupboard  Hal Scardino, Litefoot, Rishi Bhat, David Keith Directed by Frank Oz PG 97 minutes
In this interpretation of Lynne Reid Banks's classic book, 9-year-old Omri discovers he can bring his toys to life by placing them inside an old cupboard.
First, he transforms a plastic toy Indian into a living three-inch-tall man.
Then he brings a toy cowboy to life and sets off a war.


The Master Of Creation In 26 Minutes
UNTIL HE DIED ON THE FOURTH OF JULY AT the age of 52, the most famous artist on the face of the earth, and I use the word artist loosely, may well have been Bob Ross.
His name doesn't ring a bell?
Don't panic; you're not going to find him in the standard reference books.
You'd do better to go channel-surfing on your television, which for the last dozen years was Ross's domain.
He was the bearded, fuzzy-haired host of "The Joy of Painting," the public television series on which he gently guided couch potatoes through the intricacies of painting a landscape in 26 minutes.
Speaking in an anodyne voice much like the one police officers use to coax jumpers off ledges, Ross encouraged viewers to paint "happy little clouds" and insisted that anyone who followed his simple instructions could succeed.
He provided art's version of "A Better Body in 30 Days." Each week, millions of viewers, from Akron to Ankara, from Harrisburg to Hong Kong, tuned in -- a whopping 97 percent, according to Ross's calculation, just to hear his voice.
His laid-back on-screen image belied his off-screen drive as a businessman.
He wrote popular books with easy-to-follow recipes for painting snowcapped mountains and lakeside vistas.
He designed courses to train instructors, hundreds of whom have spread across the country, preaching the gospel according to Bob.
He even marketed his own line of art supplies, with his smiling face emblazoned on each tube of paint.


Maria L. Siff, Philip L. Yang Jr.
Maria Lisa Siff, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Andrew P. Siff of New York, is to be married today to Philip Lim Yang Jr., the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Yang of Manila.
The Rev.
Sam Matarazzo is to perform the ceremony at the Roman Catholic Church of St.
Vincent Ferrer.
The bride, 33, was until recently a senior appellate court attorney for the Appellate Division of the State Supreme Court, First Department, in Manhattan.
She graduated magna cum laude from Barnard College, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa, and received a law degree from Columbia University.
Her father is a lawyer in New York.
Her mother, Julie Cummings Siff, is a broker at Brown Harris Stevens, a real estate company in New York.


Minnesota Gets a Lucky Bounce in Boston
Twins 8, Red Sox 7
Tim Naehring's line drive down the right-field line bounced into the stands for a ground-rule double, and Minnesota hung on for an 8-7 victory over Boston yesterday in Fenway Park.


IN SHORT: FICTION
MEMNOCH THE DEVIL  The Vampire Chronicles. By Anne Rice. Knopf, $25.


Let Affirmative Action Die
As an ideology, affirmative action in 1995 is beginning to resemble Soviet Communism in 1989.
Outside the sheltered elites, the majority of people loathe it.
The circumstances in which it was dreamed up no longer exist.
It is clearly teetering, its legitimacy under mortal threat.
The decision by the University of California's Board of Regents to abolish preferences in its admissions policy is the unmistakable sound of a wall coming down.
President Clinton doesn't understand this.
There is no doubt that he is earnest in his defense of racial social engineering.
His speech on Wednesday was moving and eloquent: one of those moments when conviction and this President seem to coincide.
His evident sincerity at least called to mind why many of us backed his candidacy three years ago.


Unnatural Light
Artistic success and a lasting reputation depend on talent, timing, a healthy dose of self-promotion and an extensive network of collaborators.
By the time he started making photographic portraits in 1854, Felix Tournachon, known as Nadar, had already established a name as a writer and a caricaturist.
He seemed to know everyone in Parisian intellectual and artistic circles; he later claimed to have 5,000 friends.
Many of them sat for him, and Nadar's images of French writers and artists are considered among the best photographic portraits ever made.
NADAR (Metropolitan Museum of Art/Abrams, $65) includes some of the photographer's work from his most creative years.
As restless as he was enterprising, Nadar (1820-1910) used electric light to photograph Paris's catacombs and sewers, but most of his artistic passion was spent on portraiture.
Thanks to technological advances, sitters no longer needed to be clamped rigidly into place.
This freedom, along with his use of light, large prints and simple compositions, allowed Nadar to achieve his characteristic vitality.
Most of his subjects -- including Daumier, Bernhardt and Delacroix -- are fully engaged with the photographer and, by extension, with the viewer.
Commercial success nudged Nadar into producing more conventional images typical of the Second Empire, but his restless spirit soon found a new fad -- ballooning; in 1858 Nadar produced the world's first aerial photographs.
Maria Morris Hambourg, a curator of photographs at the Metropolitan Museum of Art, provides a lively examination of Nadar's early years; essays by Francoise Heilbrun, a curator of photographs at the Musee d'Orsay, and Philippe Neagu, another curator there who died in 1994, illuminate French culture, intellectual life and photography in the 19th century.
ROSEMARY RANCK


Peggy Swift, Thomas Kasza
Margaret Mary Swift, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Joseph Peter Swift of Chevy Chase, Md., was married yesterday to Thomas Neal Kasza, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Donald Kasza of La Salle, Ill.
Msgr.
Kenneth Roeltgen performed the ceremony at the Church of the Little Flower in Bethesda, Md.
Mrs.
Kasza, 31, is known as Peggy.
She is a coordinator in the corporate affairs division of the Philip Morris Companies in New York.
From 1989 to 1993 she was the personal aide to Barbara Bush.
She graduated from Denison University.
Her father is an endocrinologist in Chevy Chase.


Correction
A picture caption last Sunday with an article about the second annual American Indian Powwow-on-the-Hudson in Yonkers misidentified the hoop dancer.
He was Good Bear, not Chief Okena Littlehawk.


A. J. Brownstein, D. J. Winick
Alison Jane Brownstein, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Edward Brownstein of Larchmont, N.Y., was married yesterday evening to Darin Jonathan Winick, a son of Mrs.
Martin Rosansky of Montvale, N.J., and Lawrence Winick of Old Greenwich, Conn.
Rabbi Jeffrey Sirkman officiated at Tappan Hill in Tarrytown, N.Y.
Mrs.
Winick, 25, is the manager of contract administration and sampling at the EMI Music Publishing Company in New York and is to begin studying at Brooklyn Law School in August.
She and her husband graduated from Washington University in St.
Louis.
She received a master's degree in performing arts administration from New York University, from which Mr.
Winick received a law degree.


NOT SO FAST
HERE'S A SHORT CHEMISTRY LESSON.
Grasp it and you will grasp the reason the environmental era has barely begun; perhaps you will grasp the history of the next 50 years.
Put a gallon of gasoline in the tank of your car and go out for a drive.
Assuming your engine's well tuned, burning that gallon of petroleum should put about half a pound of carbon in the form of carbon monoxide -- CO -- into the air.
A generation ago that number was closer to one pound; by decade's end, as new technologies clean the exhaust, it should drop to barely a tenth of a pound.
The steady decrease in CO emissions, as well as in those of nitrous oxide and particulates, is the reason the air is clearer and safer now in Los Angeles than it was a generation ago.


Blood Transfusion Is Focus of Inquiry
The State Department of Health has begun an investigation to determine whether a paramedic with the city's Emergency Medical Service, injured in a car accident, was given the wrong blood during a transfusion at Coney Island Hospital.
Officials with the union for the E.M.S. workers have charged that the 30-year-old paramedic, Ira Medjuck, was given two units of the wrong blood type hours after he had undergone surgery on Thursday to repair extensive internal injuries.


Richard L. Dugoff, Rachel J. Gordon
Rachel Jessica Gordon, a daughter of Carole and Neal Gordon of New York, was married last evening to Richard Lawrence Dugoff, the son of Dr.
Sandra Dugoff and Howard Dugoff, both of Potomac, Md.
Rabbi Richard Chapin performed the ceremony at the Water's Edge, a restaurant in Long Island City, Queens.
Mrs.
Dugoff, 27, graduated from the University of Pennsylvania.
She and her husband received M.B.A. degrees from Columbia University.
She is an associate product manager at Best Foods, the consumer products manufacturer, in Englewood Cliffs, N.J.
Her father is a vice president and the general counsel of Cartier International, the jewelry company, in New York.
Her mother is the owner of Carole Gordon Associates, an advertising agency in New York.


Hooked on Boy Books
BOOKSTORES AND LIBRARIES CAN DIVIDE up their books however they want, but there are really only two important categories: boy books and girl books.
Boy books are biographies of dead presidents, books by almost any Eastern European intellectual ("How much Solzhenitsyn have you gotten through?" sneers a woman friend) or anything else in which the point is the ideas (Italo Calvino), the landscape (Cormac McCarthy) or the action (Robert Ludlum).
It is generally guys who are in thrall to Pete Dexter or Tom Clancy.


A Barbecue Restaurant With Down-Home Style
NEW YORK is a barbecue wasteland, where sauce slathered on sliced roast beef is often called barbecue.
Knowledgeable barbecue lovers often take Horace Greeley's advice.
They go west or south or anywhere else.
They certainly do not go east to Long Island.
Aside from a few tiny, funky, reasonably authentic joints, there is nowhere to go for pulled pork, slabs of ribs, chopped beef or smoked pork sausage.
Therefore, the opening last month of Rick's Smokin' Barbecue, a nearly 200-seat restaurant at 292 Merrick Road in Amityville (691-4423), was big news.


Women Profit From Club Experience
ON a cool Tuesday evening in a living room on Mayhew Avenue here, Sandy Constabile laid out plates of chocolate-chip cookies and a carafe of coffee.
For the next two hours, she and another half-dozen women talked stocks.
Ms.
Constabile is the unofficial president of the Optimists Investment Club, a group of women in their 40's and 50's who meet each month to discuss -- and play -- the stock market.
Since 1987, they have each paid $400 a year into the club's stock fund, and together they have amassed a portfolio worth $51,698, including nearly $10,000 in profits.
But more important, they say, they have become smarter about investing.
"We're more concerned about the educational aspect than we are about how much money we make," said a club member, Suzanne Carpenter.


To Be Young, Russian and Middle-Class
They are from 23 to 26 years old, all of them devotees of capitalism, and all doing just fine in Russia's new free market.
They, too, are the "new rich," at least comparatively, and there isn't a criminal among them.
Instead, the four Russians -- Dmitri Blekher, a real-estate agent; Yelena Shalneva, a press officer; Sergei Skatershchikov, a financial analyst, and Leonid Bershidsky, a journalist -- are part of an emerging class of young professionals, similar to those in almost any Western country.


A Diva Renews Her Ties to the Earth and Reflects
A SUMMER MORNING IN SKANE, the southernmost province of Sweden; green fields alternate with the golden hue of mustard flower.
At the 12th-century church of her native parish, Birgit Nilsson, one of the greatest singers of the century, now in retirement at 77, freshened the flowers at the grave of her parents, Nils and Justina Svensson.
Above her father's name is inscribed the word "Lantbrukare" ("Land Cultivator").
"He was the sixth generation of farmers," Ms.
Nilsson said.
She translated lines from an old hymn that are engraved on the stone: "One generation follows another,/ The pilgrims' song is never silenced in heaven." She sang the opening phrase softly, almost to herself, cherishing the simple melody.


Theological Spin
To the Editor:
I suppose all interpretations of "Hamlet" have validity  [ "Other Methods, Other Madness and Always Slings and Arrows," July 2 ] .
But is our generation so antireligious that it can't do more than pay lip service to the religious issues in "Hamlet"?


CHATTER: Censor the Internet; Taking Responsibility
What, if anything, should be done to limit sexually explicit material on the Internet?
It should be the user's responsibility to determine what should and should not be seen on the computer.
And there is software available to block pornographic stuff.
Leave the Government out of our communications superhighway!
They have too much control already.
LANCE PARKER Baton Rouge, La.


George T. Douris, 67, Reporter And Public Relations Executive
George T. Douris, a New York public relations executive whose clients benefited from his prominence in the city's Greek-American community and the extensive contacts he cultivated during his years as a newspaper reporter covering City Hall, died on Friday at the Roosevelt Hospital Division of St.
Luke's-Roosevelt Hospital Center.
He was 67 and lived in Manhattan.
His family said the cause was prostate cancer.


On the Roads: 12 Trouble Spots To Avoid This Week (if You Can)
A look at trouble spots you may encounter in the next week -- or month, or months -- courtesy of Transcom, an interstate transportation agency. 1.
ROUTE 4 -- Fort Lee.
Eastbound left lane and ramp to northbound I-95 closed, through July.
One lane from upper and lowel level of George Washington Bridge to westbound Route 4 closed, through Nov. 15.


Some Familiar Faces, From Foreign Places
IN spite of the dry soil and soaring temperatures, some plants are getting along just fine this summer.
They are called weeds.
These particular plants are quite clever.
They huddle near ornamentals as if to disguise themselves, or worse, they grow so close in and under favored plants that they are sometimes not seen.


MARKET TIMING
Monday House subcommittees on trade and telecommunications begin joint hearings on the elimination of the Department of Commerce.
This will be another busy week for quarterly earnings.
General Signal is expected to report 64 cents a share; Southwest Airlines, 33 cents a share, and Union Carbide, $1.46.
Tuesday The Conference Board releases its consumer confidence index for July.
Forecast: a rise to 95, after hitting 92.8 in June.
The National Association of Realtors announces existing home sales for June.
Forecast: The rate on 30-year mortgages fell to 7.57 percent in June, down from almost 8 percent in May.
Chubb is expected to announce earnings of $1.62 cents a share and Monsanto, $2.46.
Wednesday The Senate Judiciary Committee holds a hearing on product liability and a proposal to limit punitive damages against makers of drugs and medical devices.
The House Small Business Committee holds a hearing on the overhaul of the Occupational Safety and Health Administration.
Borland is expected to post a loss of 9 cents a share.
Analysts said Minnesota Mining &amp; Manufacturing should announce earnings of 92 cents a share.
Thursday The Commerce Department releases durable goods orders for June.
Forecast: up a half-percent, after a 2.5 percent increase in May.
Dow Chemical is expected to report earnings of $2.34 a share, and UAL, $4.21.
Friday The Commerce Department will release the initial estimate of gross domestic product for the second quarter.
Forecast: Analysts expect little or no growth in the quarter, with G.D.P. rising as little as three-tenths of 1 percent.
Aetna Life &amp; Casualty is expected to announce earnings of $1.11 a share; Kellogg, 75 cents, and U S West, 66 cents.


A Classic Tale Springs From the Cupboard
Kids  Leo Fitzpatrick, Justin Pierce, Chloe Sevigny, Rosario Dawson Directed by Larry Clark Unrated 95 minutes
A group of New York teen-agers spend 24 hours talking about sex, seeking sex, having sex, buying drugs and using drugs.
The story begins with a seduction and ends with an all-night party that looks like a cross between "La Dolce Vita" and Jonestown.
Much of the action takes place in apartments whose resident adults seem to be out of town or nonexistent.
The main character, Telly (Mr. Fitzpatrick), makes it his goal to deflower two virgins in one day.
Every event in the film takes on new meaning when one character tests positive for the AIDS virus.


Survivors Tell of Serb Atrocities in Fallen Enclave
Selik Hasamovic's arms, powerful from years of working in the mines, looked even stronger today, stripped of all but skin and muscle after 12 days of scrounging for food in the mountains.
His arms hung bare from the shoulders of his plaid shirt, for he had ripped off the sleeves to wrap around his badly swollen feet.
He and thousands of other men had been on the run from the Serbian Army since the Serbs captured the United Nations-designated "safe area" at Srebrenica two weeks ago.
They gave their accounts today, and they and United Nations officials said there had been signs -- though no firm evidence -- that soldiers from the regular Yugoslav Army had joined Bosnian Serbs in the attack.


Take Cuttings and Watch Out for Pests
Take cuttings of fragrant geraniums now, while plants are thriving outside.
I stick five-inch cuttings all about the pots on my roof garden, where other plants provide enough shade to protect the cuttings from too-bright sun while they are growing roots.
I've been amazed to see new leaves after only a few weeks.
Fragrant geraniums are some of my favorite winter house plants; just brushing against a leaf can send the fresh fragrance of lemon or peppermint into the air.
This is a good time to repot house plants if they are root-bound or need dividing.
Soak old pots in a solution of nine parts water to one part bleach; scrub with a wire brush.
This guards against spread of disease or insects.
Never increase the pot diameter for a crowded plant by more than three inches.


Paige Smith, Kenton Jernigan
Paige Smith, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert Hoyt Smith of Pine Bluff, Ark., was married yesterday to Kenton Jernigan, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Samuel Jernigan of Newport, R.I.
The Rev.
John Rogers performed the Episcopal ceremony at the chapel at St.
George's School in Newport.
The bride, 30, is keeping her name.
She is an associate in sales and trading at Smith Barney, the securities brokerage in New York.
She graduated from Hollins College and received a master's degree in management from Northwestern University.
Her father retired as the vice president of Simmons First National Bank in Pine Bluff.
Her mother, Sue Smith, teaches home economics at Pine Bluff High School.


Dutch Masters
THE DUTCH REPUBLIC Its Rise, Greatness, and Fall, 1477-1806.
By Jonathan Israel.
Illustrated. 1,231 pp.
New York:  Oxford University Press. $39.95.


Dollar Differential
To the Editor:
In his article "Americans in a Land of Opportunity: Europe"  [ July 2 ] , Alan Riding neglects to explain why young American writers and painters no longer go to Europe to develop as artists.
Besides the growing insularity of Americans in general, surely the main reason for this is economic, i.e., the weak dollar.


New York City Need Not Have Lost Its Major Credit Rating
To the Editor:
Regarding Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani's July 16 letter and Standard &amp; Poor's downgrading of New York City's debt, I regret the inability of this Mayor to keep the city's one major investment grade rating.
Like it or not, that rating represents the best indicator of the city's creditworthiness. (Fitch's rating is not considered "major" by investors.)


Celebrations of Life After Battling Cancer
PAT COMBS, standing arm in arm with her husband, Ted, surveyed the crowd seated under the white tent.
It was not a group Mrs.
Combs had ever envisioned being part of.
But now that she was, she wanted to remain so, because these were survivors.
"I'm rather new at this," said Mrs.
Combs, 51 years old, whose lung cancer was not diagnosed until this March, when it had spread to her brain.
She underwent surgery and, on a warm recent day, celebrated her survival with other patients at the Helen and Harry Gray Cancer Center at Hartford Hospital.


Giants Can't Wait to Tackle Early Tests
It has been a raucous spring for the Giants, and all indications are that the team is champing at the bit.
One defensive lineman, Chris Maumalanga, hit a free agent linebacker so hard he knocked him down with one punch.
There was one fight in the locker room in which one player body-slammed another.
And this was the off season.


Word for Word / Conspiracy Theories; The Unending Search for Demons In the American Imagination
WHISPERS are stalking the land: The United Nations is poised to take over the United States.
The Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms wants to disarm the country.
Black helicopters are spying on the citizenry.
If today's conspiracy theories provoke a shiver in the night, some bedtime reading may help.
A vast array of Cassandras echo through American history -- usually on the fringes of politics but occasionally accepted by the mainstream.
Through the centuries the villains of the pieces have shifted -- from Masons to Catholics to Jews, for example -- but the alleged plots also have a lot in common: a foreign (or otherwise alien) connection, a tie to big money, a secret organization more powerful than any state.


The Lament of the Belgian Director
Like the Ancient Mariner, Jean-Luc Vandenbroucke sits outside the action, waiting to tug at the sleeves of passersby and recount his tale of woe.
He was at it again today as the Tour de France neared its finish with a 46.5-kilometer (29-mile) individual time trial around the Lac de Vassiviere, a man-made lake near the porcelain center of Limoges in southwest France.
Bowed but not totally broken, Vandenbroucke hailed the latest wedding guest.


Abby Farrington, Thomas O'Malley
Abby Alida Farrington, the daughter of Lillian B. Farrington of Sea Bright, N.J., and the late Edgar R. Farrington, was married yesterday to Thomas Patrick O'Malley, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Francis D. O'Malley of West Islip, L.I.
The Rev.
Joseph W. Hughes, a Roman Catholic priest, performed the ceremony at Holy Cross Church in Rumson, N.J.
Mrs.
O'Malley, 28, is a sales manager in the subsidiary rights department at John Wiley &amp; Sons, the publishing house, in New York.
She graduated from Hamilton College.
Her father was the chairman of the Cresset Company, a former typography concern in New York.


Output Is Up; So Are Complaints on Quality
GENERAL MOTORS is selling every sport utility vehicle it can make, but a survey has found that soon after they find a home, they generate far more customer complaints than do new cars.
No wonder.
In my test of Chevrolet's Blazer, Tahoe and Suburban, an ashtray fell out of the dash and a seat adjuster proved balky (Blazer), a power window came off its track (Tahoe), a plastic shield on a shoulder belt was not properly fastened and easily came off, screw covers were not secure, another seat was balky and a light under the hood flickered (Suburban).
A colleague recently drove a Tahoe with a Chevrolet engineer and both agreed it had a noisy wiper motor.


Yanks Toil Through The Trouble
Give the 1995 Yankees credit.
Eleven games into what is shaping up to be the 14-game homestand from Hades off the field, the Yankees are regrouping on the field.
Yesterday, shaking off the effects of life in this toddling tabloid town, the Yankees went out and beat the Texas Rangers and the tough Bob Tewksbury.
The Yankees' 7-4 victory was their fourth straight and seventh in 11 games since the All-Star Game break.


SERBS KEEPING UP A HEAVY BARRAGE ON 3 'SAFE AREAS'
Rebel Serbs pressed their attack against the United Nations "safe area" of Zepa in eastern Bosnia today and continued their heavy shelling of Sarajevo.
The Bihac enclave, in northern Bosnia, also came under fire.
The attacks came a day after NATO allies threatened the Bosnian Serbs with heavy bombing if they attacked Gorazde, another United Nations-declared "safe area."


BEST SELLERS: July 23, 1995
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
1
2
BEACH MUSIC, by Pat Conroy. (Talese/Doubleday, $27.50.) An American living in Rome returns to South Carolina and tries to cope with his troubled past.
2
2
4
ROSE MADDER, by Stephen King. (Viking, $25.95.) Fleeing an abusive husband, a woman seeks happiness in a strange city by creating her own myth.
3
3
154
THE BRIDGES OF MADISON COUNTY, by Robert James Waller. (Warner, $17.95.) A photographer and a farmer's lonely wife in Iowa.
4
4
13
THE RAINMAKER, by John Grisham. (Doubleday, $25.95.) A young man barely out of law school tries to expose a corporation's multibillion-dollar scam.
5
6
4
THE WITNESS, by Sandra Brown. (Warner, $21.95.) A public defender who seems happy in her work and her marriage is plunged into a morass of bigotry and hate.
6
5
73
THE CELESTINE PROPHECY, by James Redfield. (Warner, $17.95.) An ancient manuscript, found in Peru, provides insights into achieving a fulfilling life.
7
7
8
THE APOCALYPSE WATCH, by Robert Ludlum. (Bantam, $24.95.) Tracking a neo-Nazi movement with designs on American and European officials.
8*
8
11
LET ME CALL YOU SWEETHEART, by Mary Higgins Clark. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $24.) An unusual murder case haunts a prosecutor's career and her private life.
9
9
2
DISNEY'S POCAHONTAS. (Mouse Works, $6.98.) The romance of an American Indian princess and an Englishman, told in words and pictures.
10
10
57
POLITICALLY CORRECT BEDTIME STORIES, by James Finn Garner. (Macmillan, $8.95.) Classic tales respun to avoid offending current sensibilities.
11
11
13
LADDER OF YEARS, by Anne Tyler. (Knopf, $24.) At 40, a woman leaves her physician husband and children to start a new life in a strange town.
12
12
10
ONCE UPON A MORE ENLIGHTENED TIME, by James Finn Garner. (Macmillan, $9.95.) Eight more "politically correct bedtime stories."
13
13
2
AFTER DARK, by Phillip Margolin. (Doubleday, $23.95.) A thriller about murder and corruption in an Oregon court.
14
14
4
REDEMPTION, by Leon Uris. (HarperCollins, $25.) In a sequel to "Trinity," the Larkin family continues to fight for Irish independence.
15
15
7
STRANGE HIGHWAYS, by Dean Koontz. (Tartikoff/Warner, $23.95.) A collection of suspense tales, including novels, novellas and short stories.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Nonfiction
1
9
2
TO RENEW AMERICA, by Newt Gingrich. (HarperCollins, $24.) The Speaker of the House describes his solutions to the country's problems.
2
1
5
NEW PASSAGES, by Gail Sheehy. (Random House, $25.) How changing social conditions and longer life expectancies are affecting our lives.
3
5
72
MIDNIGHT IN THE GARDEN OF GOOD AND EVIL, by John Berendt. (Random House, $23.) The mysterious death of a young man in Savannah, Ga.
4
3
5
A GOOD WALK SPOILED, by John Feinstein. (Little, Brown, $23.95.) A sportswriter reports on the P.G.A.
Tour in 1993 and 1994.
5
2
8
SPONTANEOUS HEALING, by Andrew Weil. (Knopf, $23.) A physician explains the ways in which the body heals itself.
6
6
8
DAVE BARRY'S COMPLETE GUIDE TO GUYS, by Dave Barry. (Random House, $21.) A humorist describes the strange ways of a species of males called "guys."
7
7
30
SISTERS.
Essays by Carol Saline.
Photographs by Sharon J. Wohlmuth. (Running Press, $27.50.) The relationships of 36 sets of sisters.
8
4
41
THE HOT ZONE, by Richard Preston. (Random House, $23.) The discovery of the deadly Ebola virus in Virginia and the efforts to keep it from spreading.
9
8
23
THE DEATH OF COMMON SENSE, by Philip K. Howard. (Random House, $18.) How governmental rules and regulations are fettering the lives of all Americans.
10
13
83
THE BOOK OF VIRTUES, by William J. Bennett. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $30.) Moral stories adapted from the Greeks, the Bible, folklore and elsewhere.
11
10
2
WHEN ELEPHANTS WEEP, by Jeffrey Moussaieff Masson and Susan McCarthy. (Delacorte, $23.95.) The emotional lives of animals.
12
15
14
FROM BEGINNING TO END, by Robert Fulghum. (Villard, $20.) The rituals we practice and the spiritual journeys we take, from childhood to old age.
13
12
7
KATO KAELIN, by Marc Eliot. (Harper Paperbacks, $20.) A friend of O.J.
Simpson's on events surrounding the murders of Nicole Simpson and Ron Goldman.
14*
11
6
SLEEPING AT THE STARLITE MOTEL, by Bailey White. (Addison-Wesley, $20.) A Georgia schoolteacher tells about her adventures while traveling and at home.
15*
12
IN RETROSPECT, by Robert S. McNamara with Brian VanDeMark. (Times Books/Random House, $27.50.) The author recalls his role in the Vietnam War.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous
1
1
113
MEN ARE FROM MARS, WOMEN ARE FROM VENUS, by John Gray. (HarperCollins, $23.) Communicating.
2
2
18
THE SEVEN SPIRITUAL LAWS OF SUCCESS, by Deepak Chopra. (Amber-Allen/New World Library, $14.) How to "generate wealth in all its forms."
3
3
10
HOW TO ARGUE AND WIN EVERY TIME, by Gerry Spence. (St. Martin's, $22.95.) A lawyer describes ways to win arguments at home and at work.
4
4
10
MARS AND VENUS IN THE BEDROOM, by John Gray. (HarperCollins, $22.) Maintaining passion.
Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending July 8, at 3,050 bookstores plus wholesalers serving 28,000 other retailers (gift shops, department stores, newsstands, supermarkets), statistically weighted to represent sales in all such outlets nationwide.
An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
And Bear in Mind (Editor's Choices of other recent books of particular interest) COLD SNAP: Stories, by Thom Jones. (Little, Brown, $19.95.) A collection that turns a merciless, ironic gaze on the organic trap called life, in which spiritual beings -- humans -- are forever in jeopardy of mere chemical accidents or biological insults.
THE ENGINE OF REASON, THE SEAT OF THE SOUL: A Philosophical Journey Into the Brain, by Paul M. Churchland. (Bradford/MIT, $29.95.) A philosopher's argument, clear, witty and scientifically up-to-date, that all of human mental life, however subjective it feels, is reducible to material activity taking place in the brain.
FIREBRAND: The Life of Horace Liveright, by Tom Dardis. (Random House, $27.50.) A brisk, concise, unpedantic biography of the salesman turned publisher who created the modern style of aggressive book promotion and advertising.
JOHN SLOAN: Painter and Rebel, by John Loughery. (John Macrae/Holt, $37.50.) A thoughtful, absorbing life of an illustrious member of "The Eight," artists who rebelled against the stodgy academic standards of American art at the beginning of this century.
THE LIARS' CLUB: A Memoir, by Mary Karr. (Viking, $22.95.) A haunting memoir of growing up in East Texas while trying to figure one's parents out, especially a hugely enigmatic mother who says little, reads Camus and Sartre and tries to throw herself from cars while drunk.
THE LOVE LETTER, by Cathleen Schine. (Houghton Mifflin, $19.95.) Helen is 42, capable and loves Edith Wharton.
Johnny is 20, acne-spotted and -- like, excellent! -- a big Tom Robbins fan.
In this comic novel they fall in love.
MOVING VIOLATIONS: War Zones, Wheelchairs, and Declarations of Independence, by John Hockenberry. (Hyperion, $24.95.) Swaggering in a wheelchair isn't easy, but this candidly aggressive National Public Radio correspondent is up to the job (or any other).
THE NEXT AMERICAN NATION: The New Nationalism and the Fourth American Revolution, by Michael Lind. (Free Press, $25.) An intelligent, industrious, not very cheerful look at possible futures.
Balkanization through identity politics?
Stratification, Brazilian style?
THE PRICE OF A CHILD, by Lorene Cary. (Knopf, $23.) A sensual, funny first novel that transposes to pre-Civil War Philadelphia the theme of the author's 1991 memoir, "Black Ice": the duty of an escapee toward the oppressed she leaves behind.
SECRET LIFE: An Autobiography, by Michael Ryan. (Pantheon, $25.) The biggest secret was Mr.
Ryan's sex addiction, from which he says he is recovering; this disturbing, amazingly risky work of self-exposure by an accomplished poet is a portrait of the artist as a young misfit.
THERAPY, by David Lodge. (Viking, $22.95.) An exceedingly funny novel (the author's 10th) of midlife crisis, whose 58-year-old hero, Tubby, is an awfully nice guy but unhappy in a vague way that none of his many therapies seem to help.


Mayor Finds Obstacles In Regulating Sex Shops
It would seem to be an easy triumph for Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani's swashbuckling quality-of-life campaign: drive the sex shops out of residential neighborhoods and darken those flashy triple-X storefronts once and for all.
But judging from the range of responses, passing the new zoning regulations for sex-related businesses may prove to be an uphill battle for the Mayor.
As the City Planning Commission prepares to hold public hearings on the zoning amendment Wednesday and Thursday, the city is sharply divided on whether the proposal is too restrictive or does not go far enough.
Manhattan and Brooklyn oppose it for very different reasons; Queens, the Bronx and Staten Island support it with modifications.


How a City Block Became a Spiritual Path
At first glance, Parsons Boulevard between Normal Road and 87th Avenue looks like any other row of small businesses.
There's a stationery store, health food shop, florist, barber, dry cleaner, luncheonette, clothing boutique, grocery and law office.
But spend a few minutes inside and outside these stores, and some unusual things become very apparent.
The stationery and health food stores are each called "Guru," and many of the clean-cut, physically fit employees and customers in these stores wear shirts with poems inscribed on them.
Most of the stores have posters in their windows promoting the teachings of Sri Chinmoy, an Indian spiritual leader.


North and South Meet in the Italian Marches
ABOUT three hours' drive east of Rome lies the Marches region of Italy (le Marche, in Italian), extending from the Apennines to the Adriatic.
The region is characterized by fortified hill towns, rugged mountains and deep gorges, and a flat coastal ribbon.
Its name derives from its medieval role as border land (a marca), and even today it is sort of a buffer zone between north and south, as its cuisine shows: very generally speaking, the affinities in the northern half of the region are with neighboring Emilia-Romagna and in the south with Abruzzo.
We spent a long weekend in the northern Marche provinces of Ancona and Pesaro, mostly near the sea, about a fortnight before the great July invasion of beachgoers along the Adriatic Coast.
We discovered a small group of fine restaurants whose owners and chefs are dedicated to interpreting the region's best ingredients and traditions and to its excellent wines.
The gracious Marchigiani don't expect visitors, even from as near as Rome, to be knowledgeable about the region's products, even its famous verdicchio wine, and are eager to explain and suggest.


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
Indomitable Triathloner
COMPETING in a one-person triathlon across Long Island offers positives and negatives.
A big positive is that if you finish you always come in first.
A big negative is trying to finish.
Long Island traffic waits for no man.
Especially a lone man who is trying to bike, run and swim across the busiest byways.
"The logistics are a nightmare," said Joe Tantillo of Patchogue, who competed last weekend in the Cross Island Challenge, the challenge being his own.
Mr.
Tantillo's goal was to travel from Long Island Sound in Port Jefferson to Davis Park on Fire Island.
On land he had to cross busy intersections and railroad tracks.
"So I had to check the train schedules," he said.
Then there was the ferry schedule.


NATO Diplomats Question Details of Plan for Air Raids
Despite the warning by the United States, Britain and France that they would bomb Bosnian Serb forces if they attack the Gorazde "safe area" in eastern Bosnia, senior NATO diplomats and military officers said today that there were serious questions about how the threat would be carried out.
"The history of this conflict is that people often agree to threats on the political level, but when it comes down to the military details, all kinds of objections crop up," one NATO diplomat said.


Vassar Offers Creativity On the Summer Circuit
GILDA RADNER is remembered by a dear friend in one play, and Steve Martin is back for a second summer, as playwright.
Beth Henley and John Patrick Shanley are regulars.
The actors, too, light up marquees and display awards on their mantels.
But New York Stage and Film at Vassar College here is not about the value of name dropping or the chance of being Broadway bound.
It is about what the theater is supposed to be about: the process, the ensemble, the evolution of the work, the work itself.
It is not commerce; it is camaraderie and collaboration.
And it is art.


U.S. Lists 10 Soviet-Built Nuclear Reactors as High Risks
Underscoring previous warnings from Western experts about the dangers of Soviet-built nuclear power plants, a Federal intelligence report says 10 reactors in Slovakia, Lithuania, Russia, Bulgaria and Ukraine face an abnormally high risk of failure.
The danger is attributed to design flaws, tattered economies, political disorder and weak regulatory oversight.


Randy Carroll and Kathleen Dillon
Kathleen Logan Abshire Dillon, a daughter of Dr.
Martin C. Dillon of Friendsville, Pa., and the late Nan L. B. Joyce, is to be married today to Alexander Randolph Holladay Carroll, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
James B. M. Carroll of Ponte Vedra Beach, Fla.
The Rev.
Lawrence Thompson, an Episcopal minister, is to perform the ceremony at the Inn at Long Shore in Westport, Conn.
The bride, 32, is a consultant at the Marketing Corporation of America, a management consulting company in Westport.
She graduated from Cornell University, from which she also received an M.B.A.
Her father is a writer and a distinguished teaching professor of philosophy at the State University in Binghamton, N.Y.
Her mother was the director of the domestic violence action committee program for Catholic Charities of Chenango County in Norwich, N.Y.
Nan's Place, a safe house for abused women in Norwich, was established in her memory.


Lisa N. Edstrom, Gregory E. Hagin
Lisa N. Edstrom, the daughter of Pamela and Michael J. Edstrom of Brooklyn, was married yesterday to Gregory E. Hagin, a son of Eugene H. Hagin of Princeton, N.J., and the late Rita G. Hagin.
Judge Bert A. Bunyan of the Civil Court of Kings County, officiated on the beach at Lonelyville, on Fire Island.
Ms.
Edstrom, 24, is keeping her name.
She teaches kindergarten at the Mount Kisco (N.Y.) Elementary School.
She graduated from Harvard University and received a master's degree in education from Bank Street College of Education.
Her father, a graphic artist, is also an adjunct professor of graphic arts at the Fashion Institute of Technology in New York.
Her mother is a social-work supervisor at the Human Resources Administration's Domestic Violence Program in New York.


What's Bill Got That Worked for John, Dick and Yes, Harry
Over the years, people have tried to predict market performance based on such factors as hemline lengths, baseball or football championships and the position of the stars in the sky.
Another favorite tactic is to correlate returns with presidential elections, which may not be so unreasonable after all.
Phoenix Investments, a fund and money management company in Hartford, noted in a recent study that stocks perform best in the third year of a presidential cycle, and the company encourages investors to get in the game before it's too late.


Constitution Island: How It Was Named
Britain does not have a constitution as the June 25 article "Guarding Constitution Island for Its Role in the Revolution" implies: "Originally called Martelaer's Rock, the island was named Constitution by colonists fighting for their rights under the British Constitution." RICHARD SILVERSTEIN Dobbs Ferry Editor's note: Britain does not have a written constitution.
Dr.
Steve Grove, Military Academy Historian at West Point, says that when he speaks to tour groups, questions about the colonists' naming of Constitution Island invariably come up.
He says that the colonists would have been familiar with the British constitution and wanted to show that they were adherents to its concepts.
The British constitution is a collection of documents and unwritten conventions, including the Magna Carta, legal decisons and acts of Parliament.
The Constitution of the United States was not adopted until 1789, well after the naming of Constitution Island.


Habitats/114 East 72d Street; Sun, Space and a Duplex
SO they made a deal: She'd get the huge party-in closet (much bigger than walk-in) and he'd be close to Central Park, where he likes to jog.
Together, they'd find a "bonus" to set their apartment off from those of most of the other wage-slaving, claustrophobic apartment-living New Yorkers.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
UNDER THE BIG TOP  A Season With the Circus. By Bruce Feiler. Scribner, $23.


Dancing Away A Heat Wave
Lincoln Center's 'Midsummer Night Swing,' July 15.


Wartime Dreams Revisited
WHAT TERM COULD BE more oxymoronic than "wartime nostalgia"?
Does anyone really want a return to the days of Hitler, Hiroshima and Auschwitz?
Yet in America, where no bombs fell and no storm troopers landed during World War II, Hollywood and Tin Pan Alley created a seductive wartime dream world of heroics and hearts and flowers that grows more appealing as the decades slip away.
Fifty years after the end of the World War II, the music that wafted through our national dream life in the early 1940's is regarded by many as the country's finest pop moment.
Nostalgia for the 40's dates back to the early 1970's when Bette Midler scored a top 10 single with "Boogie Woogie Bugle Boy," a 1941 Andrews Sisters hit.
More recently, cabaret singers like Maureen McGovern, Andrea Marcovicci and Mary Cleere Haran have devoted entire programs to the 1940's, and Barry Manilow has recorded an album of big-band standards.
Harry Connick Jr. presents himself as a born-in-New-Orleans reincarnation of Frank Sinatra and Dick Haymes.


W.E. Woolfenden, 77, Dies; American Art Archives Chief
William E. Woolfenden, who made it his mission to gather every artifact, photograph, scrap of paper and taped recollection he could about American artists, collectors, curators and dealers, died of respiratory failure on Wednesday in New Haven, Conn.
He was 77.
A resident of Southbury, Conn., he had retired in 1983 after serving 19 years as director of the Smithsonian Institution's Archives of American Art.


Vroooom


Whitewater: New Ground
It is comforting to learn that after the suicide of Vincent Foster, the troubled deputy counsel to President Clinton, someone in the Government recognized that the White House was contaminating the investigation and had the integrity to say so.
If the Senate's Whitewater committee were merely plowing old ground, as the Administration claims, then it would not be turning up just this sort of valuable new information.
This is stuff that was buried in secrecy and almost covered over by last summer's easygoing hearings run by the President's party.
It may or may not lead to legal charges, but there is no question about the public value of exposing official bungling and lying.


Are America's Wide Open Spaces Too Big for the Small Screen?
HERE's the idea: five young people who have never met board a Winnebago and set off across the country.
Every few days, they get a new clue -- in a pouch around a dog's neck, for example -- that presents them with a new destination and a new challenge, like working at an alligator farm or parachuting out of a plane.
Their adventures, their fights, their accomplishments and their whining -- in short their every move -- is recorded by video cameras.
This is the idea behind "Road Rules," a new MTV series on Monday nights at 10 for the next 13 weeks.
The show draws most obviously on its MTV predecessor "The Real World," a series that put a group of nubile strangers together in a house for several weeks of on-air angst.
But there is also a strong allusion to a more venerable, if often underappreciated television tradition: the road show.
"Road Rules" is "Route 66" with better outfits and more sex.


2-Tier Pricing in Prague: Foreigners Pay More
TOURISTS have become an inescapable part of daily life in this city, a situation that doesn't thrill residents as they try to wend their way around narrow streets clogged with visitors.
More tourists entered the Czech Republic last year -- 100 million, according to the World Tourism Organization -- than visited France.
It is perhaps hardly surprising that some businesses take advantage of the newcomers by charging them substantially higher prices than they charge Czechs.
And in charging, say, double for foreigners, Czech proprietors appear to be protected by the law.
Or let's say one important branch of the Czech Government, the Ministry of Finance, has blessed what has become a two-tiered pricing system.


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: July 23, 1995
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
4
DEBT OF HONOR, by Tom Clancy. (Berkley, $7.50.) Jack Ryan and the C.I.A. vs. a Japanese plot to strike America's territory and economy.
2
5
THE ALIENIST, by Caleb Carr. (Bantam, $6.99.) A journalist and a psychologist track down a murderer in turn-of-the-century Manhattan.
3
11
THE STONE DIARIES, by Carol Shields. (Penguin, $10.95.) The journey of a woman from childhood to motherhood through old age.
4
17
THE CHAMBER, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $7.50.) A lawyer represents a racist who is on death row for his part in a 1967 bombing.
5
39
CONGO, by Michael Crichton. (Ballantine, $6.99.) An American team seeks to discover why a group of archeologists died among ruins.
6
11
REMEMBER ME, by Mary Higgins Clark. (Pocket, $6.99.) After an estranged couple reunite, they are haunted by a mysterious force.
7
3
FIRST OFFENSE, by Nancy Taylor Rosenberg. (Signet, $6.99.) A probation officer whose husband is missing finds her life threatened.
8
6
CHARADE, by Sandra Brown. (Warner Vision, $6.99.) Following a heart transplant, a television host finds her life enriched -- and endangered.
9
2
DOWNTOWN, by Anne Rivers Siddons. (Harper Paperbacks, $6.99.) In Atlanta during the 1960's, a woman learns about life and men.
10*
28
CIRCLE OF FRIENDS, by Maeve Binchy. (Dell, $6.50.) The coming of age of women in an Irish village and in Dublin's academia.
11
7
UNDUE INFLUENCE, by Steve Martini. (Jove, $6.99.) A defense attorney is caught in a web of murder and deceit within his own family.
12
4
HOLLYWOOD KIDS, by Jackie Collins. (Pocket, $6.99.) The tribulations of the privileged adult children of movie stars.
13
4
ONLY LOVE, by Elizabeth Lowell. (Avon, $5.99.) A woman living in the post-Civil War Rockies fends off dangers and finds romance.
14
2
ON DANGEROUS GROUND, by Jack Higgins. (Berkley, $6.50.) Powerful interests conspire to stop the transfer of Hong Kong to China in 1997.
15
1
WHITE SHARK, by Peter Benchley. (St. Martin's, $6.50.) A marine biologist battles a mysterious underwater monster.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
NonFiction
1
4
APOLLO 13, by Jim Lovell and Jeffrey Kluger. (Pocket, $6.50.) The 1970 moon mission during which an oxygen tank exploded.
2
1
THE HOT ZONE, by Richard Preston. (Anchor/Doubleday, $6.99.) The discovery of the deadly Ebola virus in Virginia and the efforts to keep it from spreading.
3
44
EMBRACED BY THE LIGHT, by Betty J. Eadie with Curtis Taylor. (Bantam, $5.99.) A woman's near-death experience.
4
17
REVIVING OPHELIA, by Mary Pipher. (Ballantine, $12.50.) The dangers that beset teen-age girls.
5*
80
CARE OF THE SOUL, by Thomas Moore. (Harper Perennial, $12.) Everyday spirituality.
6
11
MOTHERLESS DAUGHTERS, by Hope Edelman. (Delta, $12.95.) The experiences of women after the deaths of their mothers.
7*
123
I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS, by Maya Angelou. (Bantam, $4.99.) The poet's depiction of her childhood and adolescence.
8
611
THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott
Peck. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $10.95.) Inspiration.
9
2
THE PRIVATE DIARY OF AN O.J.
JUROR, by Michael Knox with Mike Walker. (Dove, $5.99.) The recollections of a man who was discharged from the jury during the trial of O.J.
Simpson.
10
45
MAMA MAKES UP HER MIND, by Bailey White. (Vintage, $10.) Life in a Georgia town.
11*
32
SOUL MATES, by Thomas Moore. (Harper Perennial, $13.) Love and relationships.
12*
43
HAVING OUR SAY, by Sarah L. Delany and A. Elizabeth Delany with Amy Hill Hearth. (Dell, $5.99.) Two black sisters reflect on their lives.
13
2
THE CATCHER WAS A SPY, by Nicholas Dawidoff. (Vintage, $13.) The life of Moe Berg, big-league catcher, O.S.S. agent and lady's man.
14
22
MAKES ME WANNA HOLLER, by Nathan McCall. (Vintage, $12.) The life of a young black man in America.
15*
45
A HISTORY OF GOD, by Karen Armstrong. (Ballantine, $14.) A study of monotheism.
16*
12
MAYBE (MAYBE NOT), by Robert Fulghum. (Ivy, $6.99.) Inspirational essays.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Advice, How-To and Miscellaneous
1
43
CHICKEN SOUP FOR THE SOUL, compiled by Jack Canfield and Mark Victor Hansen. (Health Communications, $12.95.) Uplifting stories.
2
12
A 2ND HELPING OF CHICKEN SOUP FOR THE SOUL, compiled by Jack Canfield and Mark Victor Hansen. (Health Communications, $12.95.) One hundred more stories.
3
9
O.J.'S LEGAL PAD, by Henry Beard, John Boswell and Ron Barrett. (Villard, $8.95.) Notes and doodles supposedly made by O.J.
Simpson during his trial; a spoof.
4
221
THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE, by Stephen R. Covey. (Fireside/S&amp;S, $12.) Principles for success.
Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending July 8, at 3,050 bookstores plus wholesalers serving 38,000 other retailers, statistically weighted to represent sales in all such outlets nationwide.
An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.


Polish Tours
To the Editor
Having recently returned from our fourth visit to Poland since 1992, we are happy to report much more positive experiences with the Warsaw-based Our Roots travel agency than the 1990 experiences that Alan Finkelstein described (Letters, April 30).
Our Roots has been fair and professional on two individual tours we arranged and two group tours in which we were involved.
In our just-completed visit, our guide and driver went out of their way to accommodate our needs and respond to our many and varied questions.
GLENN RICHTER  New York, N.Y.
HENRY GERBER  Bayside, Queens


Love in P-Town


Coming to Jersey City: A Path From Bus to Train
On Tuesday, Federal, state and local officials will dedicate the Exchange Place Transit Mall in Jersey City, a pedestrian plaza that bans cars and allows buses only during the morning and evening rush hours.
The plaza, which extends from Hudson and Montgomery Streets east to the Hudson River, is expected to open in two weeks.
It is the first of several such malls N.J.
Transit hopes to construct in Hudson County to encourage more public transit.
Others, in various stages of design, are scheduled for Gateway Park-Ride, just west of Liberty State Park; Hoboken Terminal, Port Imperial in Weehawken and the Vince Lombardi rest area of the New Jersey Turnpike.


Transcendent Optimist
EMERSON The Mind On Fire.
By Robert D. Richardson Jr.
Illustrated. 671 pp.
Berkeley:  University of California Press. $35.


Caroline Tso, Theodore Chen
Caroline Gin Tso, a daughter of Arthur Y. Tso and Virginia C. Tso of East Brunswick, N.J., was married yesterday to Theodore Carl Chen, a son of Dr.
Pi-Fuay Chen and Bertha L. Chen of Alexandria, Va.
The Rev.
Dr.
John W. Hayward, a Baptist minister, performed the ceremony in the Kirkpatrick Chapel of Rutgers University in New Brunswick, N.J.
The bride, 29, is an associate at the New York law firm of Levy Phillips &amp; Konigsberg.
She graduated from Rutgers and received her law degree from American University.
Her father is a heat-transfer engineer at the Mobil Research and Development Corporation in Princeton, N.J.
Her mother is the business manager at the Center for Plastics Recycling and Packaging Engineering at the Rutgers campus in Piscataway, N.J.


Seeking Converts for Dianthus
I have always harbored a mild interest in dianthus.
These plants are not difficult to grow, they have a long and colorful history, they're totally in character with my cottage garden and the blossoms are delightfully fragrant.
So I amassed a modest collection of heirloom varieties with names like Inchmery and Queen of Sheba, while keeping an eye peeled for rarities like Bat's Double Red.
But pinks held merely a passing attraction until Rand B. Lee came into my life.
In horticulture there are a handful of ardent souls who exist solely to glorify a certain species.
Salvias, hostas, pelargoniums and clematis all have their champions.
Mr.
Lee is unabashedly dotty about dianthus.


Mr. Gingrich's World
House Speaker Newt Gingrich's views on international affairs have been making quite a splash recently.
Two weeks ago, on "Face the Nation," he breezily suggested that the United States overturn two decades of China policy and recognize Taiwan.
Then he said he did not mean it.
Never mind.
He was inviting further attention to his foreign policy ideas, all the while protesting that he had not really had enough time to polish his thoughts.
Profiled on the front page of last Tuesday's Times, Mr.
Gingrich reminded readers of his rapid rise from a west Georgia assistant professorship to the global stage.
What with most of his attention on domestic affairs these days, he freely acknowledged that when it comes to foreign policy he still has a lot to learn.


In Mark Morris's Utopia, Dancers Are Music
"THE THEATER WAS A VERB before it was a noun." Martha Graham said that, and it sent me straight to my dictionary and back through Middle English and Latin to Greek: "theasthai, to view, from thea, the act of seeing; akin to thauma, meaning miracle." She used to tell that to the acting students who studied dance with her; theater's roots were inseparable from dance and from music of some kind.
Louise Brooks said she learned to act by watching Graham dance and to dance by watching Charlie Chaplin act.
And it's worth remembering that America has made its boldest contributions to theater through musicals and through dance: the spiritual intimacies of modern dance and the social intricacies of vernacular dance.
A play has to depend on the tensions its story and characters incite.
Dances and musicals have tension built into them, tension that starts with the pull between a body and the music it moves to, or between words and music: the demands of speech and the strictures of song.
It's a contest and a courtship from the start; it spurs our senses and keeps our loyalties shifting in unexpected ways. 'L'Allegro, Il Penseroso Ed Il Moderato'
The choreographer Mark Morris's "Allegro, Il Penseroso ed Il Moderato" is a wonderful theater piece.
Created in 1988, it could be seen for a scant four days as part of the current Serious Fun Festival at Lincoln Center.
It gave off a celebratory air at the New York State Theater, with not only the Mark Morris Dance Group on stage but the New York Chamber Symphony, the Pro Arte Chorale and five vocal soloists in the orchestra pit.


Dr. Landesberg, Ms. Schwartz
Helene Elissa Schwartz, the daughter of Joan and Richard Schwartz of Melville, L.I., is to be married today to Dr.
Leonard John Landesberg, a son of Lucy and Dr.
Joseph Landesberg of Rockville Centre, L.I.
Rabbi William Berman is to perform the ceremony at the Woodbury (L.I.) Jewish Center.
The bride, 26, is to become an associate at McKinsey &amp; Company, the management consultant concern in New York, in September.
She graduated summa cum laude from the University of Pennsylvania, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa, and from which she also received an M.B.A. degree in May.
Her father retired as a partner in Ernst &amp; Young, the accounting firm in New York.


Advice to a Newspaper Dreamer
Print journalism has become rife with trouble: a strike (Detroit), downsizing (Los Angeles Times) and closings (New York Newsday).
So what would New York Newsday journalists advise a young person about pursuing a newspaper career?
ROBIN POGREBIN JIMMY BRESLIN, columnist: What are you going to do, go to banking?
I would just go into the business.
If you don't come out of rough times in this business, you don't belong.
I came out of the toughest, and I can walk through fire.
They better make sure they have their verbs in order before they start.
If you've got sentences nobody can remember, then you better be allowed to kill yourself.
SHERYL McCARTHY, columnist: I would not encourage a young person to go into journalism.
It's not quite the same as becoming a minister, yet it is a kind of calling.
You really have to be driven.
If you want to have an interesting life, and if you want people to invite you into their homes and tell you their most intimate secrets - that's why you do it.
PETE HAMILL, columnist: It depends on why you're going into it.
If you're going into it in order to have a pension plan, don't do it.
If you want to be famous, go and sell out your community and get a book deal or kill your wife or your husband.
But, if somebody has that crazy, driven need to do it, you must do it.
It was a lot more fun when the field was full of bohemian anarchists who stuck around for a while, threw a typewriter out the window and moved on.
When I broke in, and there were seven functioning newspapers, so at least you could go down the block if some butcher on the copy desk destroyed your masterpiece that morning.
But it's the most honorable work I can think of doing.
Start in Pascaloosa, if you have to.
KAREN ROTHMYER, assistant business editor: If you desperately want to be a newspaper person, do it.
You'll be happy.
It's a great life.
If you're young, you can afford to be out in the middle of nowhere, writing three stories a day.
AT 22, of course you should still do it.
But if you're in your 30's and considering a career shift, I might say, maybe youshould think about it.
If you've got a couple of kids and another 30 years of career ahead of you, I don't know.
Maybe software is the answer, I really don't know.


Auschwitz Photos
To the Editor
I am writing to amend a letter to the editor from Burton Caine saying he believed the prewar photos brought by Jews to Auschwitz-Birkenau "can only be seen at Auschwitz" (March 19).
The photos can be seen in many places.


Q and A
Passage to Poland
Q.
I will be visiting the Masurian region of Poland (former East Prussia) by late August and would like to spend a few days in a town called Elk, formerly Lyck.
Are there any hotels or other tourist facilities there?
And how can I get there from Warsaw? -- George E. Caspary, Tallahassee, Fla.


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
PLAYGROUND OLYMPICS
The 40th annual Playground Olympics are set for Wednesday at 10 A.M. at the Kensico Dam Plaza in Valhalla, organized by the County Department of Parks, Recreation and Conservation and several local recreation departments.
Spectators are welcome.
Children through 14 who have been certified as winners or runners-up in their hometown competitions are eligible.
Divided into groups through age 8, 10, 12 and 14, they will compete in a 50-yard dash, a 100-yard dash, the softball throw, the broad jump and the slalom soccer dribble.
All contestants will compete in a tug-of-war as a grand finale.
Children who create the most unusual banners will win awards along with those who win the athletic events.
The plaza is at the north end of the Bronx River Parkway, and the rain date is Thursday.
Call 593-2628 for more information.
LUDERS CELEBRATION &lt;&gt;HE&gt;
Westchester redsidents who now own or once owned a Luders-built boat may want to spend some nostalgic time in Stamford hobnobbing with other Luders aficionados.
The city is celebrating a cherished former resident -- the Luders Marine Construction Company -- with a harbor reunion of Luders-made yachts, sailboats and military vessels from Thursday through next Sunday.
Luders's former shipyard, in operation from 1911 to 1968, is now the Yacht Haven West Marina.
Among its more prestigious projects was the America's Cup winner Weatherly and the contender American Eagle as well as Navy minesweepers and patrol craft in World War II.
All Luders boat owners are eligible to join Stamford Historical Society members and former Luders employees at a Connecticut Maritime Association barbecue and beach party Thursday at 6 P.M.
The charge will be $40 for a complete dinner, hors d'oeuvres, wine and beer at Eletson Maritime, 40-44 Signal Road.
Call (203) 622-4014 for reservations.
A musical evening featuring songs of the sea and a box supper aboard the vessel Indian Harbor at Yacht Haven West will cost $25 and begin at 7 P.M. on Friday, and a buffet dinner at the Stamford Yacht Club on Saturday at 8 P.M. will cost $35.
For reservations, call (203) 329-1183.
Nongustatory events unrelated to Luders ownership include a boat-care clinic, especially for old wooden boats, scheduled next Saturday from 9 to 11:30 A.M. at Yacht Haven West, where a Boat Open House and an Antique and Marine Tag Sale will be in progress throughout the day.
Also on Saturday 90-minute harbor tours will depart from the marina at 1 and 3 P.M. and cost $10, while a sunset cruise from 6 to 9 P.M. includes a potluck supper at $25.
Call (203) 323-1978.
Three freebies are a Luders Slide Show on Saturday at 1 P.M. at the Ponus Yacht Club, and on Sunday a Yacht Parade into the harbor at 10 A.M. -- best seen from Cove Island, and a jazz concert at Cove Island Park from 5 to 7 P.M.
Through Sept. 17 an exhibition of Luders boat models, pictures, artifacts and drawings may be seen at the Stamford Historical Society, 1508 High Ridge Road, open Tuesday through Sunday from noon to 4 P.M.
Admission is $2, $1 for children.
Call (203) 329-1183 for more information.
THEATER DOINGS
Carmel's Parks and Recreation Department has reopened its Long Pond Showcase Theater in Sycamore Park, Mahopac, to present its production of the musical "They're Playing Our Song." The book is by Neil Simon, music by Marvin Hamlisch and lyrics by Carol Bayer Sager.
The original 1980's Broadway production starred Robert Klein and Luci Arnaz.
Performances are scheduled for Friday and next Sunday at 8 P.M. and Aug. 4 and 6, also at 8 o'clock..
Tickets are $7, $5 for children younger than 13 and adults older than 65.
The Long Pond Enchanted Theater for children will present "Doggie Bone Bare" today and next Sunday at 5 P.M. and on Saturday at 11 A.M.
Tickets are $3.
Call 628-7888 for reservations to both shows.
CZECH BAND
After bluegrass and new grass comes second grass, spelled Druha Trava in Czech.
That is the name of a country band from the Czech Republic, which is making its first appearance at the Towne Crier Cafe in Pawling tonight at 8:30 P.M.
The four-year-old group has performed in the United States and Europe to favorable reviews and recorded briskly selling records in English and Czech.
Their style is original and contemporary but grounded in American bluegrass, the cafe says.
The lead vocalist and guitarist, Robert Krestan, is known as the Bob Dylan of the Czech Republic.
The remaining members are Lubos Malina on banjo, fiddle and sax, Lubos Novotny on Dobro and lap steel, Pavel Malina on guitar and Jiri Meisner on bass.
All of them sing as well.
Tickets are $15.
Fans of Loudon Wainwright 3d's way with a memorable tune and a sharp lyric can catch his performance at the Towne Crier on Friday at 9:30 P.M. for a ticket price of $17.50.
The cafe is at 62 Route 22, and the phone number for reservations is 855-1300.
VOLUNTEERS SOUGHT
People with developmental disabilities like to go to museums, go fishing, bowling and horseback riding or play cards and checkers like anyone else.
But the availability of friends, relatives and even the Westchester Association for Retarded Citizens in White Plains, serving 1,500 children, adults and families, is insufficient to meet the need.
Volunteers interested in taking someone to a sporting event or a concert or spending an hour or so in a mutually agreeable activity two days a month or more should call 428-8330.
ELEANOR CHARLES


Moon Charged With Assaulting His Wife
Minnesota Vikings quarterback WARREN MOON, after publicly apologizing for a dispute with his wife that escalated into violence, faces possible jail time after being charged by authorities with misdemeanor assault.
Moon, charged with a Class A misdemeanor Friday night, surrendered to authorities and appeared before a Missouri City, Tex., municipal judge, where his arraignment was set for Sept. 19, a police spokeswoman said.
Moon was released on $1,000 personal recognizance bond.


C.W. Boldyreff, 85, Anti-Soviet Crusader
Constantin W. Boldyreff, a Russian emigre who fought Soviet Communism as a youth in the Soviet Union and later as a college professor in the United States, died on Tuesday at the Tolstoy Center Nursing Home in Valley Cottage, N.Y.
He was 85.
The son of a general in the White Russian Army who was shot by the Communists in 1932, Mr.
Boldyreff fled to Yugoslavia, where he received an engineering degree, managed British-American mining operations and, by his later account, joined other young Russian emigres in establishing the National Alliance of Russian Solidarists, an underground anti-Communist group.


Mahi-Mahi, Fresh and Simple for Summer
SIMPLE and fresh are the only demands summer makes on the dinner menu.
The following array is a good example.
The fish, mahi-mahi, which is available from local waters, is firm and easily grilled.


Gina Fiss, Joshua Rubenfeld
Gina Cohen Fiss, a daughter of Owen and Irene Fiss of Hamden, Conn., is to be married today to Joshua Marc Rubenfeld, a son of Lester and Alice Rubenfeld of Niskayuna, N.Y.
Rabbi Jon Konheim is to perform the ceremony at the Waveny House in New Canaan, Conn.
Ms.
Fiss, who will keep her name, and the bridegroom, both 25, graduated from Cornell University.
Next month the bride is to begin studying law and public administration at Syracuse University.
The bridegroom is a medical student at the State University Health Center at Syracuse.


ALSO INSIDE
MAKING IT WORK 3 The Tony for longevity: In a business where mere employment is a sign of success, there are a few actors who hold roles for 10 or 15 years.
NEW YORKERS &amp; CO. 4 The "Goddess Party" at Cafe 44, where large where it's at.
MOVIE CLOCK 10 What's showing at the local movie houses, today through Thursday.
PLAYING IN THE NEIGHBORHOOD 11 A little night music at the Seaport; a testimonial to a forefather of the city's parks; a Calypso king in Woodhaven.
GOOD EATING 12 A tour of the West Village: the cozy Au Troquet; the pleasing Tuscan cooking of Da Silvano.
SOAPBOX 13 Suffering with AIDS in secret.
And letters.


The Day the Jobs Got Up and Moved Away
HERE among the open fields and winding roads of suburban Mercer County, a sprawling steel and brown-brick factory has long provided jobs for hundreds of people, from janitors to rocket scientists.
Opened by RCA in 1958, it foreshadowed a regional economy that would flourish in the 1970's and 80's, as office buildings and corporate campuses sprang up between Princeton and Trenton.
But in recent months, what was once the unthinkable became the inevitable: the Lockheed Martin Corporation, the current owner of the East Windsor factory, joined three other major employers to announce plans to leave Mercer, taking a total of 5,400 jobs.
The losses amounted to 3,200 positions at Lockheed, which designs and manufactures spacecraft; 900 at the Mobil Corporation's research and development office in Hopewell Junction; 800 at Hill Refrigeration in Trenton, and 500 at a condom factory owned by Carter-Wallace, also in Trenton.


Corrections
A news analysis article on Saturday about the politics behind Gov.
Pete Wilson's role in eliminating affirmative-action programs at University of California campuses rendered a word incorrectly in a quotation from Sherry Bebitch Jeffe, a former legislative aide in Sacramento.
Ms.
Jeffe said of Mr.
Wilson: "He's been biding his time on this, knowing all along what he was going to do when the time was ripe. It's ripe. He's picked." She did not say, "He's pickled."


Daly Buries Some Old Demons in Auld Sod of Scotland
It was the wildest end to the craziest British Open this Old Course has ever seen, a drama with multiple acts and more twists and turns than the A91 from St.
Andrews down to Edinburgh.
So, when it was all over, when the final triple bogey had been made at the Road Hole and the last whoop and holler had died out among the spires and the alleys of the Auld Grey Toon, it was fitting that the winner was none other than the man the Scots call Wild Thing.
John Daly picked today at this haunted old spot to bury a whole bunch of demons, not to mention all the pre-tournament favorites.
On a hard, cold and windy day, Daly won the British Open in a four-hole playoff over Costantino Rocca of Italy.
He did it by keeping his patience when everybody around him was losing theirs.
He did it by hitting all the shots that conventional wisdom said he couldn't hit.
And, finally, he did it by heeding his own version of the famous Churchill one-line commencement address.


One Killed in Crash of Bus Carrying a Church Choir
A bus carrying a church group from western New York to a religious retreat apparently lost its brakes on a steep hill near Lake George yesterday, crashed through a guardrail and tumbled down a 300-foot embankment, killing one person on board and injuring 31 others, 7 seriously, the authorities said.
The chartered bus crashed at 2:15 P.M. in Bolton Landing, a small town about 70 miles north of Albany and 5 miles east of Interstate 87.
It was about 15 miles south of its destination, Silver Bay.
The weather was clear at the time, said Trooper Robin Walsh, a spokeswoman with the State Police, and because there were no skid marks, the authorities said that the bus driver appeared unable to brake.


Rockies' 4 Homers Bury Jones And Mets
Bobby Jones knew he was in trouble while he was warming up in the bullpen at Coors Field for today's start against the Colorado Rockies.
"Nothing was working," Jones said.
"My breaking ball wasn't moving and my fastball wasn't doing much either. I knew I'd have to try to make some adjustments when I got on the mound."
The Rockies never gave the right-hander a chance to find a workable solution.
By the time the first inning was over, they had pounded Jones for five runs on home runs by Dante Bichette, Vinny Castilla and Ellis Burks.
Burks added a two-run homer in the third, which provided the winning margin in an 8-5 victory, giving the Mets their first two-game losing streak since the All-Star Game break.


At Yale, an 'Original Thinker' Gets Results, and Attention
From a roll-top desk in a Victorian mansion on the edge of Yale's campus, David F. Swenson directs the investment of the university's endowment portfolio and other assets.


Computer Pornography Hearing Will Not Include Expert Witness
A Senate Judiciary Committee hearing on computer pornography and children is scheduled to go on today without the testimony of a university researcher whose highly publicized study concluded that "pornography permeates the digital landscape."
Senator Charles E. Grassley, Republican of Iowa, removed the researcher, Marty Rimm, from the witness list late last week, after Carnegie Mellon University announced a formal investigation into whether Mr.
Rimm and his faculty advisers had violated academic and ethical guidelines in preparing and publishing their study.


Loyalty Runs Down Bronx Dead End
The next time George Steinbrenner dusts off that old saw about loyalty being a two-way street, someone should ask him why that street doesn't run through Yankee Stadium in the Bronx.
It certainly doesn't run through Steinbrenner's office.
Not when the onetime sleeping giant who is now back at full roar is busy giving lessons on how to divide and conquer one's own house.


Union, S.C., Is Left a Town Torn Asunder
It was as if the young prosecutor, Tommy Pope, suddenly got religion.
In five days of testimony he had been affable, careful, plodding, but in the closing argument his voice thundered through the stately courtroom as he brought forth the horror of what the defendant had done.
He looked the jurors in the eye and told them what it must have been like for Michael, 3, and Alex, 14 months, as their mother, Susan Smith, let go of the hand brake and let her car slide into the lake, as the water began to pour in upon them.


Corrections
An obituary of the actor Harry Guardino on Tuesday included an incorrect reference to Lauren Bacall in some editions.
She starred with Mr.
Guardino in the 1981 musical comedy "Woman of the Year," but it was Katharine Hepburn, not Ms.
Bacall, who starred in the 1942 movie of the same name.


A Hearing on Parole Rules
The state Senate Judiciary Committee will conduct a hearing on whether it should be tougher for an inmate to win parole in New Jersey and how to minimize harm from convicts who relocate to the state after being released from prisons elsewhere .


Most Wanted; Making History But Not Much News
Michael Jackson's new album is not yet history.
But it's starting to look like old news on the pop charts.
"HIStory: Past and Present," which opened at No. 1 on June 20 and slipped to No. 2 two weeks later, has fallen to fourth place.


Cruise Ship Again Struck By Sickness
One year after an outbreak of Legionnaires' disease struck passengers on the cruise ship Horizon, about 220 passengers on the same ship reported symptoms of salmonella poisoning, the Federal Centers for Disease Control and Prevention said yesterday.
The sickened passengers, among 1,600 aboard the ship, began suffering diarrhea, stomach cramps and fevers beginning last Tuesday, three days after the Horizon left New York on a weeklong cruise to Bermuda and back, said Bob Howard, a spokesman for the C.D.C. in Atlanta.


Medicare Cuts Will Kill
To the Editor:
Re proposed Republican Medicare cuts masquerading as reforms to expand choice (front page, July 17): Too many seniors and people with disabilities are forgoing food and other basic needs to pay for prescription drugs and nursing care because Medicare won't pay for them.
With $270 billion cut from the Medicare program, our frailest, sickest citizens may have to go without health care altogether.


Kerdyk Now Has Reason to Play Favorites
By her own admission, Tracy Kerdyk was convinced that she was going to "take the L.P.G.A. tour by storm" when she turned professional in the fall of 1989.
Kerdyk could hardly be blamed for her optimism.
She had been a two-time all-American at the University of Miami and the collegiate player of the year in 1988.
That same year, she was named to the Curtis Cup team.
And the year before, Kerdyk had won the Canadian Amateur championship and was runner-up in the United States Women's Amateur championship.


Economic Calendar
Listed below are the scheduled release dates for major economic indicators this week.


Motorcycle Crash Hurts 6 in Mid-Manhattan


4 Review Finalists For People's Bank
People's Bank has selected four finalists in a review on its account that began last month.
The billings on the account, which had been handled by the TBWA Advertising unit of the Omnicom Group for the last seven years, were estimated at $6 million to $8 million.
Jane Sharpe, a spokeswoman for the bank in Bridgeport, Conn., identified the finalists on Friday as Angotti, Thomas, Hedge in New York; the Earle Palmer Brown North unit of the Earle Palmer Brown Companies in New York; Keiler &amp; Company in Farmington, Conn., and North Castle Partners in Stamford, Conn.
A decision is expected by early fall, she added.


For I.B.M. Faithful, Questions About Windows 95
"Every time I say I am an OS/2 user, I get immediately marginalized," an elderly woman confided to a young man sitting next to her at last week's OS/2 World convention in Boston.
"It's amazing what saying you are an OS/2 user brings out in people."
She could afford to bare her soul in public because she knew that she was surrounded by a sympathetic group: a few thousand devotees of I.B.M.'s long-overshadowed personal computer operating system.


Japanese Schools Are Different, Not Better; Cultural Conditioning
To the Editor:
My 20 years as a student of the Japanese educational system lead me to different conclusions from your July 18 front-page article.


Jury Must Fit Penalty To a Mother's Crime
Although Susan Smith was convicted on Saturday evening in the drowning deaths of her two young sons, the jury's verdict is just a beginning to a whole new parade of testimony and emotions that have tugged at the town of Union, S.C..
As the trial enters its penalty phase today, with execution in the electric chair at stake for the 23-year-old secretary, both sides will have to do what many people in Union dread.
The prosecutors and lawyers will scrape harder at the community that shaped Mrs.
Smith, and the people closest to her will share the blame.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article in Business Day on Wednesday about the United States trade deficit in May referred incorrectly to the ranking of the $11.4 billion deficit.
It was a record, but only for the period since January 1992, when the Government changed the way it calculates the figures.
While it is hard to compare the new calculations with earlier ones, other Government statistics indicate that the monthly deficit was consistently larger in 1986 and 1987 than in recent months.


Treasury to Auction Both Bills and Notes
The Treasury's schedule of financings this week will be confined to the bills and notes markets including today's regular weekly auction of three- and six-month bills and two- and five-year notes being auctioned tomorrow and Wednesday.
By the close of the New York cash market on Friday, traders said, the rate on outstanding three-month bills was 5.43 percent and six-month bills were at 5.43 percent.
In when-issued trading, the two-year note was offered at a price to yield 5.97 percent, and the five-year note at 6.27 percent.


Japan's Leaders to Stay On Despite Poor Election Showing
Voters humiliated Japan's governing coalition in nationwide elections on Sunday, weakening its authority but apparently allowing it to remain in power for the time being.
The immediate result may be to paralyze decision-making even further.
But in the medium term, it could bring forward new general elections and stimulate a far-reaching political realignment in Japan.


How Jewish Ledger Covers Intermarriage
To the Editor:
William Safire (column, July 17), discussing the controversy over the Connecticut Jewish Ledger's decision to reaffirm its policy not to publish announcements of intermarriages, claims the answer to the problem "is not in editors making those who intermarry feel like outcasts."
What Mr.
Safire doesn't understand is that The Ledger is not making anyone an "outcast." It is making a statement about what we feel is, and is not, appropriate for inclusion in a weekly Jewish newspaper.


Chief's Suspension Is Sought
A Town Councilman says Chief Robert Spina of the West Orange police should be suspended while an investigation is conducted into findings by a Superior Court judge that Mr.
Spina abused his wife.
On Friday, Judge Katherine Hayden ordered Chief Spina to stay away from his wife and to surrender off-duty weapons.


In Haiti, Democracy Still Flounders
Last month's elections in Haiti were a messy affair.
The electoral commission president, Anselme Remy, was widely condemned for mismanagement and political insensitivity.
In some places people did not get to vote.
In others, ballot boxes were not secured.
A largely illiterate electorate was badly prepared to deal with needlessly complex ballots.
Even so, observers concluded that massive fraud, of the type that characterized elections in the Dominican Republic in 1994, did not occur.
Now a report from the Carter Center, which sent observers to the Haitian election, has raised legitimate concerns while drawing some conclusions that are unnecessarily alarmist.


Legacy of a dead newspaper: A bottom-line vocabulary.
IF Mark H. Willes did not exist, the newspaper industry would have invented him.
Two months ago, Mr.
Willes said he had read New York Newsday once in his life -- when he was being considered to run Times Mirror, the company that published the paper for 10 years and vowed to stick with it forever.
But Mr.
Willes did not hesitate to close the paper on July 16, during his sixth week as chief executive.
New York Newsday, he said, did not seem likely to earn an "appropriate rate of return."


Whither CBS?
If the Westinghouse Electric Corporation completes a bid for CBS Inc., the reaction inside CBS may be muted relief that the eight-year reign of Laurence A. Tisch as chairman will end.
But the only truly happy people may be at CBS's competitors, cheered that the new owner would be Westinghouse and not an entrepreneurial company with better prospects of reviving the network's sagging fortunes.
Executives from the competing networks and analysts said a CBS-Westinghouse combination would pose little threat of a quick comeback for the network.


Bosnian War Bewilders a Midwestern Town
Donna Stath was embarrassed.
"I try to follow the war in Bosnia, but it's so confusing," she said.
"It's been going on for 300 or 400 years. I know there are atrocities going on. I understand Serbs are raping Muslim women, and kidnapping their sons.
"I think it's sad," Mrs.
Stath, the secretary of the Merrillville Community School Board, went on.
"I think, 'Golly, is this a similar situation to Nazi Germany?' And everybody ignored that for how many years?"


Lure of Entanglements Home-Grown and Lasting
BEACH MUSIC  By Pat Conroy  Illustrated. 628 pages. Nan A. Talese/ Doubleday. $27.50.
The title of Pat Conroy's latest extravagant novel, "Beach Music," refers to the songs that Jack McCall and Shyla Fox danced to as high-school seniors in a falling-down house on the coast of South Carolina the night they fell in love.
Especially their favorite, "Save the Last Dance for Me," by the Drifters.


Pulse: Beach Closings
There were nearly 500 beach closings in the region last year, according to a report last month by the Natural Resources Defense Council, an environmental group.
Experts say New Jersey, Connecticut and New York are three of the best states for comprehensive monitoring of their beaches.
These three states, Indiana and Pennsylvania are the only ones that consistently close beaches every time water quality standards are violated.
Sewer and stormwater overflow, often caused by heavy rain, is the main source of coastal pollution in the region and the nation.
The cost of comprehensive beach monitoring is small when compared with the economic activity generated by coastal tourism.
New Jersey spent about $400,000 to monitor the entire Jersey Shore in 1994; in the same year, coastal tourism in the state generated approximately $12.1 billion.


With Heat's Toll Still Being Tallied, Chicagoans Line Up for the Grieving
A delivery truck pulled into the driveway of A. A. Rayner &amp; Sons here on Friday and unloaded another rush order: eight gleaming coffins.
The day before, the truck had dropped off 20 at Rayner's red brick building, a funeral home on Chicago's South Side in one of the areas hit hardest by the heat wave that claimed more than 450 lives here a week ago.


Clemens Slated for Tests For the Sinking Red Sox
Twins 8, Red Sox 3
Roger Clemens was rocked for eight runs in one and a third innings yesterday in the Minnesota Twins' 8-3 victory over the Red Sox at Fenway Park.
Clemens (3-3) gave up nine hits and walked two in tying the second-shortest start of his career.


In New Book, D'Amato Settles Some Old Scores
George Bush "had no political compass." Mario M. Cuomo was "obsessed with the need to win with a bigger margin than me." Elizabeth Holtzman "thought nothing of destroying people to get a headline." John S. Dyson "lacked any real gray matter."
Coming from any other sitting United States Senator, the response to putting such observations in writing might be, "Why?" But from Alfonse M. D'Amato, who has never made a secret of his opinions, a more likely question is "Why now?"


Those Lucky Few Youngsters Who Escape Tragic Streets
Tomorrow night, "Dateline" gives its full hour to a celebration of several young people who have beaten the odds against growing up safe and sane in their Brooklyn neighborhood.
It's a muted celebration.
Their achievement -- high school graduation, some college, a steady job -- would be taken for granted in most other American communities.
What makes it special is that they were raised in the Bedford-Stuyvesant section of Brooklyn, where a murder a week is the average.
The producers of "Class Photo" managed to track down 21 of the 25 young men and women, all black, who posed for the fourth-grade picture in the 1981-82 school year.
Len Cannon's interviews bring out the dangers and lures of their streets.
One young man tells of leaving school in the 11th grade to escape beatings from tougher kids, "It was either go to school and take the chance of being killed, or dropping out." Others tell simply of craving money to keep up with the neighborhood swaggerers.
One says that dealing drugs and mugging people "ain't the only way, but it's the fastest way."


It's the Same Old Song: Indurain Wins His Fifth Tour de France in a Row
For tens of thousands of Spaniards, the Champs-Elysees was the staging area for a fiesta today, and for the fifth successive year, the master of the revels was Miguel Indurain.
As his fans danced, sang, cheered, chanted and applauded, he cruised eight times up and down the broad avenue in the heart of Paris as the easy winner of the 82d Tour de France.


Dudley B. Bonsal Dies at 88; Was U.S. District Court Judge
Judge Dudley B. Bonsal, a senior United States district judge for the Southern District of New York and a former president of the New York City Bar Association, died on Saturday at his home in Bedford, N.Y.
He was 88.
Judge Bonsal (pronounced BON-sel) joined the bench in 1961, sitting in the courthouse at Foley Square in Manhattan.
He acquired senior status 15 years later and resigned from regular case duty when he was 85.


Corrections
The Sports of The Times column on Wednesday referred incorrectly to the history of African-American head coaches at Rutgers University.
Vivian Stringer, who was hired on July 14 as women's basketball coach, is not the first.
Sandra Petway coached women's track and field in the early 1980's, and Craig Littlepage coached men's basketball from 1985-86 to 1987-88.


No Headline
If I condone the bombing of the Serbs, or the arming of the Bosnians, am I not saying 'it's O.K.' to violence?
If nothing is done, am I not being passive to genocide?
I don't have the answers.
It's painful. -- SAMMIE MALETTA, a Catholic priest in Merrillville, Ind.  [ A7:1. ]


Navy Certainly Needs Seawolf Submarine
To the Editor:
"The Pentagon Jackpot" (editorial, July 10) is inaccurate in its suggestion that the Navy does not want or need ships funded by the Senate Armed Services Committee.
The Navy, the Secretary of Defense, the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff and the President have all repeatedly said that the third Seawolf submarine, authorized by the committee, is an important, appropriate investment.


Oh, No! to Oh, Yes! At the British Open


An Ephemeral Embrace


Build Fewer Prisons
To the Editor:
In a July 10 news article you quote Ted Deeds of the Law Enforcement Alliance of America, an advocate of "no-frills" jails, as saying: "If the leadership says they can't control the facility without televisions and weight-training rooms, then we really need to be asking ourselves why we are sending prisoners there."


Corrections
A picture caption on Friday about children in Brooklyn looking at a grasshopper misstated the age of the youngest child, Julye Geller.
She is 15 months old, not 5 months.


Veterans Home Plan Is Assailed
Representative Robert G. Torricelli, Democrat of Hackensack, is taking aim at a plan by Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman to turn over the Paramus Veterans Home to private hands.
The Congressman said he would introduce legislation today that would bar Federal financing for state-run veterans' homes if privatization results in diminished services.
The Paramus home houses about 300 former armed services members and is one of three such homes operated by the New Jersey Department of Military and Veterans' Affairs.


Girl, 12, Is Groped At a Pool in Queens
The police arrested seven youths accused of sexually groping a 12-year-old girl after surrounding her in a city swimming pool in Astoria, Queens, on Saturday, officials said.
The arrests of the teen-agers stemmed from the summer's first reported incident at a city pool of "whirlpooling," in which boys surround a girl and try to remove her bathing suit and sexually accost her.


Heavenly Prize Rises, Fourstardave Fades
Fourstardave didn't get it done at Saratoga today, but Heavenly Prize did.
She gave one of the commanding performances of the year by racing spectacularly from next-to-last place to win the Go For Wand Stakes by 11 lengths over Forcing Bid.
This was the champion 3-year-old filly of last year in all her glory as the leading candidate for champion older filly of this year.


Corestates Drops Proposed Merger With Bank of Boston
Corestates Financial of Philadelphia and the Bank of Bostonannounced yesterday that they had called off a $4.2 billion merger.
It was the third time that a potential merger has fallen through for the Boston bank.
The banks said yesterday that they "were unable to agree on a plan that provides sufficient benefits to our shareholders, customers, employees and communities." They had intended to announce the merger this morning.


Girl Drowns At a Beach In Queens
A 17-year-old Brooklyn girl drowned off Rockaway Beach in Queens early yesterday while swimming with a woman and two men, a Police Department spokesman said.
The spokesman, Capt.
Rocco Romano of the 100th Precinct, said the police received a 911 call about 6 A.M., and after arriving on the beach just off Beach 97th Street, spotted a woman and two men in the water about 100 feet from shore.


C. W. Boldyreff, 85, University Professor Who Fought Soviets
Constantin W. Boldyreff, a Russian emigre who fought Communism as a youth in the Soviet Union and later as a college professor in the United States, died on Tuesday at the Tolstoy Center Nursing Home in Valley Cottage, N.Y.
He was 85.
The son of a general in the White Russian Army who was shot by the Communists in 1932, Mr.
Boldyreff fled to Yugoslavia, where he received an engineering degree, managed British-American mining operations, and, by his later account, joined other young Russian emigres in establishing N.T.S., the National Alliance of Russian Solidarists, an underground anti-Communist organization.


1997 Festival Is Canceled
Facing growing costs and growing opportunities for athletes to compete elsewhere, the United States Olympic Committee has canceled the next scheduled Olympic Festival, which was to be held in 1997.
The 1999 festival is also uncertain.


:New Microsoft network will offer a wealth of privacy.
GIVEN the intense scrutiny by government, press and competitors over the last few months, it seems unthinkable that anything has been left unsaid about the Microsoft Network.
But in fact, very little has been made of the fact that MSN will be a global on-line service from the start -- Aug. 24, the day of the Windows 95 release.
And even less has been said about MSN's design, which Microsoft has said complies with the new data-privacy rules that the European Union is expected to adopt in September.
Two European Union members, France and Germany, already have adopted similar rules.


Uruguay Wins America Cup
Uruguay, looking to reassert itself after missing the 1994 World Cup, beat Brazil, 5-3, on penalty kicks today to win the America Cup.
After the teams played to a 1-1 tie in regulation, goalkeeper Fernando Alvez saved Brazil's third penalty kick by Tulio, enabling Uruguay to win a record 14th South American championship.
Brazil had not lost in 25 straight international games dating to 1993.


Editorial Notebook; Some Like It Cool
There are not a lot of places to ice skate in July, and hardly any outdoors.
But the Sun Valley resort in the mountains of southern Idaho has rinks outside and inside, and there you will find every summer a subspecies of New Yorkers who refuse to see skating as a cold-weather sport.
Their winter habitat is the little rink at Rockefeller Center in the canyons of Manhattan.
Come summer, they head to bigger ice in the wide-open spaces out West.
These are not the hordes of out-of-towners who crowd the Rockefeller rink at Christmastime to skate round and round under the tree.
These are a few dozen serious figure skaters who take to the ice in early morning all winter, before tourists are out of bed, to glide, to spin, to dance and, in the words of one veteran, "to perpetuate their illusions."


Reporter's Notebook; Defense Takes Detour To Soften Sheik's Image
Call it the sheik's softer side.
Or, as his lawyer put it, look at the accused terrorist as Dear Abby.
For six months, Federal prosecutors in Manhattan have been portraying Sheik Omar Abdel Rahman, a Muslim cleric, as a fundamentalist fanatic who led a terror-bombing conspiracy in New York that included the 1993 bombing of the World Trade Center, which killed six people, and aborted plots to blow up the United Nations and the Hudson River commuter tunnels.


Postcards With Quite An Edge
It's the rare summer when PBS doesn't whip up a travelogue series for armchair tourists.
This year's concoction, imported from Britain as usual, is "Clive James's Postcards." Mr.
James is what's known at the BBC, for lack of a more precise characterization, as a personality and critic.
He was last seen here as host of a series called "Fame in the 20th Century." He obviously loves to chat, wryly, and to do silly things like donning studded leather to dance the night away at a trendy club in New York, stopping to recall fondly the days when he "had hair and a waist."
These "postcards" from places like New York, Cairo and Berlin are really notes or jottings, random observations held together by Mr.
James's ego.
But they do have an uncanny way of capturing the essence of a place.
Looking as if he should be played by Sir Ralph Richardson, Mr.
James wanders about genially while sneering politely at the world about him.
In last week's trip to London, for instance, after trudging over to Buckingham Palace to watch the changing of the guard, he warned that "to get a good position, you have to stand on a child."


Lightning Strikes 5 as Storm, Swift and Fierce, Whirls In
A fierce storm swept across the New York region late yesterday, flooding highways and leaving five people injured by lightning in New Jersey.
In Long Island, several trees were uprooted by a suspected tornado.
The five struck by lightning were seeking refuge from the storm under a tree in Englewood when they were hit, officials said.
The five, including a young girl, were admitted to Englewood Hospital where they were being treated last night.


Robert Crandall, 80, Retired Editor, Dies
Robert S. Crandall, who was The New York Times's travel editor and held other editing positions at The Times from 1952 until he retired in 1979, died on July 6 at Lee Memorial Hospital in Fort Myers, Fla.
He was 80 and lived in Cape Coral, Fla.
His family informed The Times of his death on Friday.
The cause was prostate cancer, said his brother, Philip.


Little Joy Left at the Fun House
Coney Island U.S.A., the oddest spectacle on the Coney Island Boardwalk, has entertained nearly a million people over the last 11 years with processions of bearded ladies, sword swallowers and snake charmers.
But the biggest sideshow this summer may be the one playing behind the scenes at the amusement park.


Peacekeepers at Fallen Enclave Confirm Some Atrocities but Say They Saw No Rapes
Dutch peacekeeping troops evacuated from Srebrenica in eastern Bosnia said today that Bosnian Serb invaders executed at least 10 Muslim defenders and abducted between 150 and 300 men between the ages of 16 and 60.
Since the fall of Srebrenica, refugees who were shipped to the town of Tuzla last week have drawn a grisly picture of Bosnian Serbs raping women and massacring untold hundreds of Muslim men between the ages of 16 and 60.


Fairness Denied in New York
Patrick Buchanan, the conservative commentator who is running for the Republican Presidential nomination, has been lecturing New Yorkers on the basic tenets of democracy.
Even those who cannot abide his views should give him a hearing.
Mr.
Buchanan speaks the truth when he says that the state's Presidential primary laws are indefensible and that the Republican Presidential primary scheduled for March 1996 "comes very close to being a political fix."
"Close" is an understatement.
The primary has been fixed, pure and simple -- courtesy of Senator Alfonse D'Amato's skillful manipulation of the state's complex voting laws to help his chosen candidate, Senator Bob Dole.
Among the state's top Republicans, only Mayor Rudolph Giuliani and State Senator Roy Goodman have protested what amounts to a hijacking of democracy.


George T. Douris, 67, Public Relations Executive
George T. Douris, a New York public relations executive whose clients benefited from his prominence in the city's Greek-American community and the extensive contacts he cultivated during his years as a newspaper reporter covering City Hall, died on Friday at the Roosevelt Hospital Division of St.
Luke's-Roosevelt Hospital Center.
He was 67 and lived in Manhattan.
The cause was prostate cancer, his family said.


Latest Taiwan Uproar Brings Back Old Hand
"I thought she was dead," said the old Flying Tiger veteran, devoted five-decades-strong to Mrs.
Chiang Kai-shek, the intriguing, articulate dowager from the World War II era who is still hovering about the politics of China and America.
"But she is alive -- a great lady, a hell of a politician and a rousing speaker," exulted Myron D. Levy, 77, who was an enlisted man in one of the war's Flying Tiger units of American fighter planes that darted about like musketeers in defense of the Chinese, fiercely inspired by the doughty Mrs.
Chiang.


Now the British Want to Change the Rules on Irish Peace Talks
To the Editor:
Peter Innes, director of the British Information Service (letter, July 17), predictably ignores crucial points in relation to the Irish peace process and the British Government's refusal to treat Sinn Fein equally with the other parties.
*
No peace process based on inequality can work.
Sinn Fein has a democratic mandate which the British Government must respect.


CHRONICLE
GARY LeMEL has been president of music for Warner Brothers studios for nine years and has been responsible for the soundtracks of dozens of movies, ranging from the Batman films to "The Big Chill" to "The Bridges of Madison County." But somehow that does not satisfy his every musical yearning, so every few years he cuts a record himself, singing his favorite ballads.
Tomorrow evening, he will make his debut in Carnegie Hall during a three-night tribute to Frank Sinatra, and, he said the other day, "It will be the biggest thrill of all time."


BUSINESS DIGEST
Universities Start to Invest In Riskier Markets  Facing bigger student financial-aid needs and shrinking government support, a growing number of top universities are pulling endowment money from conservative investments like blue-chip stocks and bonds and putting it into much riskier, high-flying corners of the financial markets: venture capital, leveraged buyouts, hedge funds and emerging markets like Poland and Mexico.
Even the recent loss of $128 million by a broker handling accounts for the Common Fund, which manages $20 billion in investments for some 1,400 schools, appears not to have daunted institutions like Yale, Duke and Notre Dame.  [ Page A1. ]
13 Errors in "Apollo 13"  The liberties taken with history in the film "Apollo 13" start with using the wrong NASA logo on a window (at left, the correct one) and extend to such items as the rocket's launch and the phases of the moon.
Aerospace workers, especially engineers at the Johnson Space Center in Houston, have been quick to notice a few details that were simply not the right stuff.  [ D5. ] The New Math in Newspapers  Mark H. Willes, who closed New York Newsday and cut jobs at The Los Angeles Times six weeks into his term as Times Mirror's new chief executive, may represent more clearly than anyone else the vast changes sweeping though the newspaper industry.
William Glaberson: Press.  [ D7. ]
Times Mirror Unit Dodges a Bullet  Relief spread through Times Mirror Magazines with the announcement that the parent company's drastic cost-cutting program would not include selling the division.
Still, it is unclear whether the company will eventually decide to shop it around.  [ D7. ] A Witness Removed  A Senate panel on computer pornography has removed from its witness list a researcher whose highly publicized study concluded that "pornography permeates the digital landscape."  [ A9. ] Radio's Ownership Likely to Shrink  Less is more; fewer owners means greater competition.
Is this reasoning from a George Orwell novel?
No, it is how a large majority of the United States Senate viewed the radio industry as it approved a communications-law overhaul that would remove limits on the number of stations a single company could own.
News analysis.  [ D7. ] An Electronic Privacy Shield  Microsoft's coming global on-line service and its content suppliers expect to meet Europe's proposed tough standards for customer data privacy.
Because Microsoft plans to apply the same provisions to its U.S. operations, it should raise the level of protection now available to American shoppers on the Internet.
Denise Caruso: Digital Commerce.  [ D4. ] Intimations of Irrelevance  As the release date for Microsoft's Windows 95 operating system approaches, users of I.B.M.'s rival OS/2 system, including its latest version, Warp, have felt increasingly marginalized.
Reports of the program's demise can be read in the trade and mainstream press almost daily.
But at a convention last week in Boston, the faithful could keep the torch lit.  [ D4. ] The Father of So Very Much  In 1928, Waldo Lonsbury Semon concocted a substance that would alter the texture and smell of everyday life.
In large part to honor his invention of polyvinyl chloride, better known as vinyl, Mr.
Semon, who is 97 years old, was inducted into the Inventors Hall of Fame over the weekend, joining the likes of Thomas Edison and Alexander Graham Bell.
Teresa Riordan: Patents.  [ D2. ]


Sinn Fein Leader Says He Met In Secret With British Official
Gerry Adams, the political leader of the Irish Republican Army, said today that he had a secret meeting last week with the chief British official in Northern Ireland, Sir Patrick Mayhew, to try to break the impasse in the Northern Ireland peace effort.
Mr.
Adams said the meeting, which was confirmed by British officials, "shows their sense of urgency" in trying to reach peace, but he declined to disclose specifics of the discussion.
Both he and a senior British official, Michael Ancram, said there would probably be further top-level talks.


Corrections
An article in Business Day on Wednesday about the quarterly earnings of Citicorp referred incorrectly to remarks by John S. Reed, the company's chairman, on its strategy in corporate banking.
Although Mr.
Reed told securities analysts that Citicorp would reduce its dealings with some companies in the United States and Europe, he did not say it was planning sharp cutbacks.


Relief for Now at Times Mirror Unit
A sigh of relief spread through Times Mirror Magazines last week with the announcement that the parent company's drastic cost-cutting program would not include selling the magazine division.
The Times Mirror Company closed New York Newsday on July 16 as part of a plan to cut 1,750 jobs at its newspapers, including 150 at The Los Angeles Times.
But it is unclear if the magazines have really been spared or if Mark H. Willes, Times Mirror's new chief executive, will eventually decide to sell them as a group or individually.


Patents; The man who gave the world vinyl wins a place in the Inventors Hall of Fame.
IN 1928, Waldo Lonsbury Semon concocted a substance that would alter the texture and smell of everyday life.
Technically that substance is called polyvinyl chloride, but most people refer to it simply as vinyl.
Vinyl has been used to make phonograph records, go-go boots, irrigation pipes, raincoats, garden hoses, tents, siding for houses, garment bags, floor tiles, dresses, bumper stickers and umbrellas.
Vinyl used in the interiors of automobiles is what gives new cars that new-car smell.
Today, some 67 years after it was invented, vinyl is the second-most-used plastic, after polyethelene, which is used widely for packaging.
Worldwide, vinyl constitutes a $20-billion-a-year industry; 44 billion pounds are produced each year.


Japanese Schools Are Different, Not Better; Conformity in U.S. Too
To the Editor:
As I read your July 18 front-page article, I was struck by its selective views.
In many ways the Japanese schools in the town of Omiya do present a striking contrast to American public schools.
In many other ways, the two are much the same.


A Backhoe for a Bank Job
Three men hot-wired a backhoe yesterday and tried to steal the night deposit box from a Chemical Bank branch in midtown Manhattan, the police said.
The failed robbery began around 5 P.M. when the three apparently used a screwdriver to start a backhoe that was idle at a construction site close to the bank, on Park Avenue South near East 23d Street.
Maneuvering the vehicle's claw, they smashed through a window and were about to scoop out the night deposit box when police sirens scared them away, witnesses told the police.


Fans' Fingers Crossed for Mattingly
The fans who had been expected to come to Yankee Stadium yesterday to bury pitcher Jack McDowell instead chose to praise first baseman Don Mattingly in an emotional show of support for the embattled team captain.
The 32,675 fans put on an impressive display of spontaneous combustion after a Mattingly home run helped insure what would become an 11-4 victory over the Texas Rangers.


To Compete, Hospitals Get Hoteliers' Service Lessons
While patients should probably not expect 24-hour room service, plush terry robes and a little Swiss chocolate on their pillows, hospitals in New York City, faced with the realities of a competitive marketplace, have now turned for advice to hoteliers, management consultants and other experts in the previously alien world of customer service.
At New York Hospital not long ago, Isadore Sharp, the chairman and president of the Four Seasons Hotels and a certified specialist in the comfort arts, lectured specialists in the healing arts: surgeons and nurses, bureaucrats and executives.


In America; Sweatshop Beneficiaries
The hundreds of thousands of young (and mostly female) factory workers in Central America who earn next to nothing and often live in squalor have been an absolute boon to American clothing company executives like Donald G. Fisher, the chief executive of the Gap and Banana Republic empire, who lives in splendor and paid himself more than $2 million last year.
Judith Viera is an 18-year-old who worked at a maquiladora plant in El Salvador that made clothing for the Gap and other companies.
She was paid a pathetic 56 cents an hour.
If she wanted to use the bathroom, she had to go through the humiliation of asking a supervisor for a ticket.
Anyone who stayed in the bathroom too long was punished by being sent outside to sweep the grounds in the hot sun.


Taking In the Sites; From the Detroit Picket Line to On Line
Labor disputes, which for many years played out on picket lines and in smoke-filled rooms, are moving onto the World Wide Web.
The Woodie Guthries of today write hypertext documents, not ballads, and the Henry Fords can take their cases to a nationwide audience within minutes of a walkout.
The response to a strike by six unions against Detroit's two largest newspapers, The Detroit News and The Detroit Free Press, and their operating company, the Detroit Newspaper Agency, makes it appear as if management, more than the unions, set up an electronic picket line.


Western Generals Personally Warn Serb Commander
The United States, Britain and France sent three generals to Belgrade today to warn the Bosnian Serbs' military leader personally that an assault on the Gorazde enclave would result in allied air attacks "at unprecendented levels," the White House said.
In a 90-minute meeting with the Bosnian Serb commander, Gen.
Ratko Mladic, the generals also demanded an end to attacks on all other enclaves designated as safe areas by the United Nations, the White House said in a written statement.
The statement said General Mladic also was told that the allies and the United Nations would take "any steps which may become necessary" to resupply United Nations troops in Bosnia.


Eclectic Monet, Bathed in Chicago's Ballyhoo
It is hard to believe that the Claude Monet exhibition just opened at the Art Institute of Chicago is the first major overview of his paintings to be organized in the United States in a generation.
It seems as if every third-rate Impressionist, never mind Monet, has had a show already.
The public's infatuation with the movement has been matched only by the eagerness of museums to capitalize on it.
And why not?
People love the works, Monet's above all, even if they can be glimpsed only through a mass of milling backs at blockbuster shows, like this one, which have turned the phrase "crowd control" from police argot into a matter of museum policy.
The Art Institute promises that, in compliance with fire codes, only 800 visitors an hour will be allowed into the galleries.
What a relief.


Credibility Problem Undermining Allies
The Western allies have issued their strongest ultimatum to the Bosnian Serbs in three years, but the way the ultimatum was agreed upon highlighted the differences among the nations laying it down.
The statements of delegations among the 16 countries involved contain caveats and ambiguities that detracted from the fact that Britain and France had agreed to Washington's plan for large-scale retaliation against the Bosnian Serbs.


First Lady Takes a Page From Eleanor Roosevelt
The first First Lady to become a major media figure was Eleanor Roosevelt, whose syndicated column, "My Day" began in 1936 and continued, in one form or another, for more than two decades, at its peak reaching hundreds of newspapers and making news with Mrs.
Roosevelt's stands on major issues like civil rights and labor relations.
Mrs.
Roosevelt filed the column six days a week from all over the world, lugging a typewriter on her tour of South Pacific bases in 1943 and even composing aboard a destroyer.
When Franklin D. Roosevelt once complained about Washington columnists, a reporter reminded him that his wife was one, but he replied, "She simply writes a daily diary."


The Man Behind Giuliani's Relations With the Unions
IT'S likely that Randy L. Levine won't be able to do everything he says he will do.
He may not reinvent labor relations in New York City or transform the tradition-bound Board of Education or cut the work force without hurting city services or make municipal employees more productive, and happier in the bargain.
But talk to the Commissioner of Labor Relations, an enthusiastic, voluble personality in a government of little-known, media-shy administrators, and you believe he will deliver on every last item on his list.
Or at least that he believes he will, and is well on the way.


Affirmative Action's End? Now, It's Not That Simple
Three days after the University of California Board of Regents ostensibly did away with all campus affirmative action programs based on race or sex, the intended goal of that mandate was threatened on two fronts: the loss of Federal largess and perceived loopholes in the order itself.
This morning, President Clinton's chief of staff, Leon E. Panetta, said that the University of California made a "terrible mistake" on Thursday in its affirmative action vote, and he said that the Justice Department would begin a review of the billions of Federal dollars that flow to the state's universities.


Equity Offerings Expected to Occur This Week
The following equity and convertible debt offerings are expected this week:


Ambiguous Ultimatum: Allies Show Differences
The paradox of the conference on Bosnia held in London on Friday is this: it resulted in the Western allies' strongest ultimatum to the Bosnian Serbs in three years, but the way the ultimatum was agreed upon showed the differences and even confusion among the nations laying it down.
The danger now, diplomats here say, is that the Bosnian Serbs will read the differences as disunity and lack of resolve and so press ahead with their military campaign to take Bosnian enclaves ostensibly protected by the United Nations.


Diverging Philosophies on Technology Stocks
Despite the market's wild ride in technology stocks last week, few reasonable people would dispute that American technology companies lead the world in innovation and profitability.
Not Ronald E. Elijah, manager of the Robertson Stephens Value and Growth mutual fund.
About 70 percent of the $1 billion portfolio he oversees is invested in technology stocks.


Japanese Schools Are Different, Not Better; History Textbooks
To the Editor:
Your July 18 front-page article states that high school textbooks edited by the Japanese Government simply record in one sentence that "Nanjing was occupied." Japanese textbooks have an extensive description of Japan's wartime actions, including the massacre at Nanjing.


Corrections
An article on Tuesday about the Clinton Administration's plans to let American news organizations open news bureaus in Cuba misidentified one newspaper that has applied to the Cuban Government.
It is The Fort Lauderdale Sun-Sentinel, not an Orlando paper.


Drivers Find Privatized License Offices Fumbling
Two weeks into the privatization of 23 field offices, the New Jersey Division of Motor Vehicles is still struggling with a bruised image and unhappy customers.
Wrinkles persist in what Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman had promoted as a wrinkle-free step to reduce staffing levels, increase efficiency and save taxpayers $3.8 million.
The Governor ordered the privatization of the field offices of the Motor Vehicles Division in January, giving her aides seven months to plan for the change.
But in the end, the private agencies opened July 10 with patched-together staffs, including 141 workers recruited from 10 temporary-employment agencies and put to work after only a weekend of training.
Half the temporary workers were still working today, suggesting that staffing problems remain.
Under the plan, 334 unionized employees will be replaced with nonunion workers, who will get lower pay and fewer benefits.
Independent agents will run the 23 offices.


Tri Valley Growers Picks Miller Meester
Tri Valley Growers in San Francisco, a cooperative owned by more than 650 California fruit and vegetable growers, has named Miller Meester Advertising in Minneapolis to handle advertising, direct marketing and new-brand assignments for products sold under labels including S &amp; W and Red Pack.
Though the billings were not disclosed, the total marketing budget last year was more than $50 million.


For Rocca, Nice Guy Finishes 2d In Britain
He sort of shambled up through the crowd, his cap pulled low and his shoulders slumping slightly.
Costantino Rocca was headed for the far side of the Royal and Ancient clubhouse, to a television interview area where a beaming John Daly was talking to the BBC, and as Rocca walked people were reaching out and patting him on the back.
He is golf's Everyman.
And this amiable golfer from Italy nearly pulled off every man's dream today when he got into a playoff for the British Open title.
He lost, but the improbable route he traveled to get there was a parallel to his unlikely road into professional golf.
Still, at this moment, he was disappointed and it showed on his expressive face.


William I. Kaufman, Food Writer, 73
William I. Kaufman, a food and wine connoisseur and former television producer and director who wrote some 150 books about those and other subjects, died July 16 in Livingston, Mont.
He was 73 and lived in Eugene, Ore.
The cause was a heart attack, said Michael Thoele, a family friend.
Mr.
Kaufman was in Montana researching children's rodeos.


Airborne Express


Donations Up in '94 For Public Service
The amount of time and space donated to public service campaigns produced by the Advertising Council rose sharply last year from 1993.
The council, which coordinates the advertising industry's public-service efforts, said on Friday that the media donated $891.6 million in commercial time and ad space in 1994, up 45.7 percent from $612 million in the previous year.
Ruth Wooden, president, attributed the gains to factors that included the creation of materials for new venues like Yellow Pages directories and offering the media a wider variety of campaign materials.


Man Is Arrested in Stabbing
A man licensed by the state to run a home for the retarded was arrested and accused of using a serrated steak knife to stab his roommate nine times while the victim's 5-year-old son and four residents looked on, the police said.


Handguns for Retired Officers
The president of a police group says the recent fatal shooting of a retired Hanover Township Police Chief, John DeVenter, shows why retired police officers ought to be allowed to carry handguns, as a bill introduced in June would authorize, The Associated Press reported.


13 Technical Mistakes in Apollo 13
Some people just cannot help themselves; they have to find fault.
You know the type.
They watch the movie "Quiz Show" and notice that the numbers on Herb Stempel's house in Queens don't match the address shown on a piece of paper.
In thrillers, they count the shots fired and sneer that in real life the hero would be out of ammo.
They can tell you if an actor was wearing a blue shirt when he entered the bar and a white shirt when he left.
And when the movie is a techno-wonder like Universal Pictures "Apollo 13," some engineers just can't help themselves.
They look for errors and anomalies - and they find them.
The movie in question tells the true story of the Apollo 13 astronauts - Jim Lovell (Tom Hanks), Fred Haise (Bill Paxton) and Jack Swigert (Kevin Bacon) - and their ill-starred trip to the moon in April of 1970.


A Britten Curiosity Is Rescued
Benjamin Britten's "Paul Bunyan," his first operatic work and his only collaboration with the poet W. H. Auden, is a theatrical mongrel.
Written mostly during 1939-40, when Britten was living in the New York area, the opera was intended to be a pragmatic theater piece suitable for performance by high-school students.
The resulting work has elements of opera with extended choral ensembles, much spoken dialogue, parody, Kurt Weill-like cabaret and even a rather incongruous guitar-strumming balladeer who acts as a narrator.
It was received with poor reviews at Columbia University in 1941, and Britten soon withdrew it.
But in 1974 he revised it.
And it's this version that the prestigious Glimmerglass Opera in Cooperstown, N.Y., has revived in a handsome, vibrant and creative production that makes a strong case for this virtually unknown work.


White House Says Hearings By G.O.P. Hurt Budget
Continuing an Administration campaign to portray Republicans as the party of gridlock, Leon E. Panetta, the White House chief of staff, said today that the Government could face a "train wreck" on the budget in October because Republicans were spending time holding hearings on issues like the Waco raid and Whitewater.
Many Republicans criticized Democratic gridlock in Congress during successful Congressional campaigns last year.
With President Clinton threatening to veto Republican budget initiatives in the coming months, the Administration is making an early effort to deflect any possible blame.


Taiwan Reports Nearby Firing Of 4 Test Missiles by China
The Taiwan military authorities said today that China had fired four test missiles off its southern coast on Friday and Saturday, about 85 miles north of Taiwan.
The missile tests, announced last week by the Chinese Army, appear to be one of several steps taken by China to highlight its displeasure with recent efforts by Taiwan to gain international recognition.


Heat's Grim Epilogue
After days of record heat and hundreds of deaths in Chicago, funeral homes in the city are running like assembly lines.


Just What Softball Ordered: a Doctor
Her hands are more valuable wielding a scalpel than an aluminum bat, orthopedics being a higher calling and more financially rewarding than softball.
But Dot Richardson's sport is coming to the Summer Olympics for the first time, and her medical career, like elective surgery, can wait.
The most dominant Americans in Atlanta next summer may not be basketball's Dream Team, but rather the women's national softball squad.
The United States has not lost a game since 1986 while rolling up 105 consecutive victories and three world championships on its international odometer, ruling softball the way Cuba rules amateur baseball.


Place Called Home for Cyber-Families of Future
Never mind the all-electric kitchen and the two-car garage.
Today, the American dream house has fiber optic wiring and a two-port outlet in every room.
For about $465,000 you, too, can own the Information Highway House, complete with a high-speed data communications network that will allow you to have a computer in nearly every room.
A model of this home (3BR + office, LR, FDR, EIK, 2,500 sq. ft. liv space) is being shown in Corte Madera, Calif., 10 miles north of San Francisco in Marin County.
The model home is part of a 150-house complex, called Madera del Presidio, that is being built by HCV Pacific Partners, a developer based in San Francisco.


Tai Journal; At an African Border, Hospitality Comes to Grief
In recent years, outsiders who strayed through this tiny border town, with its thousands of refugees from the civil war in Liberia, often remarked that Tai hardly seemed to be a part of this country.
While the street signs were in French, Liberian English was more commonly heard, and debates tended to be about the lawless land to the west rather than over the Ivory Coast's own staid politics.


RESULTS PLUS
AUTO RACING  Marlin Wins DieHard
Sterling Marlin, the pole-sitter, stayed in front of a hectic scramble for position yesterday to win the DieHard 500 in Talladega, Ala.
Dale Jarrett, who scooted into the lead draft with about 40 laps to go, finished second in a Ford Thunderbird.
He overtook Dale Earnhardt with five laps left. (AP)
VILLENEUVE FINISHES FAST: Jacques Villeneuve, the Indianapolis 500 winner, shot from third place to first in the last two laps to win the Cleveland Grand Prix by 1.16 seconds over Bryan Herta.
Jimmy Vasser finished third. (AP)


Bridge
In the semifinal stage of the Von Zedtwitz Double Knockout Team Championship, which attracts most of the top-ranked players in the New York metropolitan area, the survivors are teams captained by Lapt Chan, Dorothy Truscott, Robb Gordon and Robin Kay.
The Chan team, unbeaten and therefore favored to win the title, will play Kay's team, while Truscott opposes Gordon.
In one recent quarterfinal match, the diagramed deal played a key role.
North and South for the Truscott team were Carol Simon of Summit, N.J., and John Lowenthal of Manhattan, who were overambitious in the auction and reached a precarious five-heart contract.
South's eventual four-spade bid was "kickback," a Blackwood substitute, and he put on the brakes when he discovered the partnership was missing either two aces or one ace and the heart king.


Great Radio Debate: Can Fewer Owners Mean More Competition?
Less is more. Fewer owners means greater competition.
Is this reasoning from a George Orwell novel?
No, it is how a large majority of the United States Senate views the radio industry.


A Technology Bull, and a Bear
Technology stocks took a beating last week.
But views differ on whether the turmoil was prelude to further declines.
So while Ronald Elijah, of Robertson Stephens, and James E. Crabbe, of the Crabbe Huson Group, agree that the long-term outlook is bright for information techology, their short-term investment strategies differ.
Article, page D4.


Japanese Schools Are Different, Not Better
To the Editor:
"Japan's Schools: Safe, Clean, Not Much Fun" (front page, July 18) compares Japanese and American students on topics ranging from international math exam scores to suicide rates.
Japan is an island-nation whose populace is racially, religiously and economically homogeneous, and whose boundaries are protected from drugs and weapons smuggling because of its isolated location.


On a California Campus, Diversity Goals Go Unchanged
An acrylic sculpture in front of the law school here seems an apt metaphor for the University of California regents' debate over affirmative action this week.
The sculpture, by the late artist Robert Arneson, consists of two giant egg heads, their mouths open, apparently in angry argument.
Conspicuously, they have no ears.
Last week, when the Board of Regents voted to strike down the university system's race- and gender-based affirmative action policies, they were not listening to the defenders of those programs: the president who oversees the system, the nine chancellors who run the system's universities, the faculty senate or a wide variety of student organizations.


U.N. COMBAT FORCE SENT TO SARAJEVO TO COUNTER SERBS
More than 800 British and French troops, equipped with heavy artillery batteries, moved toward this besieged capital today to mount an aggressive campaign against Bosnian Serb gunners in one of the riskiest moves yet taken here by the United Nations.
The troops are to secure a supply route into the city and respond to rebels who are shelling and blasting Sarajevo with deadly intensity.


Tanqueray pulls out the stops for bike events to benefit AIDS patients, and Mr. Jenkins rides along.
IF Mr.
Jenkins, the imaginary sybarite who peddles Tanqueray gin, were to support a cause, it would probably be the Second Yacht for Mr.
Jenkins Foundation.
So it's surprising to see the character featured in an extensive advertising and promotional program devoted to the brand's sponsorship of a series of bicycle rides that benefit organizations helping AIDS patients.
Indeed, the program, which extends from magazines and telephone kiosks to bars and the Internet, is itself surprising in that the Schieffelin &amp; Somerset Company, the unit of Guinness P.L.C. that imports Tanqueray, is devoting 15 to 20 percent of the brand's total annual American marketing communications budget of $27 million to the AIDS rides program.
The rides, which began last year in California, are being expanded to the East Coast in September and are scheduled to spread to the Midwest and the South in 1996.


Amid Old Brooklyn Factories, A Shrinking Canvas
In the last 15 years, artists by the hundreds have advanced on a desolate warren of empty factory buildings and cobblestone streets in Brooklyn known as Dumbo, for Down Under the Manhattan Bridge Overpass.
As traffic rumbled overhead, the artists propped up their canvases and put up curtains in sooty Civil War-era buildings abandoned by manufacturers.
They began a Friday pizza night as babies were born.
They did their laundry by hiring a car service to take them to gentrified Brooklyn Heights next-door.
They became patrons of a local espresso bar that serves freshly baked biscotti and cappuccino with extra foam.
They felt blessed to be in a quiet old factory district much like SoHo before it became SoHo.


The First Lady's Newest Role: Newspaper Columnist
One of the most scrutinized women in America made her debut in a new role today, musing lightly as a weekly syndicated columnist in more than 100 newspapers and magazines worldwide about the pleasures of driving her own car or of being mistaken for a mere look-alike of her well-known self.
But even as Hillary Rodham Clinton embarked on her latest effort to explain herself as something other than someone else's cardboard conception, she found herself back in another spotlight as well: in front-page headlines as the uncalled witness and unspoken target of the latest round of Congressional investigations into the lingering soap opera of Whitewater.


Universities Taking On Risks To Overcome Fiscal Squeeze
Facing bigger student financial-aid needs and shrinking government support, a growing number of top universities are pulling endowment money out of stodgy investments like blue-chip stocks and bonds and putting it into much riskier, high-flying corners of the financial markets: venture capital, leveraged buyouts, hedge funds and emerging markets like Poland and Mexico.
Yale University, which pioneered the approach and has embraced it most aggressively, now puts roughly 60 percent of its portfolio into less-conventional -- and generally riskier -- investments.
Duke assigns half its endowment to such investments, and Brown and Notre Dame a third each.


Essay; Vincent Foster's 'Can of Worms'
"Was dread of further scandal a triggering cause of the apparent suicide?"
That central question, posed in this space a few weeks after Vincent Foster's body was found in a park where he may have shot himself, was long denounced as a "conspiracy theory."


Woman Stabbed to Death In Upper East Side Home
Before the Rollerbladers awaken, before the bistro brunch dates, Sunday morning on the Upper East Side is as quiet as Manhattan gets.
But yesterday, just after 9 A.M., the Sunday silence was broken by terrified screams as a woman was stabbed to death in her apartment at 1729 First Avenue, just two blocks from the Mayor's residence.
The victim, whose name was withheld pending notification of relatives but described by the police as 45 to 55 years old, lived alone in a fourth-floor studio.
She had just returned home from buying a newspaper and groceries when a man pushed his way into her apartment and attacked her with a knife or other sharp object, the police said.


Congressional Memo; Packwood Complaints Have a Nervous Senate Hearing Echoes of Anita Hill
For more than two years, the Senate has done its best to keep Bob Packwood's troubles on the back burner.
But this week, they could be forced front and center, pushing the Senate into the last thing it wants: a replay of the Anita Hill disaster.
Senator Packwood is the Oregon Republican who is alleged to have made unwanted sexual advances to women.
There were other accusations of official misconduct against the Senator, including tampering with evidence, but they never caught the public imagination in quite the same way.


A Surprise Film Hit About Rich Teen-Age Girls
In the midst of a summer of mostly desultory films, along came "Clueless." The wickedly funny farce about rich teen-age girls in Beverly Hills emerged this weekend as a sleeper hit of the summer.
"I'm blown away, especially by the great reviews," Amy Heckerling, the film's writer and director, said in a telephone interview.
"I just wanted to do something about the teen-age experience; it's such a wonderful and horrible time of life."


FIRST LADY TO GET PANEL'S SCRUTINY
A Senate committee investigating the Whitewater affair is expected to begin to examine this week whether Hillary Rodham Clinton played any role in the handling of papers in the office of the deputy White House counsel, Vincent W. Foster Jr., after he committed suicide two years ago.
Entering its second week of hearings, the committee is preparing to question some of the closest aides to the President and Mrs.
Clinton about whether she had told officials to remove papers from Mr.
Foster's office before any investigators got there.
The committee will also ask witnesses whether Mrs.
Clinton participated in the decision to prevent Federal investigators from looking at sensitive papers in the office.


Abroad at Home; With a Grain of Salt
"By autumn, we'll take Gorazde, Bihac and in the end Sarajevo, and we'll finish the war in Bosnia."
-- Gen. Ratko Mladic, commander of Bosnian Serb forces


Precinct's 1st Killing
The Upper East Side has long been known as one of the safest neighborhoods in the city, but yesterday the area's morning calm was shattered by the killing of a woman just one block from Gracie Mansion.
The slaying of the woman, who was in her late 40's and whose name was not released, was the first this year in the 19th Precinct.


INSIDE
Merger Plan Comes Undone
A deal to create a big regional bank was scrapped before it was even announced, as Corestates walked away from a $4.2 billion merger with Bank of Boston.
Page D1.
Vote Stuns Japan's Leaders
The governing coalition managed to stay in power but was weakened in national elections and now may find it harder to make economic changes sought by Washington.
Page A3.
Milestone at Tour de France
With an easy trip into Paris, Miguel Indurain of Spain became the first rider to capture the world's most prestigious cycling race for a fifth straight time.
Page C4.


N.F.L. TRAINING CAMP REPORT
Houston Oilers
The Houston Oilers have finally landed Steve McNair, reportedly in a seven-year deal.
McNair, Alcorn State's record-setting quarterback and the No. 3 pick in the National Football League draft, has agreed to terms.


Cable With a Local Twist
Executives at Time Warner figured they had made Charles F. Dolan an offer he couldn't refuse: $2 billion for his company, the Cablevision Systems Corporation.
It was the autumn of 1993, and Mr.
Dolan was at an age most businessmen would consider the autumn of their careers.
As the company's majority shareholder, he would have netted $1.4 billion -- enough to settle into a retirement worthy of a cable tycoon.
Chuck Dolan turned them down flat.


Sports of The Times; Good Show Makes It An Expletive Deleted
THE Great Digital Dis Flap turned limp on Jack McDowell's first pitch against the Texas Rangers yesterday afternoon.
While McDowell got a mixed reception when his name was announced in the starting lineup -- in fond memory of his gesture of displeasure at the fans last Tuesday -- the boos faded swiftly.
McDowell's first pitch, a called strike on Otis Nixon, drew cheers from the fans in Yankee Stadium.
They cheered when Nixon grounded out to second base.
They cheered when Will Clark struck out to end the inning, and when McDowell, with three up and three down, departed the mound and strode to the dugout, the fans cheered, some standing.


Israel-P.L.O. Talks Grind On Despite Deadlines
On a wind-scoured hillside of thorns and boulders in the West Bank, a few miles south of Jerusalem, a small group of Israeli men, women and children milled about among brightly colored camping tents and furiously flapping Israeli flags, occasionally peering across to the next hill.
There, a smaller cluster of Palestinians sat under their own, somewhat more primitive tent, with their Palestinian flag, watching the Israelis.
Two Israeli Army soldiers in a jeep kept an eye on both hills.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY THE SIDESHOW TO A SIDESHOW
Coney Island U.S.A., the oddest spectacle on the Coney Island Boardwalk, has entertained nearly a million people over the last 11 years with processions of bearded ladies, sword swallowers and snake charmers.
But the biggest sideshow this summer may be the one playing behind the scenes at the amusement park.
The landlord is trying to evict Coney Island U.S.A., which operates Sideshows by the Seashore and the Coney Island Museum on the Boardwalk at West 12th Street.
One potential tenant is McDonald's, which has looked at the site.  [ Page B3. ]


At CBS, Talk of Lists And New Blue Collars
David Letterman has been the ratings king of late-night television for almost two years now, although his rival Jay Leno won the weekly race for the first time last week.
But merciless perfectionist that he is, the host of "Late Show With David Letterman" thinks the show needs improvement.
And on Saturday Mr.
Letterman said there was "a real likelihood" that the show's Top 10 list would be cut back to only two or three nights a week.
It may be the show's trademark, and viewers may love it, he said, but it is difficult to make it funny every night.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-7 TROOPS SENT TO BOSNIA CAPITAL  Troops from the new allied rapid-reaction force were sent to the Bosnian capital, Sarajevo.
Serb attacks continued elsewhere, but the enclave where the allies have threatened air strikes was quiet.
A1  AMERICANS HESITANT ON BOSNIA  In a series of interviews, Americans in an Indiana town expressed both confusion and concern about Bosnia, but most expressed a hesitancy toward deeper American involvement in the war there.
A1  FAINT LINE IN THE SAND  The strong ultimatum by the allies on Bosnia only pointed up the differences among them, and diplomats say that the Bosnian Serbs may thus fail to recognize the line in the sand.
News analysis.
A6  GRISLY ACCOUNT OF ENCLAVE'S FALL  Dutch peacekeepers evacuated from an enclave taken by the Bosnian Serbs last week said that they had seen Muslim defenders executed and men who lived in the enclave abducted.
A6  A personal warning was sent to the Bosnian Serbs.
A7  A VISIT FROM CHINA'S PAST  Mrs.
Chiang Kai-shek, who took Capitol Hill by storm 52 years ago with her pleas to defend China, is coming back for a visit, creating great expectations.
A Capitol sketchbook.
A2  VOTE WEAKENS JAPAN PARTY  Japan's governing Socialists and their coalition managed to stay in power, but they were weakened in national elections, making economic measures to please the United States unlikely.
A3  WHERE ISRAEL TALKS HIT SNAGS  Israeli and Palestinian negotiators continued to talk about expanding self-rule for Palestinians, but it was unlikely they would meet their current deadline.
A3  A secret meeting on the Northern Ireland impasse was disclosed.
A4  Tai Journal: War spills over on the Ivory Coast border.
A4 National A8-11, B7 U. OF CALIFORNIA MOVE ASSAILED  The President's chief of staff said the University of California made a "terrible mistake" when it abolished affirmative action programs and said the Justice Department would begin a review of Federal education money for the state.
A1  MRS.
CLINTON'S ROLE VIEWED  A Senate committee investigating the Whitewater affair is expected to begin to examine whether Hillary Rodham Clinton played any role in the handling of papers in the office of Vincent Foster.
A1  Hillary Clinton begins work as a columnist today.
A10  RISK IN COLLEGE ENDOWMENTS  Faced with rising financial aid needs and shrinking government support, a growing number of universities are seeking big returns by investing their endowments in leveraged buyouts, venture capital and emerging foreign markets.
A1  Yale's investments have pushed its endowment to $3.6 billion.
A11  PACKWOOD ACCUSATIONS RETURN  This week the accusations against Senator Bob Packwood will be on the front burner as one senator has vowed to force the full Senate to vote on whether to hold public hearings into the allegations.
A9  CHICAGO'S GRIM AFTERMATH  After days of record heat and record deaths, funeral homes around Chicago are running services like assembly lines.
A8  SMITH'S PENALTY PHASE TO BEGIN  The conviction of Susan Smith is just the beginning to a whole new parade of testimony and emotions.
A8  PORNOGRAPHY WITNESS DROPPED  A Senate panel on computer pornography will not hear the testimony of a researcher whose highly publicized study concluded that "pornography permeates the digital landscape." A9  BUDGET 'TRAIN WRECK' PREDICTED  The White House chief of staff said that the Government could face a "train wreck" on the budget because Republicans were spending time holding investigative hearings on issues like the Waco raid and Whitewater.
A11 Metro Digest B1 Business Digest D1  Arts/Entertainment C9-14  Art: Monet in Chicago.
C9  Music: A Britten rarity.
C9  "Clueless," a surprise hit.
C10  Books: "Beach Music," by Pat Conroy.
C14  TV: CBS looks ahead to fall.
C12  "Clive James's Postcards" on PBS.
C12  Sports C1-8  Baseball: Yankees win their fifth straight.
C1  Golf: Daly beats Rocca in playoff for British Open title.
C1  Obituaries B9  Editorials/Op-Ed A12-13  Editorials  Fairness denied in New York.
In Haiti, democracy flounders.
Richard E. Mooney: Ice skating.
Letters  Anthony Lewis: With a grain of salt.
Bob Herbert: Sweatshop beneficiaries.
William Safire: Vincent Foster's "can of worms."  Brock Yates: Speed doesn't kill.
Bad drivers do.
Chronicle B4 Bridge B7 Crossword C11


Cutting the Drug Connection
The Board of Aldermen says drug dealers are taking advantage of Boonton's ample supply of public telephones, conducting their business right on the town's sidewalks.
Weary of having a public amenity used for illicit purposes, the board has come up with a solution: after Oct. 1, no public phones will be allowed on its public sidewalks.


CHRONICLE
JULIA BARR, who stars as a savvy and sophisticated magazine editor on "All My Children," is bringing guests to the ABC studio today: a group of 10 homeless women.
On the show, Ms.
Barr's character, Brooke English, has lived in a shelter to better understand the conditions of the homeless, and in a case of life imitating (soap opera) art, Ms.
Barr has made homelessness her cause, too.
She works with First Step, a program of the Coalition for the Homeless that helps prepare homeless or formerly homeless people for the job market.


Pass the Budget or Face Fines
The state has told Morristown to pass its budget by today or its Council members will be fined $25 a day.
Morristown is the only municipality in the state that has not adopted a 1995 calendar year budget, said Robert Friant, a spokesman for the State Department of Community Affairs.


Accounts
DSW Shoe Warehouse, Columbus, Ohio, a unit of the Shonac Corp., to Lord, Sullivan &amp; Yoder, Columbus, as the first agency to handle its account.
The billings were estimated at more than $1 million.


Slim-Fast Product To FCB/Leber Katz
The Slim-Fast Foods Company in West Palm Beach, Fla., has added another agency to its expanding roster by awarding FCB/Leber Katz Partners in New York the assignment to introduce Nutrastart, a nutritional supplement meant to compete against brands like Ensure.
The billings were estimated at $30 million.


Dispute Could Send Strawberry Elsewhere
Darryl Strawberry never even got to don a Yankees uniform before finding himself in a full-fledged brawl with George Steinbrenner over his $850,000 contract, a fight that may have doomed the odd couple's short-lived relationship.
The dispute, simmering for days, erupted to such an extent last evening that Bill Goodstein, Strawberry's attorney, now plans to file a grievance against the Yankees with the Players Association today.


Just a Few Distractions In the Giants' Mixture
In most ways, the Giants come into training camp in great shape.
Most of their draft picks are signed.
They pretty much know which players are going to be where, something that was more uncertain last year.
And they have a great coach who seems more hungry than ever.
But there are some minor contractual problems with some key players that could become an annoyance.


Dividend Meetings
Following is a partial list of dividend meetings this week:


Safeguard Scientifics Inc.(SFE,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Overtime Costs Eat Up Sanitation Savings
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani touts it as a major success in his effort to make New York City's unionized workers more productive: the contract he negotiated last year to force sanitation workers to pick up more trash.
And indeed, nine months later, workers are on average collecting 20 percent more garbage a day than before.
There's just one problem: The city has not saved much money.


Horror and Despair in the Balkans
From the takeover of Srebrenica to the assault on Zepa, television anchors and correspondents, by now masters of Serbo-Croat consonants, have been shelling the safe havens of America's living rooms with images of Serb aggression, Muslim despair and Western waffling.
Night after night has brought fierce contrasts from the ferocious war:
*Frightened, exhausted women and children, the sweepings of ethnic cleansing, set against polished emissaries exchanging phrases in the polished chambers of the United Nations.


Vernon I. Cheadle, 85, Botanist And U. of California Chancellor
Vernon I. Cheadle, a former Chancellor of the University of California at Santa Barbara whose 15-year tenure was marked by rapid campus growth as well as student unrest, died on Sunday at Cottage Hospital in Santa Barbara.
He was 85.
Dr.
Cheadle, who lived in Santa Barbara, was an internationally known botanist.
He was Chancellor from 1962 to 1977.
In that time, the number of disciplines taught on the campus rose to 100 from 36, master's programs to 42 from 15, and Ph.D. programs to 27 from 2.
Enrollment grew to more than 12,000 from 4,700.


AT&amp;T Capital Corp.(TCC,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


How Many Species Are Being Lost? Scientists Try New Yardstick
FEW if any conservation biologists doubt that humans are driving other living species to extinction at a growing rate, and in recent years estimates of the magnitude of the apparent extinction crisis have flooded forth: A million species gone by the year 2000.
A quarter of all species by 2015.
Twenty-seven thousand species a year.
Three every hour.
The list goes on.
These global estimates have always been crude at best, heavy on theory but lighter on data, and have stimulated controversy.
Many scientists, while still convinced that humans are precipitating extinctions on an epic scale, now say it is futile to try to estimate future extinctions with any exactitude.


Unusual Slaying Spotlights Mystery of an Unusual Life
Everyone -- the cobbler, the grocer, the butcher, the neighbors upstairs and downstairs -- was familiar with the 49-year-old woman who was stabbed to death on Sunday inside her studio apartment on the Upper East Side, but no one knew a thing about her.
Even the police, whose job it is to piece together motives and personal histories, are struggling to learn something about the woman, Sherry Hollis Gini, and why she was killed.
So far, no relatives or friends have come forward.
Detectives, who are still looking for a suspect, said they had been able to find out little about Ms.
Gini, other than that she had paid for her apartment in cash and probably did not have a job.


Working With a Girl's Best Friend
"Dealers Among Dealers" is not the first television documentary about the diamond trade, but it is, guaranteed, the cheeriest.
Gem cutters in blue smocks and yarmulkes sing a Hebrew song while they work: Sholom Aleichem meets Walt Disney.
Traders trade quips along with million-dollar gems ("Buy me even if you can't afford me," says a seller speaking for his merchandise) and part amicably even when they can't come to terms.
At fashion shows, jewels glitter from decolletages; auctions, with bids rising in $100,000 increments, seem like funny-money games.
Even the dealer who has been driven by bad luck or times or judgment to drive the limousine he once hired is ready to try again.
Maybe it's the camera that brings out the smiles, but even if you have trouble believing that high spirits prevail so consistently in such a high-risk line, you may find your own spirits lifted by the program's pace and zest.
Gaylen Ross, the producer, catches the communitylike flavor of the business.
Everybody knows everybody: first names are the rule, and deals are made with a handshake.
Sons with nicely coiffed hair follow bearded fathers into the game; competitors study together in synagogue and dance together at weddings, men here, women over there.


Manville Corp.(MVL,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Guilford Mills Inc.(GFD,N) reports earnings for 3d qtr to Jul 2


Shell Oil Co. reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Champion Trotter Enters Retirement
Donerail, last year's champion 2-year-old trotting colt and a strong contender for the Hambletonian on Aug. 5 at the Meadowlands, was retired unexpectedly yesterday after failing to regain form following throat surgery.
"He is not himself," said the trainer Stanley Dancer, who made the surprising announcement in a statement.
"Rather than take any chance of doing Donerail any harm, it has been decided to retire him."


Hudson Foods Inc.(HFI,N) reports earnings for 3d qtr to Jul 1


Duke Power Co.(DUK,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Simpson Expert Supports Conspiracy-Theory Defense
Seeking to lend credibility to the contention that the police framed O. J. Simpson, defense lawyers today produced a scientist who testified that the blood found on two crucial exhibits contained a preservative, suggesting it did not come directly from Mr.
Simpson and his former wife but from test tubes containing their blood.
The witness, Dr.
Fredric Rieders, a forensic toxicologist, said tests performed by the Federal Bureau of Investigation revealed a chemical preservative and anti-coagulant placed in test tubes, in blood retrieved from a sock found in Mr.
Simpson's bedroom and from the rear gate of Nicole Brown Simpson's condominium at 875 South Bundy Drive, where she and Ronald L. Goldman were killed on June 12.


Johnson Worldwide (JWAIA,NNM) reports earnings for 3d qtr to Jun 30


Alaska Air Group (ALK,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Burlington Northern Inc.(BNI,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Albany International Corp.(AIN,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Brunswick Mining and Smelting Corp. reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Tennessee Chooses New Coach
The University of Tennessee promoted BILL WEBB to head track coach yesterday, replacing DOUG BROWN, who recently left for Florida.
The Vols won the national championship in 1991 and have since been in the top five in every National Collegiate Athletic Association championship meet.
Webb has coached at Tennessee for the past 9 years and for 23 years over all. (AP)


Credit District Attorney's Office Also for Drop in Murder Rate
To the Editor:
"Bringing the Murder Rate Down" (editorial, July 17) is surely correct in its endorsement of New York City's "law enforcement machinery." Indeed they "must be doing something right." I also endorse your hope that the city's homicide rates will soon be reduced to their level of 25 years ago.


Strawberry Talks Are Moving Ahead Amid Some Snags
One of George Steinbrenner's proposals for Darryl Strawberry's contract would have subjected Strawberry's children to drug tests as beneficiaries of a trust created with his Yankee salary.
Another proposal Steinbrenner made after their original agreement would have given the club the right to release Strawberry if he violated a deal the owner wanted him to make with the Internal Revenue Service.
Strawberry's agent rejected those proposals and others, people familiar with the dispute said yesterday, and that's why Strawberry didn't join the Yankees, as scheduled, on Sunday.
But talks between the two sides yesterday led several people to say they were closing in on an agreement, and one person said he expected Strawberry to join the team later this week.


Americans Hit the Road With Relish, and Money to Burn
As he circled the Indians, Richard Alexander thought about buying one.
"I could see one of the smaller ones along a wall in our family room," said his wife, Sharon, who watched him study the line of colorful, hand-carved wooden figures outside a souvenir shop near the middle of town.
"I'd like to come home with some kind of memento."


Lavazza Takes a Ride on America's Coffee Bubble
Sipping espresso from a 1-ounce porcelain cup, Giulio Girotto almost shudders as he reaches for a 15-ounce foam container to discuss American espresso bars and drinks like cappuccinos and lattes that he refers to as "espresso-based beverages."
But how you take your espresso has become secondary to Mr.
Girotto, the chief executive of Luigi Lavazza S.p.A., Italy's biggest coffee company, and these days he shudders all the way to the bank.
Lavazza, which controls 43 percent of Italy's coffee market, is cashing in on America's flirtation with Italian foods, and above all its craze for exotic new coffees.


Coverage of the British Open Left Some Gaps
Jim McKay, who is recovering from successful heart bypass surgery, wasn't the only key element missing from ABC's British Open coverage on Sunday.
So was consistent camera work. And a good-sized tape measure.


New Post for a Pastor
After five years as pastor of St.
Catharine's parish in Glen Rock, Msgr.
Thomas J. McDade will become secretary for education of the United States Catholic Conference starting in September.
He will be responsible for developing educational programs for the 2.7 million students in Catholic elementary and secondary schools and the 4.2 million students in parish religious education programs, said Michael Hurley, a spokesman for the Archdiocese of Newark.


To Catch a Jewelry Thief
She may not think of herself as the Charles Bronson type, but Uzera Breeden decided to take matters into her own hands when three men, one of them armed, mugged her Sunday night and made off with her earrings, bracelets and necklaces.
Ms.
Breeden, 45, a secretary in Newark's Department of Neighborhood Services, got in her 1992 Pontiac and went after the man with the gun, jumping out of her car and chasing him when he crawled under a fence.


Comsat Corp.(CQ,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Reynolds &amp; Reynolds Co.(REY,N) reports earnings for 3d qtr to Jun 30


How Can You Connect Singapore and Packwood's Accusers?
To the Editor:
As an alumnus of Williams College, I have read with approval William Safire's columns on my alma mater's decision to confer an honorary degree on Prime Minister Goh Chok Tung of Singapore.


Stanley Delivers Victory in Game Full of Surprises
A potentially serious setback to their scheduled starter could not stop the Yankees last night.
Nor could a four-run Texas rally in the eighth.
Not even a little rain.
Nothing, it seems, can stop the Yankees right now.


Return of the Lady and the Mod
The ancient Romans had a two-faced god called Janus.
The theater has its two-faced mask of comedy and tragedy.
"Batman Forever" has its villainous Two-Face played by Tommy Lee Jones.
And fashion will have two faces this fall: the mod and the lady.
Now is one of those happy times when there isn't just one way to look to be in fashion.
It's a moment when shoppers can choose a character to play.


Central &amp; South West Corp.(CSR,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Patterns
A Return to Barneys
Isaac Mizrahi is back in Barneys New York but will no longer sell to Bloomingdale's, where his shop has already been eliminated.
Jennifer Peck Barnett, the president of Isaac Mizrahi, said there was no connection between the two stores' situations.
But rivalry among retailers typically plays a part in such decisions.
Two years ago, when Barneys opened on Madison Avenue at 61st Street, several designers, including Mr.
Mizrahi, balked at selling there because of loyalty to (and pressure from) longtime players in the neighborhood like Saks, Bergdorf Goodman, Charivari and Bloomingdale's.
Mr.
Mizrahi's collection was dropped from the downtown Barneys when he refused to sell it uptown.


This Summer, Americans Work Harder at Vacationing


Corrections
An obituary on July 13 about the painter Boris Margo omitted a reference to his wife of nearly 40 years, who died in 1979.
She was Jan Gelb, a painter and printmaker.
The obituary also omitted the surname of Mr.
Margo's brother.
He is David Margolis, not Margo.


U.S. HEALTHCARE INC. (USHC,NNM)
U.S.
Healthcare Inc. said yesterday that its second-quarter earnings fell slightly, as a surge in enrollment was offset by higher medical costs.
Net income for the operator of health maintenance organizations and other types of managed-health-care plans slipped to $93.1 million, or 59 cents a share, from $93.3 million, or 58 cents, a year ago.


American Electric Power Co.(AEP,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


INSIDE
Questions on Nuclear Sale A debate is raging over whether a Federal plan to privatize the operations that produce fuel for the nation's nuclear power plants will do more harm than good.
Page D1.
Clinton Attacks Budget Plan
The President accused Congressional Republicans of abandoning necessary Government programs for the "luxuries" of carrying out large tax cuts and balancing the budget in seven years.
Page A10.
Tight Rules for Vatican Staff
Starting in October, the Vatican plans to have new lay employees agree in writing to heed moral doctrines of the Catholic Church "even in the private sphere," Page A4.
King Tut's Clothes Chests
A neglected treasure of the Pharaoh Tutankhamen, his rich, decaying wardrobe, is being catalogued and studied seven decades after it was found.
Science Times, page C1.


Payouts Down in Tax Credit Program for the Poor
The Internal Revenue Service said yesterday that the number of poor working households filing for money under a tax credit program declined this year for the first time, saving the Government nearly $2.1 billion.
The I.R.S. said that through May it had received 13.8 million claims under the earned-income tax credit program, down from the 14 million claims a year earlier.
The budget had anticipated a slight increase, to about 14.2 million claims.


Loctite Corp.(LOC,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Airborne Freight Corp.(ABF,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Union Chief Linked to the Mob Appears to Have Won a 2d Term
The head of the carpenters union in the New York City area, whose administration was under fire on charges of corruption, nepotism and favoritism to mobsters, appears to have been re-elected, according to an unofficial vote count completed last night.
A major issue in the campaign was the disclosures that aides to Frederick W. Devine, who was re-elected to a second term, had doled out lucrative jobs at the Jacob K. Javits Convention Center to mobsters and former convicts.


Daly Is Right On Course and Mending Fences
One of John Daly's first scheduled acts as the new British Open champion was to show up for a news conference at 9 o'clock this morning at the Old Course Hotel.
He was there at 8:50, adding to the evidence that maybe, just maybe, this really is a new John Daly we're looking at here, both on and off the golf course.
There was a time, and it wasn't very long ago, that Daly would have shown up an hour late, issued a few sullen, perfunctory remarks, and left.
That is exactly what he did just over a year ago during the United States Open week in Pittsburgh, when one of his major sponsors set up an event announcing his signing to a multiyear endorsement deal.


American President Cos.  (APS,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Baltimore Gas &amp; Electric Co.(BGE,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


New S.E.C. Rules to Require Funds to Disclose Trading Costs
The Securities and Exchange Commission approved new rules yesterday requiring mutual funds to tell investors how much money they pay to trade stocks and bonds.
Beginning in September, all mutual funds that have more than 10 percent of their assets in equities will have to disclose the average commission rate they pay to trade stocks and bonds.


Southern New England Telecommunications Corp.(SNG,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Oklahoma Gas &amp; Electric Co.(OGE,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


U.S. Prods Nicaragua on Seized Land
From the day she took office five years ago, President Violeta Barrios de Chamorro has struggled with the thorniest problem she inherited from the Sandinista National Liberation Front: how to reimburse the owners of the thousands of houses, farms and factories that her predecessors seized as part of their program of social revolution.
Some 2,200 cases have been resolved and more than $260 million in bonds issued to former property owners.


Emphesys Financial Group Inc.(EFG,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Antec Corp.(ANTC,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


John K. Hutchens; Book Critic Was 89
John K. Hutchens, an author, book critic and longtime judge of the Book of the Month Club, died on Saturday at the Westchester County Medical Center in Valhalla, N.Y.
He was 89 and lived in Manhattan.
Mr.
Hutchens was a book reviewer at The New York Herald Tribune from 1948 to 1963, and was the editor of The New York Times Book Review from 1944 to 1946.


Fina Inc.(FI,A) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


METRO DIGEST
LABOR PEACE IN CITY, AT A PRICE When Mayor Giuliani strode into City Hall last year demanding vast concessions from municipal workers, many union chiefs saw it as a declaration of war.
Nineteen months later, the furious rhetoric has given way to a remarkable period of labor peace in New York City.
But that tranquillity has come at a price.  [ Page A1. ] Sanitation workers are on average collecting 20 percent more garbage a day than before.
But the city has not saved much money.  [ B2. ] NEW YORK CITY  ART FROM CUBA: MORE THAN BABALU Corso de Palenzuela worries that the only cultural exports Americans associate with his Cuban homeland are revolution and Ricky Ricardo.
But a five-judge panel of the State Appellate Division said the case was anything but clear-cut and overturned the conviction.  [ B4. ] SLAYING OPENS MYSTERY OF A LIFE Everyone was familiar with the woman who was stabbed to death on Sunday in her apartment on the Upper East Side, but no one knew a thing about her.
Even the police are struggling to learn something about the woman, Sherry Hollis Gini, and why she was killed.  [ B4. ] REGION  UNIONS CLAIM RIGHT TO STRIKE Just four days after Metro-North riders learned, to their relief, that the railroad had invoked a Federal law to postpone a possible strike for four months, several unions called the move illegal and said they still had the right to strike.
Union leaders said they probably would not call a strike so long as there were signs of progress in contract talks, and both sides said they intended to resume negotiations soon.  [ B5. ] Chronicle B4  Our Towns by Evelyn Nieves B5


Newell Co.(NWL,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Clinton Attacks the G.O.P. On Priorities in Budget Plan
Vowing strong opposition to a Congressional budget plan, President Clinton today accused Republicans of abandoning necessary Government programs for the "luxuries" of carrying out large tax cuts and balancing the budget in seven years.
In a speech that aides said was the beginning of a period of concerted lobbying on the budget, Mr.
Clinton came close to issuing a blanket veto threat if Republicans failed to heed his own spending priorities in areas like education, Medicare and environmental protection.
He said such programs were the "common ground" -- a phrase echoing more frequently in the President's oratory -- and had long had bipartisan support.


Connecticut Upholds Ban On Weapons
The Connecticut Supreme Court today upheld a state law banning assault weapons, declaring that the State Constitution's guarantee of the right to bear arms "does not guarantee the right to possess any weapon of the individual's choosing."
The decision, upholding a 1993 law that banned 67 semiautomatic assault weapons by brand name, makes Connecticut the first state with the right of self-defense specified in its Constitution to have an assault-weapons ban pass legal challenge, said Attorney General Richard Blumenthal, who represented the state in the case.


Raymond Rosenthal Dies at 80; Translator of European Fiction
Raymond Rosenthal, an American translator who specialized largely in 20th-century Italian fiction, died yesterday at the Cabrini Nursing Home in Manhattan.
He was 80 and a longtime resident of Greenwich Village.
The cause was lung cancer, said his daughter, Margaret F. Rosenthal, who is an associate professor of Italian at the University of Southern California.


International Briefs; Euro Disney Profit Seen
Euro Disney S.C.A. is expected to report its first profit ever when it posts third-quarter results this week, analysts said yesterday.
The company, which runs the Disneyland Paris theme park, is expected to have a profit of 10 million to 100 million French francs ($2 million to $20 million).
Euro Disney's revenue is expected to be higher because of improved attendance prompted by a cut in entry fees of as much as 20 percent and the opening of the new Space Mountain ride on June 1.
Analysts also cited a financial revamping that has reduced interest payments on debt.
The Walt Disney Company owns 39 percent of Euro Disney. (Bloomberg Business News)


International Briefs; Manweb Rejects Offer From Scottish Power
Scottish Power, one of the largest power generators in Scotland, offered yesterday to acquire Manweb P.L.C., an English regional electricity distributor, for about $:1.04 billion, or $1.66 billion.
But Manweb quickly rejected the bid, saying it "fundamentally undervalues Manweb's prospects." Scottish Power offered 945 pence a share for Manweb in cash and stock.
The company also offered an all-cash alternative bid of 915 pence a share, or about $:1.01 billion.


Elsag Bailey Process Automation NV (EBY,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 25


How the First Land Arose From the Waters
And God said, Let the waters under the heaven be gathered together unto one place, and let the dry land appear.
And it was so.
Genesis 1:9
Over the centuries the science of geology has solved many riddles concerning the earth: why fossils of sea creatures are found atop mountains, why the Pacific Ocean is surrounded by a ring of volcanic fire, why glaciers grow and retreat, why diamonds are concentrated in some places, why earthquakes strike some areas and not others.


CHRONICLE
The mood was jubilant on stage and off at Tanglewood on Sunday afternoon when the Boston Symphony Orchestra gave a concert billed as "The Three Birthdays." The birthday boys: the orchestra's conductor, SEIJI OZAWA, who will turn 60 on Sept. 1; the violinist ITZHAK PERLMAN, who turns 50 on Aug. 31, and the cellist YO-YO MA, who will be 40 on Oct. 7.
Attendance at the event -- 19,000 -- broke all records for the 59-year-old Tanglewood Music Festival in Lenox, Mass., said Caroline Smedvig, the orchestra's spokeswoman.
After Mr.
Perlman and Mr.
Ma had teamed up for a Brahms double concerto, the orchestra, with the guest conductors ANDRE PREVIN and JOHN WILLIAMS, got down to the business of surprising the three artists with compositions dedicated to each of them.


Computer Associates International Inc.(CA,N) reports earnings for 1s qtr to Jun 30


NABISCO HOLDINGS (NA,N)
The Nabisco Holdings Corporation said yesterday that earnings jumped 36.2 percent in the second quarter as international growth made up for stagnant domestic results.
The company, the maker of Oreo cookies and Ritz crackers, earned $79 million, or 30 cents a share, compared with pro-forma net income of $58 million, or 24 cents a share, in the quarter a year earlier.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt *
CIT Group Holdings Inc., New York, owned 60 percent by the Dai Ichi Kangyo Bank of Japan and 40 percent by Chemical Banking, is selling $150 million of medium-term notes due in 1998 through Morgan Stanley.
The notes are priced at 99.945 to yield 6.37 percent.
The noncallable issue is rated Aa3 by Moody's Investors Service Inc., A+ by the Standard &amp; Poor's Corp. and AA- by Duff &amp; Phelps.
*
Federal National Mortgage Association, known as Fannie Mae, is selling $100 million of notes due 2000 through Merrill Lynch &amp; Co.
Callable in one year, the issue is priced at par to yield 7.09 percent.


Reno Air Inc. reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Kirby Corp.(KEX,A) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Company to Pay in Fraud Case
A medical equipment company in Manalapan that was accused of encouraging its retail customers to inflate Medicare reimbursement claims agreed yesterday to pay $4.9 million to settle the case.


Giuliani's Budget Questioned
Mayor Giuliani's budget depends on millions of dollars in questionable assumptions, the city and state comptrollers said.
Page B2.


Connors to Play L.A. Tourney
JIMMY CONNORS, who is 42 years old and has won the event four times, has been granted a wild-card entry into the Infiniti Open beginning next Monday on the U.C.L.A. campus.
In his only appearance on the IBM-ATP Tour this year, Connors reached the quarterfinals last month in Halle, Germany. (AP)


Orthodox Threat?
To the Editor:


SPS Transaction Services Inc.(PAY,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Dean Witter Net Up 15% In Quarter
Reaping the benefits of being in two robust businesses, Dean Witter, Discover &amp; Company reported a 15 percent gain in its second-quarter earnings, exceeding Wall Street's estimates.
Widely considered a stable earnings producer under any economic conditions, Dean Witter, Discover received extra aid to its bottom line from a boom in both its core businesses: consumers have stepped up their use of credit cards and investors seem to have an insatiable appetite for stocks.


CHRONICLE
It was ALEXANDER H. COHEN's 75th birthday yesterday , so his sons, CHRISTOPHER and GERRY COHEN, put together a videotape of tributes by 75 friends and colleagues.
"It was a riot, a laugh riot," Mr.
Cohen, the Broadway and television producer, said yesterday after watching it in his home in Mougins in the south of France, where he and his wife, Hildy Parks, are spending July.


Brush Wellman Inc.(BW,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jul 2


Alexander &amp; Alexander Services Inc.(AAL,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Chess
Alexey Yermolinsky of Highland Park, N.J., won this year's running of the World Open Tournament in Philadelphia over the July 4 weekend.
Undefeated throughout, the 37-year-old former Soviet grandmaster scored 8-1 to capture the $12,000 first prize.
The nine-round, Swiss-system event attracted 233 players.
Another former Soviet grandmaster, 35-year-old Grigory Kaidanov of Lexington, Ky., took clear second prize of $6,000 for his tally of 7 1/2-1 1/2.


Marsh &amp; McLennan Cos.(MMC,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Harrah's Entertainment Inc. reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


A Big Spritz


Court, Faulting Defense, Overturns Conviction in 1990 Killing
When Luis Kevin Rojas was convicted of murder in February 1992 and sent to prison for 15 years, it looked to the Manhattan jury like an open and shut case.
After all, several friends of the victim had identified Mr.
Rojas as the man in an orange jacket who had pulled a silver .32-caliber pistol and started firing during an early-morning shoving match between two groups of young men at Broadway and Waverly Place in Greenwich Village in November 1990.


No Metaphor for Life; This Is the Real Article
DEEP IN THE GREEN An Exploration of Country Pleasures By Anne Raver 280 pages.
Alfred A. Knopf. $24.


Astec Industries(ASTE,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


On Nazis, Truth and Treachery, With Songs
The Nazi imprisonment of Dietrich Bonhoeffer, the German theologian and pastor, and his execution only weeks before the Third Reich collapsed, is a peculiarly dramatic episode.
The eloquent Bonhoeffer was a complex man, and the confrontation between him and the Nazis brings into sharp focus the agony of an individual conscience facing evil as national destiny.
In "Bonhoeffer 1945," the playwright D. Paul Thomas, an actor who also takes the title role, uses a series of interrogations by a judge advocate (Nicholas Hormann) to explore some of the spiritual suffering Bonhoeffer wrote about in prison.
But as directed by Albert Sinkys at the Second Stage Theater (2162 Broadway, at 76th Street), the play is overloaded with symbolism and acting gimmicks, at times seeming like "Thomas 1995."


Lyondell Petrochemical Co.(LYO,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Talking Peace in Ireland
Peace is looking a bit less shaky in Northern Ireland.
According to news accounts that have not been officially confirmed, the British and Irish Governments have outlined a plan to break the impasse that has stopped the peace process from going to its next natural stage.
That stage would be all-party talks to end the civil conflict.
For the first time, it seems that the critical issue of disarming the Irish Republican Army might be resolved.
Until now, the British and the Protestant Unionists have refused to sit down with Sinn Fein, the political wing of the I.R.A., until the I.R.A. abandons its weapons.
The British and the Unionists, who wish to preserve British rule, insist the arms issue is all that stands in the way of peace talks.
Sinn Fein has maintained that decommissioning its weapons amounts to surrender.
The Sinn Fein leader Gerry Adams points out that the I.R.A. has voluntarily observed a cease-fire for 11 months and that this should be evidence aplenty of its good will.


St. Paul Cos.(SPC,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Creative Computers Inc.(MALL,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Allies Search For the 'Key' In Bomb Plan
Three days after the United States, Britain and France threatened Bosnian Serbs with heavy air strikes if they attacked the Muslim enclave of Gorazde, the NATO allies still have not decided who would be authorized to start the bombing.
Allied military commanders worked into the evening on plans to deter a full-scale Bosnian Serb assault on Gorazde, a senior NATO official said.
But although NATO representatives expressed "grave concern" today about the fighting in the western Bosnian enclave of Bihac, they delayed consideration of the military plan until Tuesday.


New Mets Suddenly Look Like Old Mets
The excitement and energy created by their string of success after the All-Star Game Break is threatening to give way to that feeling of frustration and uncertainty that hung in the Mets clubhouse like a thick fog for the first half of the season.
After winning six of their first seven games following the break, the Mets have dropped three straight, including tonight's 5-3 setback to the stumbling Cubs, a team that had lost 7 straight games and 11 of their previous 12.


Films Born of Rage on France's Periphery
For all too long, French movies have been eating, drinking and chatting their way through a safe-and-tested menu of love triangles, wacky comedies, literary adaptations and historical dramas.
The problem was that, for many filmgoers, the bucolic, romantic and intellectual France of the screen was no longer recognizable.
Now several young film makers have decided to offer their vision of a more troubled, perhaps more real, France.
They have taken images long familiar to television viewers -- of unemployment, drug trafficking, vandalism and occasional race riots -- and breathed a new dimension into them.
They have gone into suburban ghettos to measure rage and despair.
Their timing could not be better.


Domco Industries reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 24


Abitibi-Price (ABY,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Westpoint Stevens Inc.(WPSN,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


By Design; Hiding, but So Stylishly
The first hint of mod hit the streets this summer: wraparound sunglasses.
They have the properly cool attitude, especially when the lenses are black and rectangular or oval.
And if the sun goes behind a cloud, wraparounds can function as quite efficient headbands, worn in the currently correct mod way: right at the hairline rather than on top of the head.
Saks Fifth Avenue has a good selection of them that includes Thierry Mugler's quintessentially mod white frames with black lenses ($210), Giorgio Armani's lightweight thin frames in tortoise shell ($200), Gianni Versace's all-black glasses with a bold gold emblem for the status-conscious ($195) and Charles Jourdan's all-black version with quilted side bars ($85).


Arco Co.(ARC,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


At a Fair, a Little Bit Town And a Little Bit Country
IN an instant, the 4-H livestock tent at the Orange County Fair was packed.
All it took to grab the crowds was the kind of shower that topples oak trees and shuts roads.
"This exhibit is always popular," Tom Davis, a 4-H agent, said as people stood four deep over a pen of chicks.
"The baby chicks and Wilbur the pig are a big draw."


Elleston Trevor, 75, Novelist Of Many Names and Books
Elleston Trevor, the prolific English novelist who wrote "The Quiller Memorandum" under the pseudonym Adam Hall, died on July 21 at his home in Cave Creek, Ariz.
He was 75.
The cause was cancer, said his son, Jean-Pierre.


International Briefs; Net Up 13% at Siemens
Siemens A.G., the German electronics and engineering giant, said its net profit rose 13 percent, to 4.405 billion marks ($3.18 billion), in the first nine months of the business year.
The chairman of Siemens, Heinrich von Pierer, repeated his forecast that group profit for the year ending Sept. 30 would rise 20 percent, to 2 billion marks ($1.45 billion).
The company posted a net of about 2 billion marks in the previous fiscal year, but the total included an extraordinary gain from the sale of its pacemaker unit. (Reuters)


Suicide Bomber Kills 5 in a Bus Attack Near Tel Aviv
A lull of three months in large-scale terrorism against Israelis was shattered today when a Palestinian suicide bomber set off a crude pipe bomb in a bus creeping through the morning rush hour here in a suburb of Tel Aviv, killing himself and at least 5 passengers and wounding 32 more.
Three of the wounded were in critical condition.
The attack came on the day before Israeli and Palestinian negotiators were to have reached an agreement on extending Palestinian self-rule to much of the West Bank.
While it was already evident before the blast that the deadline would not be met, Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin vowed that the attack would not deter the talks.


Percy Humphrey, Jazz Trumpeter, 90
Percy Humphrey, a trumpeter best known for his work with the Preservation Hall Jazz Band, died on Saturday in New Orleans, where he lived.
He was 90.
Mr.
Humphrey was from a musical family in New Orleans -- his grandfather, Jim Humphrey, taught many of the first-generation jazz musicians -- and grew up playing in all sorts of situations, from dance halls to brass bands.
He started out as a drummer, then changed to trumpet, working his way up to the position of first trumpet in the Eureka Brass Band, one of the city's most important.
In the 1950's he took over as leader of the group.


Prodigy Seeks to Reargue Its Defense in Libel Lawsuit
The Prodigy Services Company said yesterday it would seek to reargue a lawsuit filed by a Long Island brokerage firm that contends it had been libeled by comments distributed by the on-line service.
Prodigy, which is based in White Plains and is owned by I.B.M. and Sears, Roebuck &amp; Company, said it had filed a motion to reargue its case before Justice Stuart L. Ain of the State Supreme Court in Mineola, L.I.
Prodigy's motion contends that its previous legal counsel failed to present an adequate defense against the charges by the brokerage firm, Stratton Oakmont Inc.
The firm is seeking $200 million in damages.


Man Is Killed and 7 Are Injured In Shooting at a Park in Queens
A 28-year-old man was fatally shot and seven other people were wounded, one of them critically, in a sudden shooting last night that caused panic at an outdoor basketball tournament in Baisley Park in Queens, the police said.
Three hundred people were at the tournament when the shots were fired, apparently by a single gunman, the police said.


NS Group Inc.(NSS,N) reports earnings for 3d qtr to Jul 1


Flextronics International Ltd.(FLEXF,NNM) reports earnings for 1st qtr to Jun 30


No Headline
"I've always enjoyed the energy and vibrancy of New York. I'll come back, certainly. It's just an unfortunate thing that happened." TIMOTHY WATSON a South African tourist who was stabbed by a robber on the Upper West Side.  [ B3:5. ]


Oakwood Homes Corp.(OH,N) reports earnings for 3d qtr to Jun 30


Despite Anti-Labor Oratory, Mayor Treats Unions Gently
When Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani strode into City Hall last year demanding vast concessions from municipal workers, many union chiefs saw it as a declaration of war.
"He can't operate this way," thundered Stanley Hill, who runs the city's largest union.
"We won't allow it."
Nineteen months later, the furious rhetoric has given way to a remarkable period of labor peace in New York City.
But that tranquillity has come at a price: few of the wholesale concessions and productivity gains the Mayor had promised have been achieved.
The Mayor's labor accomplishments appear to fall short of those in other cities -- and of his own campaign pledges.


Striving to Capture Cultures and Beauty of Cuba
Corso de Palenzuela worries that the only cultural exports Americans associate with his Cuban homeland are revolution and Ricky Ricardo.
In his paintings, the artist conjures up an island where African drums exist alongside Spanish forts, slender palm trees and golden menorahs.
Yes, menorahs.
As Ricky would say, Corso, you have some 'splaining to do.


How Can You Connect Singapore and Packwood's Accusers?; Mere Allegations
To the Editor:
It is sickening to read William Safire's continual diatribes on Singapore and its regime ("Singapore's Fear," July 20).
A repressive regime does not follow the ability-to-pay/ progressive system of taxation as much as Singapore does: income tax rates increase gradually from 3.5 percent for the lowest income group to 33 percent for the highest.
It has hardly any pockets of destitution, its infant mortality is among the lowest in the world (6 per 1,000 live births) and its home-ownership rate is perhaps the highest (about 90 percent).


Expanding in TV, Gannett Agrees to Buy Multimedia
Moving to expand significantly both its television and newspaper holdings, the Gannett Company said yesterday that it had agreed to a $1.7 billion acquisition of the media company that syndicates the talk shows of Phil Donahue, Sally Jessy Raphael and Rush Limbaugh.
Gannett beat out several rivals for the company, Multimedia Inc. of Greenville, S.C., which also owns cable television systems; 11 daily and 49 other newspapers, and television stations in Cleveland, Cincinnati, St.
Louis, Knoxville, Tenn., and Macon, Ga. -- all markets where Gannett has no stations.
Multimedia also owns two radio stations in Macon and a security systems business, as well as the television syndication business.


Taking On Hunters
To the Editor:
I read with pleasure your report on the Idaho environmentalist who outbid ranchers for grazing rights so he could protect public lands (news article, July 21).
For a decade animal advocates in Connecticut have won bids for trapping rights to some parcels of state-owned land, targeting parcels held by sports trappers.


Lobbyist Disclosure Is Backed in Senate; Gift Issue Is Put Off
The Senate tonight overwhelmingly backed legislation to require registration by thousands of lobbyists who now avoid any public disclosures, but it put off the more painful question of what gifts senators could accept from them.
The lobbying bill, which reached the brink of passage before the Senate quit for the night, would broaden the narrow definition of the word "lobbyist" contained in a 1947 law that the Justice Department has scorned as inadequate and unenforceable.
It would expand the definition to require registration and reporting of those who lobby the executive branch and Congressional staff and would narrow the exemptions for lawyers.


The Voice of Apartheid Goes Multicultural
It is 6 A.M. on Nelson Mandela's birthday, and "Good Morning South Africa" is on the air.
The hosts -- two men, one black, one white -- wear ties bearing the President's smiling face, and take turns greeting the audience in English and Afrikaans.
Over on the news desk, a black woman and a white man deliver the day's top story, again switching in and out of the two languages.
Taped interviews take place in a variety of languages.
Later two more news anchors reintroduce the same stories, this time in Sotho and Zulu.


Agent Says His Warnings Over Waco Were Ignored
A Federal undercover officer who infiltrated the Branch Davidian compound testified today that his superiors ignored his warnings that the sect's leader knew Government agents were about to arrest him.
Once the agents went ahead with the raid, he said, the deaths of all the sect's members -- and some agents -- were foreordained.
Robert Rodriguez of the Federal Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms told two House subcommittees investigating the two botched Federal raids on the Branch Davidian compound near Waco, Tex., that the leader, David Koresh, vowed that "neither the A.T.F. nor the National Guard will ever get me."


Automotive Industries Holding Inc.(AIHI,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jul 1


Cortines Ousts a School Board in Brooklyn
The New York City Schools Chancellor yesterday removed all nine members of a Brooklyn community school board who were deadlocked in their search for a new superintendent and promptly installed his own administrator and board of trustees to manage the district.
Chancellor Ramon C. Cortines took control of the district, No. 16 in Bedford-Stuyvesant, less than a year after he took over a neighboring district, No. 17, which runs from Crown Heights to Flatbush, because of political infighting and mismanagement.
But unlike board members in District 17, who mounted little opposition to the Chancellor, several board members in District 16 vowed yesterday to take legal action to block the Chancellor's takeover.


A Bright Side To Moving Out
While many of the working poor in projects like Allegheny Commons are upset at suddenly having as neighbors people who do not work, for some the pressure to move on has had beneficial results.
Essie Stevenson, who moved into her three-bedroom apartment shortly after Allegheny Commons was built two decades ago, was paying $572 a month when she was told last fall that her rent would rise to $700.
That was because she made too much money working six days a week as a grocery store cashier to qualify for Section 8 subsidies that are aimed at the poorest of the poor.


Make DOS Sit Up And Do Its Tricks
PREVIOUS versions of Microsoft Windows were a shell on top of DOS, which runs 80 to 90 percent of personal computers.
Windows 95, due Aug. 24, is an operating system in its own right, although DOS still lingers behind the scenes for those who want or need it.
Still, not everyone will switch from 3.1 to 95, just as not everyone switched from DOS to Windows.
And besides, there are ways to have fun with something that was not designed for a romp.
Here are some ways to make your old operating system sit up and do new tricks.


Not Out of the Running


Corrections
An article in the Styles pages on Sunday about a singer and songwriter whose music will be heard this week at several men's fashion shows in New York misspelled his name.
He is Ke, not K.


Lubrizol Corp.(LZ,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Doctors Can Prevent Errors Just by Listening; Under the Microscope
To the Editor:
Your report on errors in physician management of hospitalized patients (Science Times, July 18) presents situations where physician vigilance or education has been deficient.
Surgical mistakes even in dealing with horrendous injuries and catastrophic illnesses are uncommon.
But errors occur at all levels of care and are due to a multitude of causes.
I want to call your attention to the efforts at Norwalk Hospital to minimize errors and advance the education of all surgeons.
At patient discharge, every chart is scanned in the record room and all complications are brought to the attention of a quality review committee.
A complication is defined as any unanticipated development.
The committee includes members of various specialties, and membership rotates.
The responsible surgeon discusses his patient's complication, in writing or in person.
Surgeons are constantly on trial with their peers to maintain competence.
Hard work is needed to meet this professional obligation.
The patient stands to gain most by this emphasis on care and caring, by not allowing his surgeon to be an independent entrepreneur.
Such care systems exist in many hospitals.
JOHN L. POOL, M.D.
Wilton, Conn., July 21, 1995


Sanders Is Not the Star In Debut With Giants
Giants 8, Marlins 3
Deion Sanders was upstaged by a rookie teammate last night when they made their debuts for the San Francisco Giants.
Jamie Brewington pitched seven strong innings in his first major league game, earning the victory as San Francisco beat the Florida Marlins, 8-3, in Miami.
Sanders, acquired from Cincinnati in a trade on Friday, joined the team two and a half hours before the game, batted leadoff and went 1 for 6 with one putout in center field.
He singled home a run in the seventh and continued to third when center fielder Jerry Browne bobbled the ball for an error.


Rollins Inc.(ROL,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


New Plan Drawn to Promote Irish Peace Effort
The British and Irish Governments have drawn up a new plan to deal with the major obstacles that have been impeding the Northern Ireland peace effort.
After months of impasse in the effort toward a peaceful settlement of the sectarian warfare that has plagued the predominantly Protestant British province since 1969, the Governments of Prime Ministers John Bruton of Ireland and John Major of Britain have agreed on the outline of plan that would accomplish these things:


Eastman ChemicalCo.(EMN,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


In the Rush Toward Gene Therapy, Some See a High Risk of Failure
IN the six years since the first corrective genes were injected into the first patient, gene therapy has exploded.
As many as 600 patients have been given gene therapy in studies, for diseases ranging from rare metabolic defects to common cancers.
Nearly half of these patients were enrolled in the last six months.
But for all the frenzy, there has not been a single published report of a patient who was helped by gene therapy.
And technical questions have multiplied.
For example, scientists have discovered that the immune system may attack and destroy cells that were treated with gene therapy, seeing them as foreign or, when the genes were transferred by a virus, as infected.


International Briefs; Norsk Hydro's Profit Up
Norsk Hydro, the Norwegian industrial giant, yesterday reported an 85 percent increase in its second-quarter profit, prompted by higher income from the farm and light-metals areas.
The overall increase came despite a 65 percent decline in operating income at the oil and gas division, the company said.
Hydro recorded after-tax profit of 1.95 billion kroner ($316 million), compared with 1.05 billion kroner ($170 million) in the corresponding period a year earlier.
Leiv Nergaard, chief financial officer and executive vice president, forecast lower earnings for the remainder of the year, especially in the third quarter.
"We expect the second half of 1995 to be characterized by normal seasonal variations," he said.
"This usually means that the third quarter is the weakest quarter of the year." (Reuters)


Southwest Airlines Co.  (LUV,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


COMPANY BRIEFS
INTERNATIONAL LOTTERY INC., Cincinnati, an automated dispensing products concern, said it had suspended talks to buy Lottery Enterprises Inc., San Diego, a designer and maker of vending terminals.
KAISER ALUMINUM CORP., Houston, an aluminum products and technology concern, is to invest $60 million in a proposed venture with China National Nonferrous Metals Industry Corp. to expand the latter company's aluminum smelting plant in Lianhai.


Editorial Notebook; Sitting in Judgment
Picture a jury growing impatient over legal wrangling at a trial, then finally appealing to the judge for a speedy end to the proceedings.
The jury in question was not the one at the O. J. Simpson murder trial.
It was an ordinary panel on which I served recently in Federal court.
The experience suggested to me that the Simpson case may be influencing courtrooms everywhere.
Our case involved a teen-age boy who fell off a fire escape and broke his leg in the Bronx two years ago.
Charging negligence, the boy's family was suing the building's management company and owner, in this case the Federal Government because the previous owner had defaulted on a Federal mortgage.
Judge Shira A. Scheindlin directed us not to discuss the case, but after three days of digressions over the phrasing of the lawyers' questions and endless arguments over whether the fire escape was in good repair, we all knew that this trial was not going to end soon.


Prices Regain Some Ground; Shorter Maturities Weaker
Bond prices regained some ground yesterday from last week's retreat.
But prices for shorter maturities were mildly weaker as investors positioned themselves for an increase in supply this week.
The price of the 30-year Treasury bond rose 16/32 , to 10915/32 .
Its yield, which moves in the opposite direction from its price, fell to 6.87 percent, from 6.96 percent on Friday.
Investors gained about $11.25 for every $1,000 of bonds held.


Ekco Group Inc.(EKO,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jul 2


Ryder System (R,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


On My Mind; The Document Of May 30
The "safe areas" in Bosnia were demilitarized zones from which the Muslim Bosnian Government had removed its forces long before the Bosnian Serbs began conquering them.
The Serbian attacks have been against areas deliberately made defenseless by international agreement.
Almost every American and foreigner I have talked with about Bosnia believes this to be true, and a strong legal and moral reason for the West to bomb the Bosnian Serbs.
But Western governments know it to be false.


Peco Energy Co.(PE,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


U.S. Says France Raided Bosnian Serb Stronghold
American officials have concluded that France sent its warplanes on an unannounced mission to bomb the Serbian stronghold of Pale in retaliation for the killing on Saturday of two French peacekeepers.
A senior Administration official with access to highly classified intelligence reports said tonight that France had sent as many as three Mirage fighter-bombers to strike Pale.
The attack was reported by a French newspaper today but then denied by French officials.


Goals Conflict In Plan to Sell Nuclear Unit
A plan by the Federal Government to sell the operations that produce fuel for the nation's nuclear power plants -- the largest privatization ever attempted by Washington -- has long been counted on to demonstrate commitment to leaner government.
But with the White House ready to announce details of the sale this week, a debate is raging over whether such a sale would do more harm than good.
The central question is one familiar whenever a government sells off a chunk of itself: would a private owner's financial interests be at odds with the national interest?


Arabs Say Attacks Hurt Them Too
Abed Hilal, a construction worker from this Palestinian town, left his job in Israel early today, forced home by the suicide bombing of an Israeli bus near Tel Aviv.
As news spread that the Israeli authorities had barred entry to Palestinians after the attack, Mr.
Hilal and his fellow laborers headed back to the West Bank and the Gaza Strip to avoid trouble from the police or from angry Israelis.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article on Friday about Senator Bob Dole's medical reports misstated the type of follow-up tests he had had to determine whether the prostate cancer found in 1991 had spread.
At six-month intervals, he has had PSA blood tests -- for prostate specific antigen -- and these have indicated no evidence of spread.
He has not had further CT scans.


Exide Electronics Group Inc.(XUPS,NNM) reports earnings for 3d qtr to Jun 30


Mobil Corp.(MOB,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


British Set Guns Near Sarajevo But Serbs Keep On Shelling
About 300 British troops, the first members of the new United Nations rapid-reaction force, began positioning heavy guns on the slopes of Mount Igman above Sarajevo today, but their presence did not deter Bosnian Serbs from shelling the Bosnian capital.
The French Foreign Legion has an additional 500 troops, also heavily armed, joining the British, although not all of them will be deployed on Mount Igman.


American Business Products Inc.(ABP,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Reviving Kitty Genovese Case, and Its Passions
The killing of Kitty Genovese was first a tragedy, then a symbol, then a bit of durable urban mythology.
Yesterday, more than 30 years after the slaying of the 28-year-old barmaid in Queens prompted painful soul-searching over whether her neighbors should have done more to help, the Kitty Genovese case was back in court.
In Federal District Court in Brooklyn, the man convicted of the murder, Winston Moseley, 60, walked out of the past, through a door and to the witness stand, where he claimed he should be granted a new trial.
His original defense lawyer -- who Mr.
Moseley now says had a conflict of interest because he had once represented Miss Genovese -- was also there, 82 years old but still practicing law.
So, too, was one of the prosecutors who tried the case in 1964.


Cincinnati Financial Corp.(CINF,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Market Place; Blink, and you may miss out on a star manager's newest fund.
PAUL H. WICK, whose technology mutual fund has racked up the biggest gains of any stock fund during the last five years, plans to start a new fund to invest in the sector that made him a star.
But most people are unlikely to get a chance to invest in the new fund because it will be closed to new investors when assets reach $125 million.
Given the record of Mr.
Wick, who is 32, and the general fervor for mutual funds that buy technology stocks, that amount may well be collected in a single day.


Nice-guy Sprite gets an attitude as Coca-Cola pursues irreverent, playful young consumers.
UNTIL early last year, advertising from the Coca-Cola Company portrayed Sprite as being as sticky-sweet as its pixieish name.
Now the Sprite persona has been revamped to naughty from nice, in a campaign that mocks the conventions of soft-drink marketing in a manner so bold and tough, consumers may well wonder whether the brand is being renamed Troll.
Out went the syrupy jingle "I like the Sprite in you" and the strange fruit, the "lymon," symbolizing lemon-lime flavor.
To better appeal to core customers, thirsty teen-agers and 20-somethings, the ads have been imbued with spiky energy and a pervasive skepticism of traditional Madison Avenue promises.


Spacelabs Medical Inc. reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jul 1


Liz Claiborne Inc.(LIZ,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jul 1


Required Fees For Rape Test May Soon End
Almost 10 years after Julie Lindsey was kidnapped, raped and left for dead -- then required to pay $200 for a forensic examination -- the Alabama House of Representatives voted today to prevent future victims from being similarly treated.
The 100-member body, in the last days of the legislative session in Montgomery, unanimously passed a bill requiring the state's Crime Victims Compensation Commission to pay for such examinations and evidence gathering.
When the state Senate considers the measure next Monday, it is expected to pass it as well and Gov.
Fob James Jr. has promised to sign it.


Becton Dickinson &amp; Co.  (BDX,N) reports earnings for 3d qtr to Jun 30


In Test, New Vaccine Stops Rabies Spread
WITH coyote-borne rabies pushing north from Mexico, fox rabies immigrating south from Canada and a strain carried by raccoons sweeping up the Eastern Seaboard, the North American rabies scourge is spreading fast.
But a genetically engineered animal vaccine, the first vaccine based on recombinant DNA ever released into the environment in this country, offers hope that the plague can be kept at bay.
A large-scale trial of the oral vaccine that began last February in the southern tip of Texas seems for the moment to have virtually stopped the northward march of the disease toward San Antonio, and smaller trials in Cape May, N.J., Cape Cod, Mass., Albany, and other locales also suggest that the vaccine is not only safe but is a powerful weapon against the deadly disease.
Public health officials say no other defense against the epizootic (the animal equivalent of a human epidemic), including the slaughter of animals capable of transmitting the disease, has shown nearly such promise.


Doctors Can Prevent Errors Just by Listening
To the Editor:


Gannett in Big Move For Papers and TV
Moving to expand both its television presence and its newspaper holdings, the Gannett Company said yesterday that it would pay $1.7 billion to buy the company that syndicates the Phil Donahue, Sally Jessy Raphael and Rush Limbaugh shows.


A Dutch Soldier Looks Back In Sadness and Frustration
The United Nations mission in Bosnia starts at the top with the hyperbole and hesitation of the world's diplomats and falls, finally, onto the shoulders of people like Eyal Yonah.
Private Yonah, 21, says his friends called him crazy twice in his life: first when he uprooted himself from his native Netherlands to join his divorced father in Brooklyn and briefly attend high school there, and second when he volunteered to join the Dutch Army, knowing he would probably be sent to Bosnia.


Rouge Steel (ROU,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Central Garden &amp; Pet Co. reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 25


Robert Half Intl.(RHI,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Chevron Corp.(CHV,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Corrections
A theater review on Friday about "Around the World in 80 Days" at the Promenade Theater misidentified the composer of the show's incidental music.
He is Jeffrey Lunden, as noted in the listing of credits; Ann-Marie Brady did the lighting.


Conrail Says It Polluted River and Will Pay $2.5 Million Fine
For 15 years, Conrail Inc. intentionally let oil flow into the Charles River in Boston, the United States Attorney there said yesterday, and the company will now plead guilty to six felony counts and pay a $2.5 million criminal fine.
The railroad company, which was founded by the Government, spilled the oil during normal operations at its rail yard and then allowed rain to wash it into the river.
Although Conrail had a treatment system to separate oil from rainwater, it had not maintained the system.


Pittway Corp.(PRY,A) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Drug-Testing Kit in Short Supply
The president of the union that represents the state's parole officers says his members are running out of the kits used to test former convicts for drug use, The Associated Press reported.
In a memo yesterday to Victor D'Ilio, chief of the Bureau of Parole, Tony Sgro, president of the Patrolmen's Benevolent Association Local 326, said nine district offices had no drug-testing supplies, making it impossible for parole officers to check on their clients.


New Home for Cancer Center
A former nursing home owned by Essex County will be converted into the state's first freestanding cancer research and treatment center.
Under the deal, the county will sell the Essex County Geriatric Center for $5 million to the Garden State Cancer Center, which now occupies space at the University of Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey in Newark.
The cancer center is scheduled to open in 1999.


Coast Distribution System (CRV,A) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Hewlett Lines Up Distributors for New PC's
The Hewlett-Packard Company said today that it would distribute its new consumer-oriented personal computers through several national retail outlets.
Hewlett-Packard was late to enter the consumer PC market, having concentrated on sales to corporate customers.
But the company, which is based in Palo Alto, Calif., began to sell its initial line of multimedia PC's through Circuit City in April.
Hewlett-Packard said it expected to have its new line of consumer-oriented PC's in retail stores of several chains, including Best Buy, Circuit City, CompUSA, Computer City, Incredible Universe, Micro Center, Office Depot, Officemax and Staples, next month.


Caraustar Industries(CSAR,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


American Brands Inc.(AMB,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


The Story Behind 'A Message to Garcia'
To the Editor:
Your review of "The Nightingale's Song" by Robert Timberg (July 17) refers incorrectly to "A Message to Garcia" as a "Spanish-American War tale of doubtful authenticity about a resourceful young naval lieutenant."


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.75
8.75
7.25
DISCOUNT RATE
5.25
5.25
3.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
5.75
5.74
4.32
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.47
5.43
4.43
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.46
5.43
4.83
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.44
6.52
7.24
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.87
6.96
7.52
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.75
7.85
8.33
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.21
6.21
6.37
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Californian Guilty Of Bilking Investors
A California man was convicted on Friday of bilking thousands of investors across the country through a fraudulent scheme that purported to invest in housing for the poor.
A Federal jury in Minneapolis found Gary W. Lefkowitz, 42, of Beverly Hills guilty of 47 counts involving fraud, obstruction of justice and tax evasion.


Amcol International Corp.(ACOL,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Corporate Foods reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 17


'Huckleberry Finn' Without Fear; Teachers Gather to Learn How to Teach an American Classic, in Context
Christine Giordano, an eighth-grade teacher, bashfully addressed a roomful of colleagues and admitted that she was nervous about teaching one of the classics of American literature, "The Adventures of Huckleberry Finn."
The book is required reading in the junior high school where she works, and Mrs.
Giordano, who has eight years of teaching experience, was worried that she and her students would not be able to handle Mark Twain's satirical portrait of race relations in America in the 19th century.


Maradona Gets a New Contract
DIEGO MARADONA, whose worldwide ban for drug abuse expires in September, signed a two-and-a-half-year contract yesterday with his former Argentine club, Boca Juniors.
He is eligible to play Sept. 28 and will receive about $8 million in salary and bonuses.
The president of Boca Juniors, ANTONIO ALEGRE, plans to ask FIFA, soccer's world governing body, to reduce the ban to allow Maradona to start the new season in August.


Union Leader Under Fire As Labor Talks Resume
With National Basketball Association players locked out and feuding among themselves over the future of their union, negotiators for the league and the union will return to the bargaining table today in an effort to eliminate at least one of the conflicts by trying to reach a new deal.
Even as they do so, the union director Simon Gourdine will be contending with a new assault on his leadership from one of his own financial consultants.
The consultant, W. Charles Bennett, resigned yesterday, charging that Gourdine had misrepresented his analysis of N.B.A. profits to support the ill-fated collective bargaining agreement the union struck last month.


A Brooklyn Man Is Charged in Two Rapes
A 40-year-old Brooklyn man was charged today with rape in connection with sexual assaults on two women in Fort Greene in Brooklyn two weeks ago, the police said
Melvin Alexander, of 127 North Portland Avenue in Clinton Hill, was charged with the rapes after he was arrested on Saturday for an unrelated robbery, Sgt.
Edward Orski, a police spokesman, said.


Sports of The Times; At Age 33, He Still Runs The 40 in 4.25
WHEN the Giants' morning practice ended yesterday under a baking sun, the players in their blue or white jerseys plodded up the slope into the shade of the big trees where dozens of fans waited.
Some stopped to sign autographs.
But long after the others were in their dorm here on the Fairleigh-Dickinson campus, Herschel Walker was still signing all the pads, all the photos, all the hats, all the footballs.
"If I have time, I do it," he was saying now.
"Most of them are just innocent little kids. I think about if my nieces and nephews were out there, I'd want the players to sign for them."


In Celebration of a Brightly Shining Future
Neither prodigious lightning nor torrential downpour stopped the music on Sunday afternoon at Central Park Summerstage.
When Boukan Ginen, a roots-rock band from Haiti, had to leave the stage in the middle of its first song because of hazardous weather conditions, the audience took over, singing festival songs, chanting for more music, playing percussion on whatever was available and sending piercing whistles into the dark, rainy sky.
After more than half an hour, the drenched audience was paid back for its wait and the band returned to the stage, transferring the crowd's enthusiasm and solidarity into its live show.
Boukan Ginen is among Haiti's top new bands playing mizik rasin, a politically savvy hybrid of electric rock and traditional African and Haitian music.
Formed five years ago by three former members of Boukman Eksperyans, Boukan Ginen quickly transcended its status as a mere spin-off band with its first album, "Jou a Rive" (Xenophile).
At Summerstage, the band's leader, Eddy Francois, turned chants into anthems, singing in a big, bountiful tenor about finding freedom from poverty, redemption in work and happiness through unity.


Untimely Dispute Is Timely for Yanks
Seventeen years ago yesterday, Billy Martin stood on the mezzanine level of a Kansas City hotel and tearfully resigned from the first of what would become five terms as manager of the Yankees.
The day before, Martin, in a rage over the remorseless return of Reggie Jackson from a five-day suspension, uttered the immortal words: "The two of them deserve each other. One's a born liar; the other's convicted."
On the 17th anniversary of that declaration, two people who deserve each other were in the process of deconstructing the Darryl Strawberry deal.


Mediacom To Grow Into Global Network
Grey Advertising in New York said yesterday that it would expand its European media services company, Mediacom, into a worldwide media network that will handle accounts in 71 countries with billings estimated at more than $6 billion.


No Rest in Navratilova's Retirement
Martina Navratilova is retired.
Yet, there she was last week, playing matches in six different cities over a seven-day span for the New Jersey Stars of World TeamTennis.
"This is like paid practice," said the 38-year-old Navratilova, who will play an exhibition against Monica Seles in Atlantic City on Saturday.
"It's as good as anything, and it enables me to have good match play, which I haven't had since last November."


Schuller Intl Group Inc. reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Inco Ltd.(N,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Asarco Inc.(AR,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


A $300 Investment in a Gelding Returns $69,240 to the Owners
You're tempted to say: only at Saratoga.
But a 7-year-old gelding who was sold two years ago for $300 in a bankruptcy sale won the Daryl's Joy Handicap today by the length of his bargain-basement head.
It is also not often that you see a pair of 7-year-old horses dueling down the homestretch like juveniles.
But they did it today at Saratoga with the long-shot Pride of Summer outrunning the short-shot Fourstars Allstar and winning about 230 times the amount invested in him at the bankruptcy sale.


Informix Corp.(IFMX,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jul 2


A Writer Braces For the Attention
Adrienne Kennedy says she is not sure who has been writing her plays for more than 30 years or where they come from.
What she knows is that when insomnia rousts her before dawn, she takes up a pen in her apartment on the Upper West Side of Manhattan and writes, filling yellow legal pads with bad dreams and autobiography, prose-poems of racial heartbreak, rage and obsession.
Then she forms the stories into dramas -- barely able, she says, to rework or witness the finished product.
Now, to Ms.
Kennedy's mingled satisfaction and dread, her works are to be thrust into the limelight.
The Signature Theater Company -- which will move this fall into temporary space at the Joseph Papp Public Theater -- has selected her work to make up its coming season, naming her its playwright in residence to succeed Romulus Linney, Lee Blessing, Edward Albee and Horton Foote.


Doman Industries reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


A Pop-Memory Workout, Without Strain
Jon Bon Jovi shares a trait with the greatest rockers: He's shameless.
If he and his band, Bon Jovi, want to borrow something, they don't care who notices.
At the Jones Beach Amphitheater here on Friday night, the start of a three-night stand, Bon Jovi's stage set featured pinball machines -- "Tommy," anyone?
For the Rolling Stones-style "I'll Sleep When I'm Dead" (also a Warren Zevon title), a giant inflatable doll -- a staple of Stones tours since the 1970's -- appeared: a voluptuous woman's body with, oddly, a chicken's head.
During the song, Mr.
Bon Jovi sang part of the Temptations' "Papa Was a Rolling Stone," then switched to the Stones' "Jumpin' Jack Flash."


Deluxe Corp.(DLX,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Southern Energy Homes Inc.(SEHI,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


METROPOLITAN GOLF REPORT
New York State Open
Now that he has captured his first major title in the region with his victory in the New York State Open last week, Ron McDougal is thinking about trying for the PGA Tour again.
The 32-year-old assistant at Century Country Club in Purchase, N.Y., has failed three times in his attempt to qualify for the tour, but his victory at the Concord's Monster Course last Thursday was enough to encourage him to make another attempt.


Tobacco Studies Detailed
Secret research documents show that Philip Morris U.S.A. tracked hyperactive third-graders as potential future customers and gave electrical shocks to college students to see if that would make them smoke more, Representative Henry A. Waxman of California said Monday.
One company report concluded that smokers craved nicotine more than food, he said.
Mr.
Waxman, a Democrat, unveiled stacks of documents from Philip Morris, the world's largest tobacco company, on the House floor, contending that they illustrated unethical and possibly illegal research into nicotine


Focus on Susan Smith's Lies and a Smile
While the authorities searched for her two young sons, Susan Smith watched herself lie to the nation on a taped television newscast, and even smiled at the television screen, a counselor who had come to help her testified today in the penalty phase of Mrs.
Smith's capital murder trial.
The counselor, Margaret Frierson, recalled that Mrs.
Smith's incongruous smile occurred near the end of her nine days of lies, as news reporters were beginning to speculate that Mrs.
Smith might be involved in the disappearance that she had blamed on a carjacker.


Berta Scharrer, 88, Research Scientist And Roach Expert
Dr.
Berta Vogel Scharrer, a pioneering biomedical scientist and founding faculty member of the Albert Einstein College of Medicine at Yeshiva University, died on Sunday at her home in the Bronx.
She was 88.
Harvard University, conferring an honorary doctorate on Dr.
Scharrer in 1982, said her "research journeys into the world of insects have profoundly affected the study of human physiology." The particular insect she had studied since 1937 was the South American cockroach.


General Signal Corp.(GSX,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Metro-North Unions Claim Right to Strike
Just four days after Metro-North riders learned, to their relief, that the railroad had invoked a Federal law to postpone a possible strike for four months, several unions yesterday called the move illegal and insisted that they still had the right to strike at any time.
Union leaders said they probably would not call a strike so long as there were signs of progress in contract talks, and both sides said they intended to resume negotiations soon.
But the statements made it clear that the unions are not ready to remove the threat of a strike from their arsenal, a threat that prompted tens of thousands of riders to stay away from the railroad last week.


Detroit Diesel Corp.(DDC,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Trans World Airlines (TWA,A) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Financial Services Agreement Is Expected by End of Week
Europe's chief trade negotiator predicted today that more than 70 countries would agree by the end of the week on the world's first agreement liberalizing trade in financial services, although the United States would not be among them.
Japan and South Korea have not yet agreed to join the accord.
But Sir Leon Brittan, who represents the 15 European Union nations, said at a news conference that he was confident the two nations would commit to join the pact during talks that start in Geneva Wednesday.


Lawyers Want Reno Barred From Death-Penalty Decision in Bombing
Lawyers for a former Army sergeant held in the bombing of the Oklahoma City Federal Building said today that they would ask a Federal judge to disqualify Attorney General Janet Reno from participating in the Government's decision on whether to seek the death penalty in the case.
In a motion to be filed on Tuesday in Federal District Court in Oklahoma City, lawyers for Timothy J. McVeigh, one of two men held in the blast, will seek the removal of Ms.
Reno and other Justice Department officials.
Their removal is being sought on the ground that Ms.
Reno, who must review the local prosecutor's recommendation on whether to seek the death penalty, has already said she supports a sentence of death for the Oklahoma City bombers.


First Grader's Winning Bathtub
A first grader from Montague will be honored in Washington today for designing a bathtub that can accommodate a wheelchair and has a shelf and faucets that are easy for disabled people to reach.
Ayla Satter and nine other children from kindergarten through eighth grade won the Invent America competition, sponsored by Chrysler Corporation and the nonprofit United States Patent Model Foundation.
Two million to three million children submitted entries, which were narrowed down through local and national contests, a spokeswoman for Invent America said.


Advanced Technology Laboratories Inc.(ATLI,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Beneficial Corp.(BNL,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


'I'll Come Back,' Stabbed Tourist Says
A tourist from South Africa was stabbed as he fought off robbers on Central Park West, but said yesterday that he bore no ill will toward the city.
"I've always enjoyed the energy and vibrancy of New York," he said.
"I'll come back."
Article, page B3.


U.N. Official Accuses Serbs of 'Barbarous' Acts
Bosnian Serb forces committed wide-scale acts of barbarism when they seized the "safe area" of Srebrenica two weeks ago, the United Nations Secretary General's special representative for human rights in the former Yugoslavia said today.
At a news conference here, the official, Tadeusz Mazowiecki, also warned of atrocities on the same or a larger scale in Zepa, and condemned the international community for failing to protect that safe area, which has been the scene of heavy fighting for more than a week.


Two Agencies Form Vermont Company
Two agencies in Vermont, Communicators Group Inc. in Brattleboro and Kelliher/Samets/Volk in Burlington, have merged to form KSV/Communicators.
Communicators, with 10 employees, brings in billings estimated at $8 million from clients like the Vermont State Lottery, which will be added to Kelliher/Samets/Volk, which has 25 employees in Burlington and Montreal and billings estimated at $12 million from clients like Cellular One.


Imo Industries(IMD,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Rochester Gas &amp; Electric Corp.(RGS,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Black Cadet Gets a Posthumous Commission
In a simple White House ceremony today, President Clinton gave a worn Bible and the gold-plated bars of a second lieutenant to the descendants of a black West Point cadet who was expelled after he was falsely accused of staging a racist attack on himself 115 years ago.
"We cannot undo history," the President said in awarding the commission to the heirs of Johnson Chesnut Whittaker, one of the first black cadets at West Point, 64 years after his death.
"But today, finally, we can pay tribute to a great American and we can acknowledge a great injustice."


Centex Corp.(CTX,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


International Briefs; Acquisition by Danisco
Danisco A/S, a Danish consumer products and packaging company, said yesterday that it had bought the closely held Crown Packaging Group Ltd. for $:32 million ($51 million).
The purchase of Crown, a British packaging company with sales of $:53 million in the year ended March 31, will increase Danisco's share of the British market for corrugated board to 10 percent, Danisco said.
Crown Packaging was owned by a group of institutional investors and the company's management. (Bloomberg Business News)


Ex-Stars' Criticism Is Misguided Effort
For Bob Cousy, the demand was mere acknowldgement, and more meal money.
For Tommy Heinsohn, it was a pension plan.
For Oscar Robertson, it was free agency.
Cousy, Heinsohn and Robertson, erstwhile team-sport labor activists, seem to think they had the right to fight for the issues of their day but that Michael Jordan does not.


Tourist Is Stabbed in Back Fighting West Side Attacker
A tourist from South Africa was stabbed in the back as he fought off a group of men trying to rob him near Central Park on the Upper West Side, but he said yesterday that he bore no ill will against the city, adding, "It's something that could have happened in any city, anywhere."
The crime shook up both residents and tourists in the affluent neighborhood around the Dakota apartments, an area where violent attacks are relatively rare.


Black &amp; Decker Corp.(BDK,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jul 2


State Power Agency To Name Leader
The trustees of the New York Power Authority are expected to meet today to name Clarence D. Rappleyea Jr., the former minority leader of the State Assembly, to head the agency.
He would replace S. David Freeman, the current president and chief executive officer.
Earlier this year, the Legislature approved a law giving authority to the trustees to designate who would be chief executive and to increase his or her pay.
Mr.
Rappleyea, who resigned last month as minority leader, could thus be paid more than the $82,500 salary he received in that post.


Mayor's Rating Rises As Crime Rate Falls
A drop in the city's crime rate has apparently helped bring a modest improvement in Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani's approval ratings, according to a poll released yesterday.
The poll, conducted by Quinnipiac College in Hamden, Conn., indicated that 50 percent of the people surveyed this month approved of Mr.
Giuliani's performance, compared with 46 percent in a poll a month ago.
The poll's margin of error was plus or minus 3.6 percentage points.


Anne Klein's President Is Leaving
Andrew Rosen, the president of Anne Klein &amp; Company, is leaving after six years, during which he presided over three different designers.
Friday is his last day.
Frank Mori, the president of Takihyo+ Ltd., which owns Anne Klein and half the Donna Karan Company, said he would take over the day-to-day running of Anne Klein, a responsibility he gave Mr.
Rosen when he hired him.


Giants Try to Get Young Tackle To Turn His Fury on Their Foes
If you ever see Chris Maumalanga on the street, don't cross to the other side.
You would like him.
He would ask how your family is doing.
He might ask if you need anything.
He might invite you to dinner.
On him.
That is how Maumalanga is most of the time: personable and charming.
Just don't taunt him.
Don't try to show him up.
If you do, take a step back and get ready.
Linebacker Mitch Davis found it out the hard way in late June.
Maumalanga and a small group of players were sitting around talking when the 6-foot-3-inch, 240-pound Davis joked that he wanted Maumalanga to go downstairs and get his keys.
Maumalanga said no.
Davis, half joking, half trying to embarrass Maumalanga in front of his friends, asked again.
Maumalanga punched him in the face.


Kotite Envisions An Offense Of Steel
It sounds good: A Jets offense that has no fear and attacks defenses with pressure.
Rich Kotite has no reservations about it as he rolls an unlighted cigar in his mouth, savoring the thought, if not the smoke.


Love Songs and Understatement
The virtues of pre-rock pop are still cherished in Brazil.
There, songwriters work on serpentine chord progressions and subtle metaphors, confident that they can please listeners with ingenuity rather than impact.
Djavan, who has been one of Brazil's leading songwriters since the late 1970's, had the audience singing along, reverently and joyfully, when he performed on Saturday night at Roseland; his understatement was treasured.
Djavan Caetano Viana, who was born in the state of Alagoas in northern Brazil, emerged as a songwriter shortly after the musical and political upheavals of the late 1960's.
He specializes in gentle, smoothly phrased love songs, but carries on the musical eclecticism and poetic sophistication of the MPB (Musica Popular Brasileira) movement.
In "Limao" ("Lime"), from his current album "Novena" (Epic Brazil), he sees a sunrise and the promise of countless new beginnings as he cuts a lime to serve with a fish.


Q&amp;A
Hill and Dale
Q.
I once read that if you measure the mountainsides, Colorado with all its high peaks really has a bigger surface area than Texas.
Is that true?


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-7  BOMB ATTACK IN ISRAEL  A Palestinian suicide bomber set off a pipe bomb in a bus in a suburb of Tel Aviv, killing himself and at least five others.
A1  West Bank residents fear the attack will delay Israeli withdrawal.
A3  U.S.
SAYS FRENCH BOMBED SERBS  American officials have concluded that France sent its warplanes on an unannounced mission to bomb the Bosnian Serb strong hold of Pale.
A1  U.N.
GUNS OVER SARAJEVO  The first members of the new United Nations rapid-reaction force, began positioning heavy guns on the slopes of Mount Igman above Sarajevo, but shelling continued.
A6  QUESTION ON AIR STRIKES  Three days after threatening Bosnian Serbs with heavy air strikes if they attacked Gorazde, the allies have not decided who would be authorized to start the bombing.
A6  U.N.
OFFICIAL CITES ATROCITIES  Bosnian Serb forces committed wide-scale acts of "barbarism" when they seized the "safe area" of Srebrenica two weeks ago, a United Nations official said.
A6  DIVERSITY IN SOUTH AFRICA  While America struggles with the concepts of affirmative action and cultural diversity, South Africa is rushing to embrace them.
A2  The U.N. mission falls, finally, to individual peacekeepers.
A6  AID TO NICARAGUA THREATENED  Congress, dissatisfied over the pace at which the Nicaraguan Government has been reimbursing the owners of property seized by its Sandinista predecessors, is threatening to cut off aid.
A7  NEW PLAN FOR IRISH PEACE  The British and Irish Governments have drawn up a new plan to deal with the major obstacles that have been impeding the Northern Ireland peace effort.
A5  Rome Journal: Tighter rules for the Vatican's lay employees.
A4  National A8-11  WARNING FROM WACO OFFICER  A Federal undercover officer testified that his superiors ignored his warnings that the Branch Davidians' leader knew Federal agents were about to arrest him.
A1  SENATE BACKS LOBBYIST BILL  The Senate supported legislation to require registration by thousands of lobbyists, but put off the question of what gifts Senators could accept from them.
A1  MORE AMERICANS HIT THE ROAD  With the nation's economy relatively healthy and unemployment consistently low, travel industry officials say Americans this summer are going to destinations around the country in record numbers.
A8  VICTORY FOR RAPE VICTIMS  The Alabama House of Representatives passed a bill requiring the state, instead of the victim, to pay for examination after a rape.
A8  CONRAIL FINED OVER OIL RUNOFF  Federal officials said Conrail would plead guilty to six felony counts and pay a $2.5 million criminal fine for intentionally letting oil flow into the Charles River in Boston.
A8  SUPPORT FOR CONSPIRACY CLAIM  O.J.
Simpson's lawyers produced a scientist who testified that the blood found on two exhibits contained a preservative, suggesting it was taken from test tubes and planted.
A9  CLINTON ASSAILS G.O.P.
ON BUDGET  The President accused Republicans of abandoning necessary Government programs to carry out large tax cuts and balance the budget in seven years.
A10  HONORING A BLACK CADET  The President posthumously awarded a commission to a black West Point cadet who was expelled after officials falsely accused him of staging a racist attack on himself 115 years ago.
A10  EFFORT TO DISQUALIFY RENO  Lawyers for Timothy McVeigh, who is being held in the Oklahoma bombing, said they will ask that Attorney General Janet Reno be disqualified from participating in the Government's decision on whether to seek the death penalty in the case.
A10  WEIGHING A MURDER PENALTY  In the sentencing phase of the Susan Smith murder trial, a counselor testified that Mrs.
Smith watched herself lie on a television newscast, and smiled at the screen.
A11  A man accused in two clinic killings was called incompetent.
A9  Metro Digest B1  IS GIULIANI SOFT ON LABOR?
New York's 200,000 union workers have escaped the dramatic sacrifices they feared when Mayor Giuliani was elected.
In fact, labor concessions in New York fall short of those in other cities and of the Mayor's own campaign pledges.
A1  Business Digest D1  Arts/Entertainment C13-20  A wave of films about France's tough and alienated suburbs.
C13  Adrienne Kennedy, Signature's new playwright in residence.C13  Theater: "Bonhoeffer 1945." C14  Music: Boukan Ginen at Summerstage.C13  Books: "Deep in the Green." C18  Television: Diamond dealers.
C18  Fashion A12  Science C1-12  Opening the chests of King Tut's magnificent wardrobe.
C1  Deep below Canada, clues to how the first continents formed.
C1  Sports B6-12  Obituaries A13  Elleston Trevor, novelist.
Raymond Rosenthal, translator  Editorials/Op-Ed A14-15  Editorials  Talking peace in Ireland.
A bold, imperfect Medicare plan.
Steven R. Weisman: Juries.
Letters  Russell Baker: Lawyer in deep water.
A.
M.
Rosenthal: The document of May 30.
Anita K. Blair: Bad problem, wrong solution.
Anna Husarska: Weak voices.
Chronicle B4  Chess C11  Crossword C18


Cooper Tire &amp; Rubber Co.(CTB,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Amgen Inc.(AMGN,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


For Most U.S. Households, Inheritances Hardly Count
Benjamin Franklin and your mother may have been right after all, at least according to a new study: affluent Americans typically got that way by staying healthy, getting married and working hard for a good wage, rather than by inheriting their money.
A number of studies in recent years have pointed to a greater concentration of wealth and income among fewer and fewer people, prompting some calls for higher taxes on inheritances to prevent a widening of class divisions.
But two surveys covering a total of 20,000 Americans over 50 show that health, marital status and income are the main determinants of wealth, according to a study released today by Rand, a research group based in Santa Monica, Calif.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Bonds and Stocks Rebound From Last Week's Retreat Prices of 30-year Treasury bonds regained some ground from last week's retreat, rising more than a point.
The gains pushed Treasury yields down to 6.87 percent, from 6.96 percent on Friday.  [ Page D9. ] Technology stocks also rebounded from a decline last week, with the Nasdaq index rising 16.80 points, to 978.57.
The Dow industrials rose 27.12 points, to 4,668.67, and the S.&amp; P. 500-stock index rose 3.01 points, to 556.63.  [ D10. ] Star Manager to Start New Fund  Paul H. Wick, whose technology fund has led stock mutual funds in gains over the last five years, plans to start a new fund to invest in small technology companies.
But when assets reach $125 million, it will be closed, and that could be very soon.
Market Place.  [ D10. ] American Express Net Up 14.8%  American Express reported a 14.8 percent gain in its second-quarter earnings, to $410 million, or 81 cents a share, exceeding Wall Street's expectations, as its customers spent more on their charge cards.
It agreed to plead guilty to six felony counts and pay a $2.5 million criminal fine.  [ A8. ] Prodigy Seeks to Reargue Case  Prodigy said it would try to reargue its defense in a suit brought by a brokerage firm, Stratton Oakmont, which contends it had been libeled by comments distributed by the on-line service.  [ D2. ] An About-Face for Sprite  Lowe &amp; Partners/SMS has revamped the Sprite persona to naughty from nice, in a campaign that mocks the conventions of soft-drink marketing.
Out went the syrupy jingle "I like the Sprite in you" and the strange fruit, the "lymon." To better appeal to core customers, the ads have been imbued with a skepticism of traditional Madison Avenue promises.
Stuart Elliott: Advertising.  [ D6. ] Why Inheritances Hardly Count A new study shows that health, marital status and income, not inheritances, are the main determinants of American wealth.  [ D8. ]


A Shelter and a Storm; As Tax Breaks Change, the Working Poor Lose Out
For a dozen years Art and Geneva Terry loved living in Allegheny Commons, an apartment project built under a Great Society program that married the needs of the working poor for housing and the desires of the wealthy for tax shelters.
Nights at the project fell silent and safe, because the residents of the 134 apartments went to sleep early so they could get up to go to work.
That silence has vanished.
This summer, jobless young men congregate in the parking lot, drinking beer from 40-ounce bottles while waiting for another car to pull off the street for a furtive exchange of dollars and drugs.
On one steamy night last month a toddler wearing only a diaper wandered on the sidewalk long past dark, while a boom box kept the sandman at bay.


Electric Cars To Get Bodies From Taiwan
For years, the companies that convert cars to run on electricity have tried to buy new vehicles without the engines.
Yesterday, for the first time, one company said it had found a vendor -- in Taiwan.
Battery Automated Transportation Inc. of Burbank, Calif., said it would import engine-less cars, or "gliders," from the China Motor Company of Taiwan.


Spurned Bank Asserts It Is Not for Sale
Already spurned by the Corestates Financial Corporation, the Bank of Boston Corporation lost the fleeting interest of another suitor yesterday, as the Banc One Corporation withdrew its last-minute $5 billion bid to buy the company.
But the Banc One offer was not completely serious, and Bank of Boston's chairman, Ira Stepanian, said his company would not consider selling itself outright anyway, though it was still open to a merger with another banking company.


Dismay on the West Bank
For many Palestinian residents, every militant attack and subsequent Israeli punishment is a devastating blow.
Page A3.


Amoco Corp.(AN,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Grand Casinos Inc.(GND,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jul 2


Electronic Pen With Its Own Eraser
AS a drawing or painting tool, the computer mouse is only slightly less effective than a potato.
This is particularly a problem for artists who want to use the power of the personal computer to create new forms of electronic art, but it also makes life difficult for people who want to draw maps, make sketches or simply doodle with a computer painting program.
The Wacom Technology Corporation recently introduced a new graphics tablet for Apple Macintosh computers that uses a cordless "ultra" pen, instead of a mouse, to enable artists to draw, paint and trace images more naturally.


Stone Container Corp.(STO,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Swim Champion Is Navigating a New Challenge
At the 1992 Summer Olympics, Mike Barrowman won the 200-meter breast stroke and set a world record of 2 minutes 10.16 seconds that still stands.
Having won a gold medal in the water, he is now trying to make the 1996 Olympic team on the water.
His new sport is sprint kayaking.
Rule No. 1: the kayak belongs in the drink, not the guy paddling it.
"Nobody jumps in and paddles right away without falling in the water 30 or 40 times," Barrowman said at the Olympic Festival, where he is a developing athlete trying to improve his remote chances of making next summer's team in Atlanta.


Safeco Corp.(SAFC,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Observer; Lawyer in Deep Water
Have you heard about the New York Litigator?
If not it's because you haven't abandoned marriage, family, job, bowling and the O. J. Simpson trial to figure out what Whitewater is.
("Don't point that finger at me, Litigator! I got First Amendment rights to tell the world about you.")


McClatchy Newspapers Inc.(MNI,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Arnold Industrues Inc.(AIND,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Accounts
*
Boca Raton Resort and Club, Boca Raton, Fla., owned by the Boca Raton Hotel and Club L.P., to West Group, Tampa, Fla., to handle its account, previously at Ryder &amp; Schild, Miami.
The billings were estimated at $2 million.


A Bold, Imperfect Medicare Plan
House Republicans say they must reform Medicare because the 30-year-old program of health insurance for the elderly is headed for bankruptcy.
The assertion is true.
But the G.O.P. is also manipulating Medicare's financial straits so it can make major cuts and thus honor its promise to balance the budget by 2002 while reducing taxes.
The Republicans deserve credit for even thinking about tampering with a heavily subsidized, sacrosanct program that is jealously protected by a powerful voting bloc.
They also deserve credit for outlining a vision of a Medicare program that provides better, less costly care.
But in their zeal to cut the deficit, they could cause serious damage.


Industry Association Is Renaming Award
The American Association of Advertising Agencies in New York is renaming an annual award to honor the late John O'Toole.


Kimberly-Clark Corp.(KMB,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Rhone-Poulenc Rorer Inc.(RP,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


SunAmerica Inc.(SAI,N) reports earnings for 3d qtr to Jun 30


Ralston Purina Group .(RAL,N) reports earnings for 3d qtr to Jun 30


Corrections
Because of a production error, a section of the Nasdaq National Market stock table in the Money and Business section on Sunday appeared out of order and another section was omitted.
Listings that fell alphabetically between the Southwest National Corporation and Transworld Home Healthcare Inc. appeared at the end of the Nasdaq table on page 28; listings from Workingmens Capital Holdings Inc. to the end of the alphabet were omitted.
Readers wishing corrected copies of the table may write to Production Quality Control, The New York Times, 229 West 43d Street, New York, N.Y. 10036, or telephone (212) 556-1992.


Forgotten Riches of King Tut: His Wardrobe
WHEN the Egyptologist Howard Carter uncovered the tomb of the Pharaoh Tutankhamen in 1922, it was the brilliant gold of the funeral mask and other artifacts that awed the world.
But the tomb also contained wooden chests filled with the boy king's clothes and footwear.
Along with most of the rest of the treasures, the bulk of the textiles, some reduced to dust, ended up in a storeroom at the Cairo Museum.
When Mr.
Carter died in 1939, his Tutankhamen archive, including 1,500 photographs, many drawings and 2,500 note cards documenting the textiles, was deposited at the Griffith Institute at Oxford University in England.
And there the materials sat for more than five decades, virtually forgotten by all but a few scholars whose general opinion was that nothing could be done because of the supposed poor state of the textiles and the difficulty in obtaining access from the cautious Egyptian authorities.


Transactions
Baseball  American League
BOSTON RED SOX -- Traded Mark Whiten, outfielder, to the Philadelphia Phillies for Dave Hollins, third baseman.
Activated Vaughn Eshelman, pitcher, from the 15-day disabled list.
CALIFORNIA ANGELS -- Signed Jose Lind, second baseman, to a minor-league contract and assigned him to Vancouver of the Pacific Coast League.


Rome Journal; For Vatican's Lay Staff, Tighter Rules to Live By
As an ecclesiastical state, the Vatican has never pretended to be an equal opportunity employer.
All its lay employees, from its legendary Swiss Guards to the cashiers at its exclusive duty-free store, must be Roman Catholics and swear loyalty to the Pope, who is the absolute ruler of not only the church worldwide but also of the diminutive state of Vatican City.


Man Charged in Clinic Killings Is Called 'Delusional' by Doctor
On the first day of a hearing to determine if he is competent to stand trial, a man accused of killing two women at abortion clinics in Brookline, Mass., last year was called "schizophrenic, undifferentiated and delusional" by a psychiatrist today.
Later the defendant, John C. Salvi 3d, was removed from the courtroom by guards after an outburst in which he demanded to speak.


Two Comptrollers Contest Mayor's Budget Estimates
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani's newly adopted city budget for 1996 may be balanced on paper, but both the city and state comptrollers charged yesterday that the appearance of balance is actually based on hundreds of millions of dollars in questionable assumptions.
City Comptroller Alan G. Hevesi said that as much as $1 billion of the Mayor's $31.1 billion budget consists of revenue estimates or planned spending cuts that may not happen.
State Comptroller H. Carl McCall went even further, saying the city's budget is now actually unbalanced by nearly $400 million.
He also identified another $400 million in shaky assumptions.


Old Dominion Freight Line Inc. reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Stelco Inc. reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


RPM Inc.(RPOW,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


'Wanderer' Repeated and a Rhapsody Unbuttoned
Odd notion that the orchestra should ever seem superfluous in a concert by the New York Philharmonic.
But the Philharmonic had only itself to blame on Friday evening when it played Liszt's orchestration of Schubert's "Wanderer" Fantasy after presenting the original version for solo piano in a preconcert recital.
Anyone who heard both might have found Liszt's sound and fury intrusive.
In any case, it is a brave performer who will play the work twice in an evening, as Peter Roesel, a German pianist, did here.
If the original came out sounding a bit like full-blown Liszt, with a basically steely sound wrapped in a pedaled haze, Mr.
Roesel could be forgiven; keeping the two versions straight in his memory must have been hard enough, let alone finding radically different styles for them.


Silicon Valley Group Inc.(SVGI,NNM) reports earnings for 3d qtr to Jun 30


Panthers Promote From Within By Hiring MacLean as Coach
DOUG MacLEAN, player development director of the Florida Panthers, was hired yesterday as head coach in a move that management hopes will bring a more aggressive brand of hockey and a spot in the playoffs.
MacLean signed a three-year contract to replace ROGER NEILSON, who was dismissed on June 8.
General Manager BRYAN MURRAY did not agree with Neilson's conservative style and reliance on veterans.
The Panthers' record under Neilson was 53-56-23, but the team had the weakest offense in the National Hockey League.


Amerada Hess Corp.(AHC,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Crews Clean Up Oil Spill
Crews continued the slow work of cleaning up an oil spill in the Delaware River yesterday, but it could take weeks before the job is completed.
A tanker fuel line snapped on Saturday at the Coastal Point Eagle Refinery, dumping 40,000 gallons of oil.


Senate Debates Arms Ban
In a struggle for control over foreign policy, the Senate opened debate today on a Republican bill to end American participation in the arms embargo against Bosnia, while Senate Democrats and the Clinton Administration waged an offensive to blunt the effort.
Senator Bob Dole, Republican of Kansas, the majority leader and co-sponsor of the bill, criticized the Administration for a lack of leadership that he said has allowed the United Nations to decide when and whether NATO will use air strikes to punish the Serbs.


'Bright Star' of Navajo Nation Gets Prison Term in Fatal Crash
It was almost midnight, after more than nine hours of emotional testimony in a packed New Mexico courtroom on Monday, when Judge James Blackmer announced his difficult decision: Gordon House would be sentenced to 22 years in prison for the four deaths he caused in a drunken-driving car crash on Christmas Eve 1992.
The District Court judge, saying he had had trouble sleeping for days, acknowledged that Mr.
House was "definitely a bright star to the Navajo nation and to our state as well." But he said the case was "not about race but alcohol, an equal opportunity destroyer."


Halliburton Co.(HAL,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


In Korea, Democracy Still Has Far to Go
To the Editor:
Your July 19 news article on the hastiness of South Korea's postwar construction boom highlights the darker underside of Korea's "economic miracle." However, as I learned on a trip there last month, it is not only the recent construction boom that rests on a dangerous foundation.
The transition to the "New Korea" promised by President Kim Young Sam, where internationally guaranteed human rights would be respected, remains dangerously incomplete.
The laws authorizing arbitrary arrest and detention, suppression of free association, expression and assembly that propped up decades of military rule are actively used by President Kim against political opponents and labor activists.


After 2 Are Slain at Park, Search for Killers Begins
It was five minutes into the second half of the basketball game the South Jamaica, Queens, neighborhood was calling the Peace Tournament.
The basketball was fast paced and fluid, and 300 people were rooting excitedly at the contest between two neighborhood teams, held in honor of two men killed by a police officer last December not far from the basketball courts here.


Euro Disney Reports Its First Profits
After nearly three years of heavy losses and a near brush with bankruptcy, Euro Disney, operator of the largest theme park in Europe, announced its first quarterly profit today.
While the results were better than expected, analysts were quick to caution that they did not mean that the theme park, which has generated almost $1.5 billion in losses since it opened in April 1992, was past its financial troubles.
For one, the results were bolstered in large part because the company does not have to pay interest on $3.61 billion in debt until 1997.


Consolidated Freightways Inc.(CNF,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Jones Apparel Group Inc.(JNY,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jul 2


Stored A-Bombs Creating Health Risks, Study Says
A sweeping study of global nuclear weapons production has concluded that the bombs, although used only twice in war, have still been responsible for extensive destruction, producing millions of tons of toxic and radioactive waste, massive damage to the environment and untold effects on human health.
The study, produced over six years by the International Physicians for the Prevention of Nuclear War and a small Washington group that specializes in the field, asserts that because of damage to human health "destruction before detonation is the hallmark of nuclear weapons production."


Compuware Corp.(CPWR,NNM) reports earnings for 1st qtr to Jun 30


For a Better Line-Item Veto
Congressional Republicans appear to have lost enthusiasm for the line-item veto -- and well they should.
The House and Senate versions of how it should work are substantially different.
But both cede too much authority to the President.
While Speaker Newt Gingrich has expressed doubt that the matter will be resolved this year, key players may keep trying.
If it comes to that, there are better ways.


SmithKline Beecham (SBH,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Kemet Corp.(KMET,NNM) reports earnings for 1st qtr to Jun 30


G.O.P. Puts Heat on the Commerce Dept.
With a summer heat wave that has gripped the capital for weeks, it was only a matter of time before Democrats and Republicans began bickering over what to do about the weather -- and more specifically, whether predicting it is still a legitimate role of government.
How to deal with the Government's giant weather bureaucracy -- privatize it, restructure it or cut its budget drastically -- is just one of the bitter arguments that broke out this week as Congress began to tackle the messy business of dismantling the Commerce Department, an invention of President Theodore Roosevelt that has come to embody all that the Republicans, especially the tear-it-up freshmen, say is wrong with big government.


O'Neill Powers Yanks to Seventh Straight Victory
The muscular right fielder rocked a three-run homer into a gusty wind in the first inning off Kevin Appier.
He used the same, sweet left-handed stroke to clobber another home run in the third.
The Yankees were delirious and enthused with his powerful blasts.
Had there been a Darryl Strawberry sighting?


Why Gingrich 'Trots' for Presidency: It's Publicity
Last month, Speaker Newt Gingrich said he was not shutting the door completely on a Presidential bid because if he did, no one would pay any attention to him.
Today, he said that if he opened the door completely, no one would pay attention.


Tracor Inc.(TTRR,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Charlie Rich, 62, 'Silver Fox,' Country Singer and Songwriter
Charlie Rich, the country singer known as the Silver Fox, who had several major hits in the 1970's, died yesterday at a motel in Hammond, La., where he and his wife had stopped for the night on their way to Florida.
He was 62.
The cause of death was a blood clot in his lung, said the coroner, Vincent Cefalu.


Sybron Intl. Corp.(SVB,N) reports earnings for 3d qtr to Jun 30


An Angry Man on the Rise in a Quaking Russia
!ZHIRINOVSKY!
By Vladimir Kartsev, with Todd Bludeau  198 pages.
Columbia University Press. $24.95.
The first thing to know about this sort-of-biography by Vladimir Kartsev is that, despite those exclamation points in the title, it is not mainly about Vladimir Volfowitch Zhirinovsky, the Russian nationalist and suspected anti-Semite who might one day be president of his country.
Near the end of "!Zhirinovsky!" in fact, Mr.
Kartsev writes: "Zhirinovsky is beside the point, or almost beside the point."


Freeport-McMoRan Copper &amp; Gold Inc.(FCX,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Open Short-Sales Positions Are Down 2.1% on Nasdaq
The number of open positions of short sales on the Nasdaq market decreased 2.1 percent in the monthly period ending July 15, the exchange announced yesterday.
Uncovered short sales totaled 820.1 million shares, compared with 837.5 million shares for the month that ended June 15.
Open positions of short sales are the total number of shares that have been borrowed and sold by Nasdaq members and their customers, but have not yet been covered by repurchase.


Ingersoll-Rand (IR,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Fiserv Inc.(FISV,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Interface Inc.(IFSIA,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jul 2


Eastern Enterprises (EFU,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Asarco Inc.(AR,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


U.S. Surgical (USS,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


91,000 Children Found Hungry
About 91,000 children under the age of 12 in New Jersey are hungry because their families do not have the financial resources to give them enough to eat, a nonprofit organization reported yesterday.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-11  BOMB ATTACK IN PARIS SUBWAY
Four people were killed and 62 wounded when a bomb exploded in a crowded Paris train station near Notre Dame Cathedral in the middle of the evening rush hour.
A1  NATO BOWS TO U.N.
ON AIR STRIKES
Four days after the United States, Britain and France threatened the Bosnian Serbs with air strikes if they attacked Gorazde, NATO officials agreed that no large-scale bombing would start without United Nations clearance.
A1  SERBS INDICTED FOR WAR CRIMES
The International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia indicted the Bosnian Serb leader, Radovan Karadzic, and others for crimes against humanity.
A9  FRENCH DENY PALE BOMBING
Despite vehement French denials, senior American officials said they continued to believe that France bombed the Serb headquarters at Pale on Sunday or Monday.
A8  TOWN OF ZEPA FALLS
Bosnian Serb troops took the town of Zepa, the heart of another United Nations "safe area," but it was unclear how much territory was under Serbian control.
A9  C.I.A.
FAULTED IN GUATEMALA
An internal Central Intelligence Agency investigation into the agency's conduct in Guatemala concludes that C.I.A. officers there improperly concealed their clandestine activities.
A1  Entertainment mogul to head advertising for Russian network.
A3  After the bombing in Tel Aviv, a new Israeli response.
A6  Profound changes debated at Amnesty International.
A10  Shanghai Journal: New proof of China's (high) stature.
A4  National A12-17  INQUIRIES FOR TOBACCO MAKERS
The Justice Department has convened a grand jury to investigate whether tobacco companies misled regulators, and it may convene a second panel to investigate whether executives lied to Congress.
A1  SMITH'S HUSBAND IN TEARS
Susan Smith's former husband sobbed as he told the jury how all his dreams for his sons died when he learned that his estranged wife had drowned them.
A12  NUCLEAR ARMS' WIDE IMPACT
A study of nuclear weapons concluded that they have been responsible for much toxic and radioactive waste, widespread environmental damage and untold effects on human health.
A12  BLOOD TESTIMONY CHALLENGED
An F.B.I. scientist said that blood on the sock retrieved from O.J Simpson's bedroom and on the gate behind Nicole Brown Simpson's home did not contain a preservative, challenging previous testimony.
A12  NO PLAN TO CALL HILLARY CLINTON
The chairman of the Senate Whitewater committee generally ruled out calling Hillary Rodham Clinton as a witness.
A14  'CORRECTIONS DAY' IN HOUSE
The House inaugurated a procedure to allow lawmakers to overturn what they considered unnecessary Government rules.
A14  GINGRICH ON A '96 BID
Speaker Newt Gingrich said that if he made a bid for the Republican Presidential nomination now, no one would pay attention.
A14  MORE WARNINGS ON WACO
Witnesses told Congress that they were sure the Branch Davidians would have soon surrendered if Federal agents had not invaded their compound.
A15  TRIMS FOR COMMERCE DEPARTMENT
Congress began to tackle the messy business of shredding the Commerce Department, with Democrats and Republicans began bickering over the weather.
A16  MEDICARE CUTS UNDER FIRE
President Clinton celebrated the 30th birthday of Medicare by attacking Republican plans to cut growth in the program.
A16  The Shoney's chain agreed to pay $96 million to aid minorities.
A12  A man who counseled Indian youth was sentenced in four deaths.
A17  Washington's mayor said 1,500 city workers could be dismissed.
A17  A radar system for planes in the Midwest failed three times.
A17  Metro Digest B1  COURT UPHOLDS 'MEGAN'S LAW'
New Jersey's Supreme Court upheld the constitutionality of alerting community groups and residents of the presence of sex offenders, saying that "to rule otherwise is to find that society is unable to protect itself from sexual predators." A1  TEACHERS RESPONDING TO BUYOUT
Thousands of New York City teachers are preparing to retire early under a buyout plan, leaving behind a younger teaching force and probably shortages in math, science and social studies.
A1  Business Digest D1  Arts/Entertainment C9-14  Colleges' summer reading.
C9  Prague, a music capital tangled up in freedom.
C9  Music: "Tamerlano." C10  Stereolab.
C10  Cecil Taylor's band.
C13  Rosie Flores.
C13  Books: "!Zhirinovsky!" C14  Book Notes.
C13  Television: Bidding farewell to "Northern Exposure." C9  The Living Section C1-7  Eating Well: When fresh comes packaged.
C1  At lunch with Larry Clark: Think you had a bad adolescence?
C1  A workaholic's worst nightmare: Vacation.
C1  Health Page C8  Sports B7-11  Baseball: Yanks reach .500 with seventh straight victory.
B7  Strawberry still isn't signed.
B7  Mets lose to Cardinals in 11th.
B9  Obituaries D19  Editorials/Op-Ed A18-19  Editorials  Buddy, can you spare a steak?
Looking backward in India.
Mr.
Cortines acts boldly.
For a better line-item veto.
Letters  Thomas L. Friedman: The end of something.
Frank Rich: Scandal for profit.
Ronald Steel: A realistic entity -- Greater Sarajevo.
Glenn C. Loury: Let's get on with Dr.
King's idea.
Chronicle B4  Crossword C13


Journal; Scandal For Profit
If anyone doubts whether Hugh Grant is as smart as the witty characters he plays, consider this: It cost him only a $60 fee -- plus a $1,180 fine -- to make sure that inattentive summer audiences wouldn't ignore his first big-studio American movie, "Nine Months," on which his future as a Hollywood megastar depends.
Contrast that with the duncelike deportment of Kevin Costner, who has so far run up $172 million to insure that his summer vehicle, "Waterworld," won't capsize as quickly as the preceding three flops that have brought his own career as a Hollywood star to the brink.


BMC Industries(BMC,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


In a Ranking of Maternal Health, U.S. Trails Most Developed Nations
The United States ranks 18th in an index measuring maternal health, lower than most other developed nations in the world, a new study says.
The study reviewed the data in 10 categories of maternal health and gave each of the 118 countries surveyed a score based on its performance in those areas.
Areas rated included the number of women who die during childbirth, teen-age pregnancy, contraceptive use, prenatal care and availability of safe abortions.


Kentucky Parts With Rhodes
The University of Kentucky has granted forward RODRICK RHODES his release.
BROOKS DOWNING, Kentucky's assistant media relations director, said that Rhodes "requested and was granted" a release earlier this month so he could "pursue other options, such as transferring."
A California newspaper reported last weekend that Rhodes had made an official visit to the University of Southern California.


New Jersey High Court Upholds Law Identifying Sex Offenders
New Jersey's Supreme Court today upheld the constitutionality of alerting communities to the presence of sex offenders, saying that "to rule otherwise is to find that society is unable to protect itself from sexual predators."
The 6-to-1 ruling put the state's highest court at odds with a Federal judge in Newark, Nicholas H. Politan, who struck down "Megan's Law" last February on the ground that its notification provisions were illegal extra punishment for sex offenders who had already served their prison terms.


As Vietnam Opens Up to the World, So Does Its Food
ANNABEL JACKSON-DOLING is eating Chinese food in one of Hong Kong's top restaurants, but her mind is elsewhere.
She is recounting a recent experience in Vietnam.
"I was in Nhatrang one day, a southern coastal village, sitting on a wooden bench in the early morning and eating xoi, a lump of glutinous rice flavored with bits of fried shallots, peanuts, sesame seeds and coconut sprinkled on top," she recalls.
"Little kids love it and so do I. It almost explodes in your mouth because of the salt-sugar contrasts and the variances of texture. A little girl was just given a little dollop on a banana leaf, and the excitement on her face was incredible."


Washington Post Co.(WPO,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jul 2


Corrections
A picture caption yesterday with an article about the possibility of a strike at the Metro-North Commuter Railroad misidentified several union officials.
The man at the center was Roland P. Wilder Jr., a lawyer for the unions, not Michael Doyle, a union spokesman; Mr.
Doyle was at the far left.
Anthony Bottalico, chairman of the United Transportation Union, was behind Mr.
Doyle.


Chesapeake Corp.(CSK,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Buddy, Can You Spare a Steak?
Stop thinking of them as members of Congress.
Think of them as America's guests, ready and able to settle into a nice meal and a free hotel room.
True, the Senate voted yesterday to set up a new registration system for lobbyists.
But Congress has yet to pass a much more significant companion bill that would bar lobbyists from plying senators and representatives with free meals, free entertainment and free vacations.
The registration bill, championed by Senator Carl Levin, Democrat of Michigan, is a useful advance for open government.
It would plug loopholes in the system that allow many lobbyists to avoid registration, and it would require lobbyists to disclose whom they represent, how much they are paid and on what issues they are lobbying.


Louisiana Land &amp; Exploration Co.(LLX,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Coastal Corp.(CGP,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Accounts
Monumental General Insurance Group, Baltimore, a unit of Aegon USA, to Doner Direct, Baltimore, a unit of W. B. Doner &amp; Co., to handle its direct-response account, previously handled in-house.
The billings were estimated at $5 million.


Shanghai Journal; China Stands Tall in the World, and Here's Proof
In its heyday in the 1930's, when movie starlets and rich financiers walked the crowded streets, Shanghai was known as "the pearl of the Orient."
So perhaps the pearl was an obvious choice for a motif when city planners designed the city's tallest structure, the 1,535-foot Oriental Pearl Television Tower, which was formally completed in May.


Study Finds Pesticides in Baby Food
LOW levels of pesticides are found in all major brands of baby food sold in the United States, according to a study released today.
The levels are well below the standards set by the Federal Government, but those standards are geared to the tolerances of adults, not children.
The report, issued by the Environmental Working Group, a nonprofit research organization in Washington, says the "residues do not pose an immediate health risk." It comes at a time when many in Congress are pressing for changes in pesticide regulations that critics say would make them less stringent.


Sea Life Pays for a Walk on the Beaches
To the Editor:
Recently many tons of sand were added to "enhance" Brooklyn's beaches from Manhattan Beach to Sea Gate.
It is now possible to walk at low tide from Brighton Beach to Manhattan Beach on sand.


Admiral's Cup Giving U.S. A Chance to Regain Glory
If ever American yachtsmen needed a victory to put spit and polish back into their image, this is the time.
Still tarnished by a humiliating defeat last May in the America's Cup matches, top United States sailors are now looking to Europe for a touch of brilliance.
Beginning tomorrow in Cowes, England, the two-week Champagne Mumm Admiral's Cup regatta is expected to draw 24 boats from 8 countries.
While its 38-year history lags behind the America's Cup in longevity and prestige, the British event still commands considerable respect in grand prix racing.


Lockheed Martin Corp.(LMT,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Common Fund Raises Estimate Of Trading Loss to $138 Million
The Common Fund has raised by nearly 8 percent, to $138 million, its estimate of the total losses it incurred from unauthorized trading at First Capital Strategists, a York, Pa., money management firm.
It also said First Capital had neither assets nor insurance to cover the losses.
In a memo to investors dated July 21 and released yesterday, the fund, a $20 billion investment pool of college endowment money, said it would use $3 million of its $20.5 million liquid reserves to offset a portion of the deficit.


Israel Passes the Point of No Return
The broken bodies, the twisted metal and the grief wrought by the suicide bombing in Ramat Gan on Monday were terribly familiar.
But the politics of the aftermath were something very new.
After the last bus bombing in Tel Aviv, in October 1994, Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin angrily sealed off the Arab territories and warned Yasir Arafat, the Palestinian leader, that if he did not crack down on terrorism, he could forget about self-rule in the West Bank.


F.B.I. Overreacted in Waco, Witnesses Say
A series of witnesses told Congress today that they were confident the Branch Davidians would soon have surrendered if the Federal Bureau of Investigation had not used tear gas and assault vehicles to invade their compound outside Waco, Tex.
The testimony before two House committees jointly investigating the deaths near Waco in April 1993 came from two lawyers who had negotiated with sect members during the 51-day siege.
Testimony from the witness today had been scheduled by committee Republicans to show that the loss of patience by the F.B.I. at the end of the siege was a critical mistake and largely responsible for the deaths of about 80 people when the Davidians' compound went up in flames shortly after the assault.


International Briefs; SmithKline Profits Rise 3% in Quarter
The British-American pharmaceutical company SmithKline Beecham P.L.C. reported a small rise in second-quarter profits yesterday, held back by falling sales of its formerly best-selling ulcer drug, Tagamet, and higher interest charges.
Pretax profits rose 3 percent, to $:298 million, or $475.3 million, in the three months that ended on June 30, while group sales from continuing operations rose 12 percent, to $:1.64 billion, or $2.62 billion.


Kennametal Inc.(KMT,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Jun 30


NATO Gives U.N. Officials Veto on Air Strikes in Bosnia
Four days after the United States, Britain, and France threatened the Bosnian Serbs with the heaviest air strikes yet if they attacked the Muslim enclave of Gorazde, NATO officials said early this morning that they had agreed that no large-scale bombing could start unless United Nations civilian officials gave the go-ahead.
Far from doing away with the cumbersome "dual key" arrangement that the United States says has hampered NATO's ability to protect United Nations peacekeepers on the ground, the NATO allies in effect have sided with the United Nations Secretary-General, Boutros Boutros-Ghali, who has been saying nobody could take his key away from him.


International Briefs; Polygram Net Up 15% In Year's First Half
The Dutch entertainment company Polygram N.V. said yesterday that its earnings for the first half of 1995 had risen 15 percent, largely because of strong pop music sales.
The company earned 270 million guilders, or $174 million, up from 234 million guilders in the corresponding period a year ago.
Sales rose to 4.02 billion guilders, or $2.59 billion, from 3.61 billion guilders.


Commerce Group Inc.(CGI,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Clinton Joins a Rally on Medicare's Birthday
President Clinton joined Congressional Democrats and hundreds of elderly Americans for a 30th birthday rally for Medicare on Capitol Hill today, attacking Republican plans to cut growth in the program and vowing not to "let the Government mess with your Medicare."
But the reality behind the political oratory was that most Democrats surrounding Mr.
Clinton in the caucus room of the Cannon House Office Building bitterly oppose his plan for trimming growth in Medicare spending -- even though the President would do it more slowly than the Republicans and without reducing benefits to individuals.
Mr.
Clinton barely acknowledged that fact, though his remarks were far milder than those of his fellow partisans.


Corrections
A brief sports article on Saturday about the appeal of a lawsuit that charged discrimination against Bill Parcells, the former New York Giants football coach, misstated the year he resigned and misidentified the coach who replaced him.
It was 1991, not after the 1992 season; the successor was Ray Handley, not Dan Reeves.


Armco Inc.(AS,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Stocks Continue Their Rebound; Dow Is Up 45.78
The stock market yesterday regained much of the ground it lost in last week's stock rout, setting aside traders' fears, at least for now, of a sharp retreat in prices.
The Dow Jones industrial average closed at 4,714.45, up 45.78 points and above 4,700 for the first time in six sessions.
The broader Standard &amp; Poor's 500-stock index rose 4.47 points, to 561.10; the Nasdaq composite index climbed 15.18 points, to 993.75.


Pepsico Posts an 11% Rise In 2d-Quarter Net Income
Driven by strong operating income from its beverage business, its Pizza Hut restaurant chain and its domestic Frito-Lay snack foods, Pepsico Inc. reported an 11 percent increase in its second-quarter earnings yesterday, slightly exceeding analysts' expectations.
"Over all, it was a solid quarter," said Andrew Conway, a beverage analyst for Salomon Brothers.
"The company is focused on growing earnings per share this year."


Inside Oil City, Hope Runs Dry
The oil industry got its start in this part of northwestern Pennsylvania with the drilling of the world's first commercial oil well in 1859.
The Quaker State Corporation got its start in this town in 1931 by promoting the special qualities of Pennsylvania oil.
When the oil industry moved southwest, Quaker State stayed.
And when other big corporations -- Pennzoil, Jones &amp; Laughlin Steel, U.S.
Steel and GTE -- began deserting Oil City, the townsfolk took comfort at the sight of the five-story, glass-and-concrete Quaker State headquarters building that reared up over surrounding storefronts.


First Data Corp.(FDC,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


When Close Is Perfect: Even 4 Errors Can't Prevent Top Score on New S.A.T.
It sounds like one of those impenetrable, imponderable word problems on the S.A.T.: If a standardized test has 138 questions and a test taker gets 3 or 4 wrong, can he or she still get a perfect score?
The answer: Yes. On the S.A.T. itself.


Book Notes
Small Is Bigger
British publishers are grumbling these days over some snappy little upstarts that have staged a remarkable coup.
In less than a month, many of Britain's most popular books have been rousted from best-seller lists, replaced by miniature books that Penguin is publishing as part of its 60th-anniversary celebration.


Foster Wheeler Corp.(FWC,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Teacher Accused of Kidnapping Pleads to Lesser Charge
Glenn Harris, the Manhattan gym teacher who was charged with kidnapping after he took a 15-year-old student on a two-month cross-country trip, pleaded guilty yesterday to a lesser charge that will mean he serves no prison time.
Mr.
Harris, 33, flashed a smile as Judge Antonio I. Brandveen of Manhattan Criminal Court pronounced a sentence of three years' probation on a charge of custodial interference.
A conviction for kidnapping could have brought a sentence of at least two and a third years in prison for Mr.
Harris, who had been the subject of a nationwide manhunt.


George Rodger Is Dead at 87; A Pioneering Photojournalist
George Rodger, a pioneering photojournalist who covered World War II for Life magazine and later helped to found the Magnum photo agency, died today in his home in southern England.
He was 87.
Long overshadowed by two other co-founders of Magnum, Robert Capa and Henri Cartier-Bresson, Mr.
Roger was best known for photographs he took at the Bergen-Belsen concentration camp when it was liberated by British troops in April 1945 and for his work with the Nuba tribe of southern Sudan.


Consolidated Edison (ED,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Erika Lehnsen; Art Therapist, 90
Erika Lehnsen, one of the first art therapists to work with children, died on Sunday at the Andrus retirement home in Hastings-on-Hudson, N.Y.
Until recently, Miss Lehnsen, who was 90, was a resident of the Upper West Side of Manhattan.
Miss Lehnsen and her associates, including Elinor Ulman and Bernard Levy, were among the founders of the art therapy field.


Servicemaster Ltd.(SVM,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Train Kills Fleeing Suspect
A man suspected of snatching a woman's purse at an Upper West Side subway station was killed last night when he fled into a tunnel and was struck by a southbound D train, the police said.
A Police Department spokesman, Doram Tamari, said the suspect, who was unidentified, ran from the 96th Street Station and onto an express track, where he was struck at 8:50 P.M.


Man Is Slain and His Father Wounded in Robbery at Nassau Home
A 23-year-old man was killed and his father was critically injured Monday night when they returned from work at a Queens beauty supply company to find two robbers ransacking their home.
The Nassau County police said one of the robbers shot the younger man, Frank Chun, in the head immediately after he and his father, 53-year-old Myunk Kuk Chun, entered their home at 1111 Furth Road here.
They said the robber shot the elder Mr.
Chun several times.


Yesterday in Washington
WAR IN BOSNIA The Senate opened debate on a bill to end American participation in the arms embargo against Bosnia, while Senate Democrats and the Clinton Administration waged a final offensive to blunt the effort.
Senator Bob Dole, co-sponsor of the bill, said the Administration had shown an absence of leadership that has allowed the United Nations to decide when and whether NATO will use air strikes.
WACO HEARING Witnesses told Congress that they were confident that the Branch Davidians would have soon surrendered if Federal agents had not invaded their Texas compound with tear gas.


California Takeover of Orange County Seems More Likely
As the financial crisis in Orange County, Calif., continues to worsen, chances are increasing that the state will seize control of its wealthiest county and force it to pay its debts.
A state appointment of a trustee to manage the county's fiscal affairs would be an action with little precedent: there have been few seizures of municipalities since the Depression, and never of a government of this size.
But the magnitude of the county's bankruptcy -- its debts are around $1.9 billion -- and the county's inability to draft a plan to pay its creditors are creating a situation in which state intervention is all but certain.


Jet Defense Gets Set To Rev Up The Attack
The Jets' attitude problem on defense may finally be channeled and used to disrupt the other team instead of themselves.
Even now, awaiting today's first summer-camp workout in pads, Mo Lewis frowns when he recalls how angry he was with some of his own teammates during last season's demise, when the Jets suffered the same old choke-hold.
The inevitable squabbling followed.


N.B.A. Says It Is Willing to Address Players' Concerns
Five weeks after they thought they had completed labor negotiations for the next six seasons, officials of the National Basketball Association and its union of locked-out players returned to the bargaining table yesterday but made no instant progress toward another agreement.
"We discussed and covered a lot of areas," Commissioner David Stern said after the five-hour meeting at a midtown Manhattan hotel.
"I can't say that substantial progress was made, but we did indicate the owners' willingness to attempt to address areas of concern that have been raised by the players as long as a deal remained sensible economically."


Highway Plan For West Side Appears Dead
Under attack in Congress and from the Giuliani administration, a plan to tear down a newly rebuilt stretch of the West Side Highway and reconstruct it alongside Donald J. Trump's planned Riverside South development appears dead, at least for now.
An associate of Mr.
Trump said the $2 billion Riverside South project, the most ambitious building effort in Manhattan in decades, will go ahead unimpeded, with construction starting in about six months.
But Representative Jerrold L. Nadler, an Upper West Side Democrat who is an ardent opponent of Riverside South, said the death of the highway project could endanger the entire development.


Many U.S. Aides Seem Sure That French Bombed Serbs
In the face of vehement French denials, senior American officials said today that they still believe that France bombed the Bosnian Serbs' headquarters at Pale over the weekend.
Administration officials said they had circumstantial evidence and a report from a "usually reliable" intelligence source with ties to the French Government, but not a photograph of a bomb crater or other irrefutable proof.


Devils' Cup Banner To Be Raised Oct. 7
The Devils will raise their Stanley Cup championship banner at Byrne Meadowlands Arena before an afternoon game against the Florida Panthers on Oct. 7, the National Hockey League said yesterday in releasing its 1995-96 schedule.
The Rangers and Islanders both open their seasons on the road on Oct. 7.
The Rangers will play at Hartford before their home opener on Oct. 11 against the Winnipeg Jets.


New York Buyouts Could Leave Gaps In Teaching Ranks
Thousands of New York City teachers are preparing to retire early under a buyout plan, and educators say the exodus will leave behind a younger teaching force and probably, shortages in math, science and social studies teachers.
So far, 3,450 of the city's 68,500 teachers and 1,745 other school employees, including 105 principals and 191 assistant principals, have told the Board of Education that they plan to take advantage of the incentive program, a budget-cutting measure that offers teachers extra credit toward their pension plans.
About 1,200 teachers usually retire each year, board officials say.


METRO DIGEST
SEX-OFFENDER LAW UPHELD IN NEW JERSEY
New Jersey's Supreme Court upheld the constitutionality of alerting communities of the presence of sex offenders, saying that "to rule otherwise is to find that society is unable to protect itself from sexual predators."  [ Page A1. ]
Governor Pataki signed legislation that will require convicted sex offenders to notify the state about where they are living long after they are released from prison.  [ B2. ]


Morceli Just Misses Another Record
The biggest name in middle-distance running was rounding the final turn of the 1,500-meter run, and the crowd in this very small principality was stomping its well-heeled feet.
The closer Noureddine Morceli came to the finish line, the louder the fans became, but then as the electronic clock and Morceli both came to a halt, the Louis II Stadium became as quiet as the engines of the luxury cars that pace Monaco's narrow, tax-free streets.


C.I.A. Says Agents Deceived Superiors On Guatemala Role
An internal Central Intelligence Agency investigation into the agency's conduct in Guatemala concludes that C.I.A. officers there failed to disclose their clandestine activities to two United States Ambassadors, to Congress and to the agency itself, intelligence officials said tonight.
The report found that C.I.A. officers in Guatemala broke no laws in connection with the deaths in Guatemala of an American innkeeper and the husband of an American lawyer, and it does not establish that a man identified as a paid C.I.A. informer was their killer, the officials said.


Storming the Public Hospital Bureaucracy
New York City is in the midst of health care "shock therapy," says Maria K. Mitchell, and she is pleased to be leading the team sending waves through what she describes as the city's entrenched and bloated health care bureaucracy.
"The fat that exists in this system is really incredible," said Ms.
Mitchell, director of Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani's Office of Health Services and his recent choice as chairwoman of the Health and Hospitals Corporation, which runs the city's public hospitals.


Goodyear Tire &amp; Rubber Co.(GT,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Community Notification Upheld
The New Jersey Supreme Court upheld Megan's Law yesterday, ruling that alerting communities to the presence of a paroled sex offender does not infringe an ex-convict's rights.
Instead, the court said, the notification law enables communities to try to protect themselves against sexual predators.


Changes in Chelsea
Murray's Chelsea, 198 Eighth Avenue, at 20th Street, which was a branch of Murray's Cheese Shop in Greenwich Village, has changed hands.
Georges Masraff, who was once executive chef at Tavern on the Green, has bought the store from Rob Kaufelt, who will continue to own Murray's Cheese shop in Greenwich Village.


Agrium Inc. reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


2 Officers Are Accused of Raping a Woman
Two New Rochelle police officers were suspended today after a civilian dispatcher accused them of raping her at her apartment early Saturday after a night of drinking, police officials said.
Police Commissioner Patrick Carroll said that his department was working with the Westchester County District Attorney's office to investigate the case, but that it was too early to know if criminal charges would be filed.


Hormel Sues Over a Boarish Film Muppet
Perhaps the makers of Spam, the much-maligned pork luncheon meat, have been the target of too many jokes over the years, but executives of the Hormel Foods Corporation are certainly not laughing at the latest Muppet movie.
The movie, "Muppet Treasure Island," features a wild-boar puppet named Spa'am who runs amok, and the makers of Spam, which has been around since 1937, have sued in Federal court in Manhattan, claiming trademark infringement.


International Briefs; Pearson May Reduce Stake in B Sky B
Pearson P.L.C., the British media and entertainment company, said yesterday that it was considering selling a substantial portion of the 9.7 percent stake it holds directly in British Sky Broadcasting.
Pearson, which also holds another 4.3 percent stake indirectly, said options for a sale of shares included a secondary offering.
Pearson's holdings include The Financial Times, the daily newspaper; Madame Tussaud's wax museums, and the Port Aventura theme park in Spain.


Melville Corp.(MES,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jul 1


Eating Well; When Fresh Comes Packaged
THE pre-cut vegetables in plastic bags that are becoming popular in supermarket produce sections promise less drudgery, more flavor than canned or frozen alternatives, and plenty of vitamins.
In most respects, they deliver.
They may not be quite as nutritious as they seem, however.


One Night, Two Big Bouts
The top heavyweights are squaring off -- in the ring in Las Vegas, Nev., and on pay-per-view television -- in what could result in a battle royal.
Mike Tyson's co-manager, John Horne, announced last night that Tyson would hold the second fight of his comeback at the MGM Grand in Las Vegas on Nov. 4.
The same day, Evander Holyfield and Riddick Bowe will meet for Bowe's World Boxing Organization title at Caesars Palace, also in Las Vegas, an announcement that will be made today.


Amdahl Corp.(AMH,A) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


U.S. Convenes Grand Jury To Look at Tobacco Industry
The Justice Department has convened a grand jury in New York to investigate whether tobacco companies misrepresented to Federal regulators the contents and ill effects of cigarettes.
The department is likely to convene a second panel here to investigate whether company executives lied to Congress about tobacco products.
It is the first time the Federal Government has moved against tobacco companies or their executives.


Loral Corp.(LOR,N) reports earnings for 1st qtr to Jun 30


Coleman Co.(CLN,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Sports of The Times; It's Love For Sale By the Bay
JUST when the baseball season seemed to have hit a snail's pace, the Cincinnati Reds and the San Francisco Giants made a trade that puts two of the most enigmatic talents in professional sports on the same team: one is the Prince of Light, one the Prince of Darkness.
On Monday, Deion Sanders was traded from the pennant-bound Reds to the last-place Giants, a move that raised hopes for San Francisco's Super Bowl champion 49ers that Sanders, a free agent in football, will return to the team this season.


A Music Capital Tangled Up in Freedom
With a distinguished lineage of composers and performers, Prague has long cherished itself as one of Europe's enduring music centers.
Now, however, the city's musicians and their managers say standards are slipping, as ensembles, opera companies and Prague's world-famous orchestra adjust to the whims and temptations of the free market.
At the heart of the turmoil has been a dogfight at the Czech Philharmonic, an icon here.
Adding to the disenchantment, many seasoned musicians say, the city's two resident opera companies are saddled with overloaded schedules and skimpy budgets, and as a consequence give lackluster performances.


Mr. Cortines Acts Boldly
For the second time in eight months the New York City Schools Chancellor, Ramon Cortines, has suspended a local school board -- in this case a Brooklyn board that has dithered in finding a superintendent.
This is a clear failure of educational leadership, and Mr.
Cortines has made the right move.
But some board members now threaten to sue on grounds that he has no clear authority to dismiss a board just because he is displeased with its stewardship.
It is therefore time for the State Legislature in Albany to clarify the chancellor's powers.
Under state law, the central board has responsibility for overall policy and high schools.
The 32 community boards are responsible for junior high and elementary schools and for hiring superintendents, principals and other staff.
The chancellor has clear authority to step in when local boards are found to be corrupt.
His authority to intervene in other circumstances is less clear.


A Workaholic's Worst Nightmare? Vacation
WHEN Brian Fraidin invites friends to go away with him on vacation, he speaks frankly.
Don't get too excited, he warns, because he will probably cancel.
In fact, he regularly aborts trips just days before they are supposed to happen.
He can live with disappointing others, he said, because work comes first.
"Sitting on a beach sounds appealing to me," said Mr.
Fraidin, who owns a venture capital firm in Baltimore and took his last vacation three years ago (it was a weekend trip to Florida).
"But once the day is over, what have you accomplished?"


USLife Corp.(USH,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Corrections
A chart in Business Day on July 19, with an article about a Kentucky lawyer who has filed suits against seven insurance companies, misidentified one company.
It was the First National Life Insurance Company of America, based in Birmingham, Ala. -- not the First National Life Insurance Company, which is based in Montgomery, Ala., and is a subsidiary of the American Life Assurance Group.


Bergen Brunswig (BBC,N) reports earnings for 3d qtr to Jun 30


Islanders Sign Three Forwards
The Islanders signed three forwards yesterday, two of whom were free agents and one, ANDREAS JOHANSSON, who was their seventh-round draft choice in 1991.
Johansson, 22, played the last four seasons in Sweden, including this past season with the national team, which he led in scoring at the world championships.


No Intention To Question First Lady
The chairman of the Senate committee investigating the Whitewater affair today ruled out calling Hillary Rodham Clinton as a witness unless strong evidence emerged of her involvement in the mishandling of papers from the office of a White House aide who committed suicide two years ago.
The chairman, Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato, said in response to a request by Senator Lauch Faircloth, Republican of North Carolina, that Mrs.
Clinton testify that she would not be called "unless there is clear and convincing facts and reason" to do so.


Private Fund Raising Opposed
The Whitman administration is planning to ask private corporations to donate money to help restore historic sites -- among them, the executive wing of the State House as well as Morven, the former governor's mansion in Princeton.
Lisa R. Kruse, a Treasury Department spokeswoman, said using private dollars would not only save tax money but would also bring in revenue because the public has an "almost insatiable appetite" for history, The Associated Press reported.


Imasco Ltd. reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Foreign Affairs; The End of Something
The U.S. consulate in Bordeaux died last week.
It was 205 years old.
The oldest living consulate in American diplomatic history succumbed to a variety of ailments, including CNN disease, faxatosis, AT&amp;T-Direct, global integration and most of all the lingering effects of a Congressional ax attack.
The Bordeaux consulate is survived by the American Embassy in Paris and its sisters, the U.S. consulates in Strasbourg and Marseilles.
Memorial donations may be sent to the General Operating Fund of the U.S.
State Department in Washington. (It needs the money.) No memorial service is planned.
Yes, in case you missed it, the State Department announced last week that to appease Congressional budget-cutters it was closing down 19 consulates and embassies, including Bordeaux.
Normally the closure of a consulate with two U.S. diplomats and nine locals would not be worthy of note, but Bordeaux is a bit different.
It was opened by the Washington Administration -- that's George Washington -- in 1790 as America's first consulate abroad.
In closing consulates like Bordeaux, the U.S. is turning its back on the past and the future of U.S. foreign policy for the sake of the present.


Personal Health; Sorting out the benefits of taking extra vitamin E.
IN a nation hungry for simple nutritional solutions to complex health problems, vitamin E might seem to be a panacea.
Various studies have singled it out as the most promising and possibly the safest antidote to the nation's leading killers, heart disease and cancer.
And, while it is protecting coronary arteries against atherosclerosis and DNA against attacks by chemical carcinogens, it may also be keeping normal cells throughout the body from aging prematurely.
But vitamin E, chemically named alpha-tocopherol, does all this and more at levels well above those needed to prevent a nutritional deficiency, levels that render it a drug, not a nutrient.
As a vitamin, it aids in the formation of red blood cells, muscles and other tissues and prevents oxidation of vitamin A and essential fatty acids.
At high levels not attainable through diet -- 40 times or more the nutritionally needed amount -- vitamin E functions as a potent antioxidant.
Why Not Take It?
Well, then, shouldn't everybody take vitamin E supplements?
Certainly, most if not all researchers who study it are taking it, but most are not yet willing to tell the general public to do the same.
Are these scientists being hypocritical, telling us one thing and doing another?


Northeast Utilities (NU,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Robinson Is Leaving Devils To Become Kings' Head Coach
A month after winning their first Stanley Cup, the Devils will be losing their top assistant coach, LARRY ROBINSON.
A source in the Devils' organization has confirmed a report in The Los Angeles Times yesterday that the Kings will hold a news conference today to announce the hiring of Robinson as head coach.
Robinson, 44, has been JACQUES LEMAIRE's assistant with the Devils for the past two seasons.
He played 20 seasons in the National Hockey League as a defenseman, 17 with the Montreal Canadiens and 3 with the Kings.
He was a member of six Stanley Cup championship teams in Montreal.


Aflac Inc.(AFL,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Police Arrest A Firefighter In Tree Razing
The Police Department interrupted its day-to-day litany of murders, robberies and shootings to announce last night that it had solved the case of eight trees in Astoria, Queens, that were mysteriously cut down for no apparent reason, infuriating the community.
Captain Bernard Gillespie of the Queens Detective Command said that Andrew Campanile, 55, a city firefighter on disability, had been arrested and charged with destroying city property and forging a city work permit when he led a professional crew that cut down the trees on July 1 and July 8.


Lincare Holdings (LNCR,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


COMPANY BRIEFS
BIG O TIRES INC., Englewood, Colo., a tire supplier, signed a $54.7 million agreement to be acquired by BOTI Holdings Inc., a group of its senior managers, officers and franchised dealers.
BOTI will pay Big O Tires $16.50 a share.
IWC RESOURCES CORP., Indianapolis, a water utility, agreed to acquire Miller Pipeline Corp.
Indianapolis, for an undisclosed amount of cash and common shares.


Complaints Lead to Suspension Of an H.M.O. Run by Hospitals
The health maintenance organization run by the city's public hospitals has agreed to suspend enrollment of new members from Medicaid for 30 days because of concerns of complaints about long waits, often of up to several weeks, to see a doctor.
The suspension of Metro Plus, which is run by the Health and Hospitals Corporation, came amid a Department of Health investigation of whether H.M.O.'s in the city have enough doctors and office space to handle the exploding influx of Medicaid patients into managed care.


LG&amp;E Energy (LGE,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Jail for Boarding Up a Building
Two owners of a rundown commercial building in Morristown were ordered jailed by a Municipal Court judge for violating a town code that prohibits the boarding up of buildings for more than 90 days because of the fire risk.


Treasurys Close Mixed Following Latest Data
Prices of Treasury securities were mixed yesterday, with the long bond up, despite a barrage of indicators that suggested a sustained healthy economy would make it unnecessary for the Federal Reserve to lower rates again.
The 30-year bond gained 22/32 of a percentage point, to a price of 110 5/32.
It yield, which moves in the opposite direction from its price, fell to 6.82 percent, from 6.87 percent on Monday and down from 6.92 percent at its worst point during the day.
In the shorter maturities, bill rates were up about one-hundredth of a percentage point, and intermediate maturities were mixed.


Goulds Pumps Inc.(GULD,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


N.J. Transit to Keep Fares Level
New Jersey Transit will not raise its fares in the fiscal year ending June, 30, 1996, despite reductions of $10 million in Federal aid and $5 million in state aid, officials said yesterday.
Even though the $832.8 million budget calls for an $23.5 million increase in spending, transit officials said a projected increase in riders and other factors would make a fare increase unnecessary.


Market Place; Between a company's news and trading activity, a puzzling lag.
WALTER INDUSTRIES, a home-building conglomerate that recently emerged from a messy six-year bankruptcy, took its new shareholders for a roller-coaster ride yesterday.
The price for the usually stodgy stock, which normally trades on a when-issued basis, popped up more than $1 in the first half-hour of trading, to more than $16 a share, and gyrated between $16 and $16.75 until midday, when investors lost their enthusiasm and the stock settled into a rut between $15.75 and $16.125 for the rest of the day.


Nigerian Leader Moves Toward Elections
To the Editor:
Your editorial "Nigerian Tragedy" of July 19 misrepresents the Nigerian situation.
Gen.
Sani Abacha came to office at the request of prominent political leaders who wanted the military to end Nigeria's disturbing drift to chaos in the wake of the annulment of the June 12, 1993, presidential election by the former military Government.


Wine Talk
WANDER for a while through the famous Pike Place Market here.
Whether it is Geoduck clams the size of footballs, raspberries as big as quails' eggs or Brobdingnagian morilles with the shape and heft of hand grenades, everything is outsize.
But then, these people have massive Mount Rainier in their backyard; perhaps a little exaggeration, a sense of extravagance are not all that much out of place.
In this setting, even a raspberry has to be pretty big to get noticed.


Coping With the Heat, a Floor at a Time


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS  Cold Front in Canada
Greg Rusedski, a Canadian who recently became a British citizen, got a frosty reception from spectators at the Canadian Open yesterday, then was treated far more harshly by Michael Joyce.
Joyce, a 22-year-old American ranked 91st in the world, beat the 50th-ranked Rusedski, 7-6 (7-2), 6-3, in the first round in Montreal.


Cintas Corp.(CTAS,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


A French Chef Contends With American Ingredients
BERNARD LOISEAU wore the expression of a trout fisherman who had just snagged a big, meaty twig.
"Where's the juice?" he asked as he squeezed some midsummer Long Island cantaloupe.
"These American products never can be as good as those from my own garden."


Webb (Del) Corp.(WBB,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Jun 30


EXPLOSION KILLS 4 AND INJURES MANY ON TRAIN IN PARIS
Four people were killed and 62 wounded today when a bomb exploded in a crowded commuter train near Notre DameCathedral in the middle of the evening rush hour, the authorities said.
Medical teams said 14 of the wounded were in critical condition.
Prime Minister Alain Juppe, who immediately flew by helicopter to the scene of the blast, said, "There is very strong suspicion of an attack." A police statement said later that an explosive device of "several kilos" was involved.


Food Notes
White, Sweet Nectarines
This summer, many specialty stores are selling white-flesh nectarines, which are sweeter than the yellow kind.
Nectarines originally had white flesh.
They became yellow only when horticulturists started cross-breeding them with peaches to make them bigger and firmer for shipping.
White peaches are also enjoying renewed popularity, and white apricots may begin to appear in stores next year.


A Second Look at Child-Support Laws
If James Pascale were living in California, he might be paying a lot less child support because of the time he spends with his 11-year-old son and twin 9-year-old daughters.
But he lives in New Jersey, where the State Supreme Court has ruled that his former wife, Debra Pascale, should continue to have complete control over the $25,000 both parents contribute each year to support their children.


A Wistful Sendoff-cum-Wake For That Paradise of the North
After five seasons on CBS, "Northern Exposure" comes to a close this evening.
It's time.
The show's distinctive whimsy began to grow perilously thin a year or two ago.
Cast changes, most notably the departure of Rob Morrow, who played the central and somewhat irritating character of whiny Joel Fleischman, proved fatal.
In tonight's wrap-up, several major players like John Cullum's Holling, Janine Turner's Maggie and John Corbett's Chris barely muster enough energy to put in brief appearances.
All of which shouldn't detract from the inventiveness and accomplishments of "Northern Exposure" at its best.
When Joel, a New Yorker and recent medical-school graduate, arrived in the outpost town of Cicely, Alaska, to pay off scholarship obligations, a wonderfully offbeat community sprouted up in prime time.
The barmy residents were the brainchildren of Joshua Brand and John Falsey, the creative team whose other credits include "St. Elsewhere."


CHRONICLE
Never again, WALTER MATTHAU said yesterday.
What he was vowing not to do was to make any more films in Central Park.
He had just spent eight weeks filming scenes in the park for "I'm Not Rappaport."
"It's impossible to work there," he said.
"There are too many planes overhead, sirens, traffic. You can't hold up traffic in New York. If you do, they make lots of noise."


Congressional Roundup; On 'Corrections Day,' House Gets 2d Chance
The House of Representatives today inaugurated a procedure to allow lawmakers to overturn unnecessary Government rules and proved that one politician's case of bureaucratic overkill is another's essential safeguard.
On the first test of what Speaker Newt Gingrich calls Corrections Day, the House voted, 269 to 156, to give San Diego a permanent exemption from the Clean Water Act's requirement that the city thoroughly purify sewage before piping it deep into the Pacific Ocean.


Breed Technologies (BDT,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Jun 30


Chubb Corp.(CB,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Baxter International (BAX,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


CHRONICLE
The Pakistani cricket hero IMRAN KHAN said yesterday that his recent marriage to a British heiress had not diminished his nationalist zeal, Reuters reported.
In his first meeting with reporters since his return home from Europe to Lahore last weekend, Mr.
Khan, 42, said he would not respond to requests that he enter politics because he could not bring change to what he called a corrupt political system.
Even so, he said, "People want a change in the system because it does not represent the people."


IES Industries(IES,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


American Annuity Group Inc.(AAG,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Tatars vs. Turks at Glimmerglass
The 900-seat Alice Busch Opera Theater of the Glimmerglass Opera in Cooperstown, N.Y., is a wonderfully intimate place to hear almost any opera.
But it is an ideal facility for the operas of Handel.
The production of Handel's "Tamerlano," directed by Jonathan Miller, that opened here on Saturday night was as close to ideal as one could hope for.
Frantic to provide a new work for the 1724 season of his London opera company, Handel composed the basic draft of "Tamerlano" in just 20 days.
In a less sensitive production, this opera, Handel's 18th, could seem a formulaic rush job: 27 arias, 2 duets, 1 trio and a final quartet.


New York Lets Insurers Swap Huge Risks
The New York Insurance Department said yesterday that it had approved the creation of an exchange that would allow insurance companies to reduce their exposure to huge losses by swapping blocks of policies in different parts of the country.
If the exchange, called the Catastrophe Risk Exchange, is accepted by insurance companies it could solve the biggest problem facing many property insurers: how to protect against huge losses that could arise if a severe hurricane or earthquake hit a heavily developed area.


EG&amp;G Inc.(EGG,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jul 2


F.B.I. Disputes Simpson Defense on Tainted Blood
Blood on a sock retrieved from O. J Simpson's bedroom and on the gate behind Nicole Brown Simpson's home did not contain a preservative, but only some vague and inconclusive hints of one, a scientist from the Federal Bureau of Investigation testified today at Mr.
Simpson's trial.
Defense lawyers called the F.B.I. special agent, Roger Martz, to buttress their claims that corrupt police officers removed the Simpsons' blood from test tubes containing an anti-coagulating substance used in laboratories, EDTA, and sprinkled it on the sock and gate.


Congressional Roundup; Registering Lobbyists
The Senate voted 98 to 0 today to require thousands of additional lobbyists to register and disclose their activities, but reached no agreement about limiting gifts from lobbyists and others.
In a series of closed meetings, supporters of efforts to tighten limits on gifts failed to make much progress towards compromise with foes.
But Senator John McCain, Republican of Arizona, said he was hopeful of winning support for a new idea he was promoting: that Congress put itself under the same strict limits that apply to officials in the executive branch, who are barred from accepting just about all gifts worth more than $20.


Business Travel; Some airlines are going to great lengths to shorten flying time between North America and Asia.
WITH little fanfare, Asian-bound passengers from the United States and Canada have been able to shorten their flying time across the Pacific Ocean by as much as three hours.
While the flights benefit business and leisure travelers equally, the real motivation behind many of the flights is to make flying more convenient for business travelers, who pay the highest fares.
Northwest Airlines, for example, is so determined to accommodate its business travelers to Asia that on some flights it chooses to carry fewer leisure passengers and less cargo.
While it flies in the face of conventional aviation wisdom to leave passengers behind on planes that are not full, Northwest's purpose is to eliminate stops en route that otherwise would be necessary for planes carrying heavier loads.


International Specialty Products Inc.(ISP,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Banta Corp.(BNTA,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Tootsie Roll Industries(TR,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jul 1


Cecil Taylor's Band Without Cecil Taylor
Cecil Taylor's big band opened its first show at the Knitting Factory on Monday night with Mr.
Taylor reading poetry offstage.
A few members stood around offering bleats or whirs as accompaniment.
Then the rest of the 30-odd-member group filtered in, sprawling across the stage and into the audience.
They entered chanting, but when they sat down to play, what came out was less substantial than their entrance.
This was clearly a local community event.
Mr.
Taylor, who did not perform at all, began holding open rehearsals for this big band several months ago.
Apparently anyone who thought he had a contribution to make joined.
The process was democratic, and so was the music: it wasn't until 45 minutes into the performance that a soloist appeared.
It gave the performance a festive, communal feeling, and if the music didn't really work, its lack of order seemed secondary on such a hot summer night.
What counted was its sense of fun and its narrative.


Talley Industries(TAL,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Braving the Full Sunlight
"Now you know what we look like during the daytime," Mary Hansen of Stereolab, a group of pop-music experimenters from England, said on Saturday afternoon at Central Park Summerstage.
The nearly three-hour concert paired two acts normally seen at night: Stereolab, rock-club regulars, and John Cale, a former member of the Velvet Underground whose solo music seems best suited to art bars and cabarets.
Despite shaky beginnings, the pale, sweaty acts flourished instead of melting in the afternoon sun.
Stereolab's music is a mixture all its own.
In sweet, light pop songs, the English band connects the dots between its different obsessions, from synthesizer history to Marxist rhetoric, from 1950's kitsch to 1970's progressive rock.
On Saturday, the band didn't perform with as much archival electronic gear as it had in the past.
But the droning organ of Morgane Lhote kept the band's smart bubble gum pop anchored to the ground while Laetitia Sadier's Moog synthesizer gurgled and sputtered on top.
Ms.
Sadier sang most of the vocals in a dulcet French accent as Ms.
Hansen harmonized with oohs and aahs, turning slogans like "We want unconditional rebellion" into harmless sing-alongs.


Two Pirate Outfielders Injured in Frightening Collision
Braves 3, Pirates 1
Pirate right fielder Dave Clark broke his left collarbone and center fielder Jacob Brumfield suffered facial cuts after they collided while chasing a fly ball yesterday at Three Rivers Stadium in a loss to Atlanta.


Excerpts From the Ruling on Community Notification
Following are excerpts of the New Jersey Supreme Court's 6-to-1 ruling on a law dealing with notifying communities about convicted sex offenders, from the majority opinion written by Chief Justice Robert N. Wilentz.


Southern Pacific Rail Corp.(RSP,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


INTERNET PROFILES SELECTED TO AUDIT WEB USE
Hoping to become the Nielsen rating service of the Internet, the Internet Profiles Corporation of San Francisco has been selected by Playboy Enterprises, the Netscape Communications Corporation, Ziff-Davis Publishing, a unit of Forstmann Little &amp; Company, and several other media companies to provide independent auditing of World Wide Web users.
The companies will use data compiled by Internet Profiles' I/Audit program to determine electronic advertising costs, sell advertising space and evaluate the effectiveness of ads on the Web.
Several companies have announced plans to provide such services, but Internet Profiles, a privately held company known as I/Pro, is the first to gain a following among big Internet publishers.


Defining and Proving Rights Abuses: Debate Splits Amnesty International
When Amnesty International reported that Rwandan Hutu in exile in Zaire were being secretly re-armed by foreign governments, it was big news.
Many Hutu, after all, had been responsible for the massacre of hundreds of thousands of Tutsi in Rwanda.
But within Amnesty there was opposition to releasing the report.
In a major departure, most of the accusations were based on secondary sources -- politicians, news media, other rights organizations -- rather than on Amnesty's own research.


Looking Backward in India
India's recent drive toward economic liberalization is a remarkable success story in the developing world.
With overseas investment pouring in, the economy has boomed.
But now many of India's gains are imperiled by a recrudescence of nationalist sentiment that threatens to drive foreign companies away.
Fear of economic colonization is as old as India itself, but India's leaders must transcend these anxieties if future progress is to be secured.
The focus of the latest anti-foreign hysteria is a proposed $2.8 billion power plant to be constructed outside Bombay by a consortium of American companies led by the Enron Corporation of Houston, a large natural gas supplier.
The plant would be the biggest foreign investment in India since the economy started opening up five years ago.
It is also desperately needed.


Singing the City's Praises


Oshkosh Truck Corp.(OTRKB,NNM) reports earnings for 3d qtr to Jun 30


Accounts Awarded For Starbucks, 7Up
Two marketers formally awarded their accounts yesterday to agencies that had been expected to land those assignments.
Cadbury Beverages North America, a unit of Cadbury Schweppes P.L.C. in Stamford, Conn., named the New York office of Young &amp; Rubicam Inc. as the agency of record for its 7Up line of sodas, with billings estimated at $25 million to $30 million.
The account had been at the Leo Burnett Company in Chicago for the last decade until Burnett resigned on May 31 to handle the Fruitopia line of fruit and tea drinks for the Coca-Cola Company.


Hospitality Franchise Systems Inc.(HFS,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


'Safe' Town In Bosnia Falls to Serbs
Bosnian Serb troops captured the town of Zepa today, the heart of another United Nations "safe area," but the surrounding hills were full of Bosnian Government troops and Muslim refugees, and it was unclear how much territory was under Serbian control.
After a weeklong assault on Zepa, the Bosnian Serb troops entered the town today, but Bosnian radio said that the Government troops still controlled a "substantial stretch of territory" in the enclave, which is made up of more than 20 villages.


California Action to Benefit Minority Students
To the Editor:
Re your July 21 news article about the rejection of affirmative action by the University of California Board of Regents:
As a graduate of two University of California campuses, I was pleased that Gov.
Pete Wilson and the Board of Regents chose to end the long-standing but unfair affirmative action programs in the university system.


Transactions
Baseball  American League
BOSTON RED SOX -- Placed Dave Hollins, first baseman, on their active roster.
Designated Chris Donnels, first baseman, for assignment.


A Realistic Entity: Greater Sarajevo
The fall of the isolated Muslim enclaves in eastern Bosnia, including Zepa yesterday, may be a blessing in disguise.
In threatening air strikes to protect the "safe havens," NATO is misguided.
The eventual withdrawal of Muslim troops and civilians from Gorazde, Bihac and Tuzla could hold the key to a political settlement.
The Bosnian Government should have abandoned these towns long ago.
They were held because they were considered useful in the effort to reclaim lost territories and because the plight of their refugees engaged the conscience of the West.
Now the Bosnian Government should scale back its unrealistic ambitions and withdraw its army to establish a viable, independent republic around Sarajevo.


Washington Mayor Concedes Necessity of Job Cuts for Budget
In his first public admission that many city workers will lose their jobs in a plan to return the District of Columbia to financial stability, Mayor Marion S. Barry Jr. said today that as many as 1,500 people, about 4 percent of the work force, could be dismissed over the next two years.
The job cuts are part of Mr.
Barry's response to recommendations by the Federal Financial Control Board to guide the city out of its financial crisis.
The board, appointed by President Clinton, earlier this month advised the city to eliminate 5,600 positions.
Most of those job savings are expected to be achieved through attrition and early retirement.


Muslim Refugees Raise Tensions in Serb Village
Pero Milosevic's family has been living in this Serbian village in the forested Majevica mountains for 300 years, and he is determined to remain.
"This village is our home, and we can't leave," he said, sitting under grape vines strung over a latticework in the yard of his two-story house.


Big clients remain few at Jerry &amp; Ketchum, but this time Della Femina sees no need to exaggerate.
ALONG Madison Avenue, people keep asking a question that echoes the cry from the old JGE appliance chain commercials: "What's the story, Jerry?"
The Jerry is Jerry Della Femina, the flamboyant adman, author, columnist, restaurateur and retailer who is the chairman, chief executive and creative director of Jerry &amp; Ketchum in New York.
And the story they want to hear is how he is faring with his agency, formed 15 months ago in a joint venture with Ketchum Communications after he spent more than a year running a small shop, Jerry Inc.


4 Months Later, Viacom Revives A Sale to Tele-Communications
After months of tortuous negotiations, Viacom Inc. said yesterday that it had agreed to spin off its cable systems to Tele-Communications Inc. in a deal valued at about $2.25 billion.
The deal is structured as a spinoff rather than a sale so that Viacom can avoid paying onerous capital-gains taxes, according to executives at both companies.
Viacom's desire for a tax-free transaction has driven the talks with Tele-Communications from the outset: Congress blocked the companies' previous attempt at a tax-free cable deal in March.


A One-Pot Variation on a Joy of Summer
WHEN it's hot outside, no one wants lots of pots boiling on the stove.
Today's menu can be made in one pot.
Summer's basic potato salad recipe becomes a main dish with the addition of some smoked chicken or, if you prefer, smoked turkey or some leftover grilled chicken or beef.
It is accompanied by corn on the cob, cooked in the same pot as the potatoes.
Potato Salad With Smoked Chicken and Corn on the Cob
16 ounces tiny new potatoes  1 tablespoon rice vinegar  1 tablesooon dry white wine  1 tablespoon olive oil  2 teaspoons Dijon mustard  3 tablespoons plain nonfat yogurt  8 ounces smoked chicken  4 ears corn  1 small red onion to yield 6 tablespoons finely chopped  Fresh sprigs fresh basil to yield  2 tablespoons chopped  2 ounces arugula, about 2 cups  1/8 teaspoon salt, optional  Freshly ground black pepper  2 medium-large ripe tomatoes.
1.
Scrub but do not peel the potatoes.
Cook in water to cover in pot large enough to hold the corn as well.
Cover the pot, and cook the potatoes until they are tender, for 10 to 20 minutes, depending on size.
If you cannot find very small potatoes, cut them up.
2. In serving bowl whisk together vinegar, wine, oil and mustard; stir in yogurt.
3. Cut the chicken into bite-size chunks, and add to dressing.
4. Shuck corn.
5.
Finely chop the onion; wash dry and chop the basil and stir onion and basil into the dressing.
6. Trim the tough stems from the arugula, wash thoroughly and dry.
7.
Two minutes before the potatoes are ready, place a steamer in the pot and add the corn.
8.
When potatoes and corn are cooked, drain them well.
Cut potatoes into quarters or halves.
Combine the potatoes with the dressing, and season with salt, if desired, and pepper.
9.
Wash, trim and cut the tomatoes into thick slices.
Arrange the arugula on a serving plate; top with tomato slices, spoon the potato-chicken salad over tomatoes and serve corn on the side.
Yield: 2 servings.
Approximate nutritional analysis per serving: 665 calories, 13 grams fat, 60 milligrams cholesterol, 1,505 milligrams sodium (before optional salting), 35 grams protein, 105 grams carbohydrate.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.75
8.75
7.25
DISCOUNT RATE
5.25
5.25
3.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
5.75
5.75
4.26
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.44
5.47
4.39
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.42
5.46
4.79
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.40
6.44
7.25
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.82
6.87
7.54
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.70
7.75
8.32
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.19
6.21
6.38
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


China's Wang to Miss Meet
WANG JUNXIA, a world-record holder at 3,000 and 10,000 meters, will not compete in the world track championships next month in Goteborg, Sweden.
The Chinese Athletics Association said yesterday that Wang and her fellow distance runners were not in peak form because of a dispute with their former coach, MA JUNREN. (AP)


BUSINESS DIGEST
Earnings and a Jet Order Push Up Boeing's Stock  Boeing reported better-than-expected earnings for the second quarter and said it had received an order for 54 jets in a deal it valued at $2.25 billion.
The combined news propelled its stock to an all-time high of $67 before closing at $66, up $2.
Excluding a $600 million charge for employee early retirement packages, the company earned $254 million, or 74 cents a share, in the quarter.
With the charge, the company lost $231 million.  [ Page D2. ] Euro Disney Posts a Profit, But Analysts Remain Wary  After nearly three years of heavy losses and a near brush with bankruptcy, Euro Disney announced its first quarterly profit, earning $35.36 million in its third quarter.
But analysts cautioned that the theme park was not past its financial troubles.  [ D3. ] New Signs of Moderate Growth  More signs emerged that the economy is growing moderately without stirring inflation.
Sales of existing homes rose a better-than-expected 6.5 percent in June, the National Association of Realtors said.
"To think you open up and say 'We're in business; send over the national accounts' is incredibly naive," Mr.
Della Femina said.
Stuart Elliott: Advertising.  [ D5. ] Faster Flights Across Pacific  Passengers bound to Asia from North America have been able to shorten their trips across the Pacific by as much as three hours as airlines find ways to cut the flying time.
Edwin McDowell: Business Travel.  [ D4. ]


Where the Milk Program Starts
Milking a cow might not seem to be part of the job description for Mayor of Elizabeth.
But Mayor J. Christian Bollwage will gamely put hand to udder today when a cow and her calf arrive at O'Brien Field from a farm in Andover, in Sussex County, to publicize the city's summer lunch program.
The Federally and state-financed program feeds 1,100 children in the city at a cost of just over $100,000 for the summer.
Mayor Bollwage said some city children would be seeing a cow for the first time.
TERRY PRISTIN


Earnings and Jet Orders Lift Boeing's Stock to Record High
The Boeing Company reported better-than-expected earnings yesterday for the second quarter and said it had received an order for 54 of its 737 jets in a deal it valued at $2.25 billion.
The combined news propelled its stock to an all-time high of $67 before closing at $66, up $2, in trading on the New York Stock Exchange.


Heartbreak, Rockabilly, Honky-Tonk And Blues
Rosie Flores was a spinning wheel of American roots music on Sunday night at the Mercury Lounge, circling from rockabilly to blues to honky-tonk to Tex-Mex and back to rockabilly.
But she spun only one thread: heartbreak.
She shouted about it and wept over it, laughed about it and danced over it in a sturdy, dynamic voice.
In 1987, Ms.
Flores was a contender for country stardom when she released her first album, "Rosie Flores," on Warner Brothers/Reprise Records.
But after conflicts with the label, Ms.
Flores was dropped.
Five years later, she returned on the independent label Hightone as a more original and individual singer and guitarist with a range far beyond that of most country-pop aspirants.
Her fourth album, "Rockabilly Filly," to be released on Hightone on Sept. 15, takes her farther off the Nashville trail and deeper into her roots with collaborations with the rockabilly pioneers Wanda Jackson and Janis Martin.


Imperial Oil Ltd.(IMO,A) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Centerior Energy Corp.(CX,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Giuliani and Board to Share Ideas on Search for Chancellor
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani and the Board of Education have yet to agree on much of anything regarding the search for a new chancellor for New York City's schools, but yesterday they agreed at least to meet to share their ideas on the matter.
The announcement of a meeting, scheduled for Aug. 16, follows weeks of rancor between the Mayor and a majority of the board's members after the resignation of Chancellor Ramon C. Cortines last month.


Required Reading: Grisham, Clancy, Rice and Proust
When summer heats up, the reading list of the average college student splits three ways.
It's a division that reflects struggle among three impulses.
The urge toward enlightenment wrestles with the need to find a job, and both can be pinned to the mat by the swinish desire to wallow in trash.
An informal survey of college bookstores around the country yields a best-seller list that is fraught with contradictions.
Some titles, tony and highbrow, suggest that America's colleges really are coaching the best and the brightest for victory in a highly competitive world economy.
There are others -- many of them, in fact -- that paint a different picture of the college population.


Metropolitan Diary
DEAR DIARY:
The temperature in Central Park had soared to 102 degrees.
Gus the polar bear was sweating it even more than usual.
And then I heard the sounds of the Delacorte Clock playing . . .
"Jingle Bells." The work of a subversive clock master?
The heat didn't seem so unbearable after all.
JONATHAN KUHN
. . .
Hand-lettered cardboard sign seen by Jeffrey C. Loeser in the window of a deli on 18th Avenue in Brooklyn: FROZEN MILKY WAYS  FIRST OF THE SEASON
. . .
Dear Diary:
Riding the bus across 34th Street with me was a family of tourists talking excitedly.
A boy about 8 years old noticed a "No Standing" sign and asked his mother what it meant.
She confidently stated that it meant people were not allowed to stand by it.
Hearing that bit of misinformation, I chirped up that the sign was meant for cars.
Slightly embarrassed, the mother said: "Oh, that's O.K. He believes anything I tell him." SUSANNAH WOODS WEISER
. . .
Scene: A Fifth Avenue bus heading downtown.
Dramatis personae: Two chatty ladies.
Woman No. 1: It really was so romantic.
He said, "I will follow you to the end of the world, until you marry me."
Woman No. 2: What was the end of the world?
Woman one: Yonkers. ERNEST J. NEWMAN
. . .
Dear Diary:
A rather healthy but apparently not-so-virile elderly gentleman strolled into the operating room for correction of his problem.
As the anesthesia resident in the Operating Room that day, I examined his chart as I prepared him for the anesthetic.
According to the pre-operative questionnaire he had filled out, he was in terrific medical shape: he had answered "no" to all of the routine questions.
However, under the section asking patients to "list all current conditions," he had simply scribbled, "In love." MICHAEL LOCKER
. . .
Dear Diary:
The other day we went to see "Apollo 13." After we settled in our seats, a young couple -- apparently on their first or second date -- sat in the row behind us.
The man asked the woman if she was hungry.
"Get some popcorn," she replied.
"What size?"
"It's a three-hour movie; get me a three-hour popcorn."
When the movie was over, after approximately 2 hours and 10 minutes, I wondered if she still had 50 minutes of popcorn left.
JACK HARTOG
. . .
Sign spotted by Lori Vogel in the window of a Greenwich Village restaurant: NOTICE -- CLOSED BY ORDER  OF COMMISSIONER OF HEALTH
Name of the establishment?
"Eat Healthy."
. . .
While Joseph Salderelli was at the grocer's the other afternoon with his wife, he found himself sorting through the corn for perfect ears.
Having found them, he saw from the corner of his eye that a shopping cart had pulled up beside him.
He began to put his corn into the cart, assuming that it was his mate's.
"Excuse me!" the cart driver said.
Mr.
Salderelli looked up and saw an elderly woman about to begin her own search for corn.
"I'm sorry," he said.
"I thought you were my wife." The woman cast a sly glance in his direction.
"You wish," she said.


In Rare Role Reversal, Mother Is Jailed for a Failure to Pay
The marriage went sour.
There was a divorce and custody fight and so much bitterness over child support that one spouse was jailed for not paying it.
What makes this tale unusual is that the person behind bars is a woman.
Denise Brousseau Reisner, a piano teacher from South Salem, N.Y., has been in the Westchester County Jail in Valhalla since July 13 for failing to comply with a court order that she pay support for the care of her four children, who are with her former husband, Murray Reisner of Armonk.


National Media Corp.(NM,N) reports earnings for 1st qtr to Jun 30


Planned Parenthood Provides Many Services
To the Editor:
In your July 22 article on the resignation of Planned Parenthood's president, Pamela Maraldo, you refer to Planned Parenthood affiliates' "role as advocates for abortion rights and low-income women's access to health care." What is missing from this description is our mission to provide women the means to manage their fertility through birth control education and services.


Books: The Cool Summer Refresher
THE heat and humidity mount, and the last thing you want to do is go into the kitchen and light the stove.
Several recently published books might fan your food interests and still keep you cool.
As you sit there, sipping your iced tea, did you ever wonder how our ancestors coped before mechanical refrigeration kept the chill on?


Father Testifies In Penalty Part Of Smith Trial
David Smith's hand trembled so much today that the photograph of his two little boys seemed to vibrate, inches from the faces of the jurors.
Three jurors wept with him as he told them about his 3-year-old's terror of water.
"Michael didn't like water on his face," said Mr.
Smith, who testified against his 23-year-old former wife, Susan Smith, in the penalty phase of her murder trial.
"He would try to climb out of the bathtub" when water splashed onto his face.
Mr.
Smith would have to shield Michael's face with his hand, he said, when he rinsed his hair.


Dynatech Corp.(DYTC,NNM) reports earnings for 1st qtr to Jun 30


London Insurance reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Johnson Takes a Shot at Reeves and the Giants' Coach Fires Back
In 14 years as a National Football League head coach, Dan Reeves has won at least 9 games in 10 of those seasons and at least 10 games eight times.
In the 1980's, he was the only coach to guide an American Football Conference team to back-to-back Super Bowls.
He may be one of the most prepared and diligent coaches in the N.F.L.
That is why so many people around the league think the Giants will win at least 10 games this season despite a difficult first five games.
However, if you believe the comments of the former Dallas Coach Jimmy Johnson, Reeves didn't do such a good job tutoring quarterback Dave Brown last season.


AT LUNCH WITH: Larry Clark; Think You Had a Bad Adolescence?
LARRY CLARK, director of the movie "Kids," a searing look at antisocial teen-agers in lower Manhattan, conceived the film while hanging out with skateboarders around the city.
He did more than observe the scene.
He melded with it, learning to skate himself, to wear his pants tugged low to reveal the waistband of his undershorts, even designing his own skateboard.
Now, he has come to lunch at Barocco in black jeans and a black T-shirt that says "Powell Peralta," a skateboard maker with hip credentials on the street.


U.N. Tribunal Indicts Bosnian Serb Leader and a Commander
The International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia indicted the Bosnian Serb leader, Radovan Karadzic, today on charges of genocide, crimes against humanity and war crimes, a ruling that could complicate efforts to bring peace to the war-torn region.
The tribunal also indicted the commander of the Bosnian Serb military, Gen.
Ratko Mladic, as a war criminal.
The charges against both men include persecuting, shelling, killing and deporting civilians throughout Bosnia and Herzegovina; sniper attacks against civilians in Sarajevo, and taking United Nations peacekeepers hostage and using them as human shields.


No Headline
"Everything I planned is gone, teaching them how to play ball, taking them fishing, teaching them how to ride a bike, watching them go to school on their first day." -- DAVID SMITH, Testifying against his former wife, Susan, who was convicted of killing their two sons.  [ A8:1. ]


Torricelli Reattacks Whitman
United States Representative Robert G. Torricelli, a likely Democratic candidate for Governor in 1997, has gone after Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman for the second time in a week.
Representative Torricelli asked the Federal Treasury Department yesterday to release a letter that was sent to the Governor from the Internal Revenue Service concerning $789 million New Jersey withdrew from state pension funds in 1992 to balance its budget.
Governor Whitman says disclosure might compromise the state's position in the event of a lawsuit.


ACE Ltd.(ACL,N) reports earnings for 3d qtr to Jun 30


INSIDE
No Plan to Call Hillary Clinton
The chairman of the Senate Whitewater panel ruled out calling Hillary Rodham Clinton as a witness unless evidence emerges of her involvement in the handling of the papers of Vincent W. Foster Jr.
Page A14.
A Shift Seen at Amnesty
Current and former Amnesty International officials say the human rights group has become as concerned with responding quickly to a crisis as it once was with preparing unimpeachable reports.
Page A10.
Seizure of County Expected
As the financial crisis in Orange County, Calif., worsens, chances are increasing that the state will seize control of its wealthiest county and force it to pay its debts.
Page D1.


Ally &amp; Gargano Plans Reorganization
After a series of large account losses, Ally &amp; Gargano, the New York agency founded in 1962, said yesterday that it would sell three divisions, dismiss half its employees and reorganize itself as a smaller, retail-oriented agency with a different name.
"It's necessary to reduce our overhead and pay our debts to be able of having any hope to go forward," said Bill Luceno, chairman and chief executive of Ally.
"We're doing what we can." He disputed a report in the Daily Fax edition of Advertising Age that said the agency would close.


Russian State TV Channel Says Let's Make a Deal
When the Russian Government decided to reorganize the vast and unprofitable state television network, the theft and corruption were so pervasive that the network called a four-month moratorium on all commercial advertising.
It was a staggering move that cost the cash-strapped network, Ostankino, tens of millions of dollars.
It was also a blow to advertising wholesalers, independent producers and network employees who were skimming millions of dollars a month.


CHRONICLE
"I guess this is my 15 minutes of fame, and I wish that it were only 5," SHIRLEY HERZ said as she arrived at the Marriott Marquis Hotel Monday evening to be the subject of a roast.
Still, Ms.
Herz, a theatrical publicity agent, laughed as hard as anyone in the audience and managed not to look pained as six roasters poked fun at her age (a closely guarded secret), her fur coat, her blond hair, her temperament, her professional tenacity and her lifelong interest in animals.


A Day of Flags


Defense Witness Says Sheik Never Urged Assassination
Contradicting testimony by the Government's chief informer, a supporter of Sheik Omar Abdel Rahman testified yesterday that the militant Muslim cleric had not urged the informer to murder President Hosni Mubarak of Egypt.
Mr.
Abdel Rahman is on trial in Federal District Court in Manhattan on charges that he led a terrorist conspiracy that included soliciting various people to assassinate the Egyptian leader.
The informer, Emad Salem, testified earlier in the seven-month-old trial that Mr.
Abdel Rahman, during a 13-hour drive from New Jersey to Detroit in 1991, urged him to kill Mr.
Mubarak.


Pulte Corp.(PHM,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


India Deal by Goldman
The investment banking firm Goldman Sachs Group L.P. said yesterday that it would buy a 28 percent stake in the Kotak Mahindra Capital Corporation, an investment banking susidiary being formed by Kotak Mahindra Finance Ltd. of India.
Goldman will also invest in Kotak Securities, an affiliate of Kotak Mahindra that is a member of the Bombay Stock Exchange.
The deal will allow Goldman to increase its stake in Kotak Mahindra Capital to 40 percent within three years.


Tenneco Inc.(TEN,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Avon Products Inc.(AVP,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Aptargroup Inc.(ATR,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Gatx Corp.(GATX,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Cadence Design Systems inc.(CDN,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jul 1


Rise in Nabisco Earnings Is Below Some Estimates
The RJR Nabisco Holdings Corporation reported strong second-quarter growth in its premium cigarette brands and in its international tobacco sales yesterday, although the 15 percent rise in its earnings excluding one-time items was below some Wall Street estimates.
Still, analysts said the company's results were encouraging both domestically and internationally after a troubling first quarter.


A Folklorist Finds the Melting Pot Brimming in Queens
ILANA HARLOW lucked into it.
Like Louis Leakey in the Olduvai Gorge or Margaret Mead in Samoa, Ms.
Harlow has found her challenge: the borough of Queens.
Ms.
Harlow, you see, is a folklorist, and polyglot Queens, it turns out, has more different kinds of folk than any other similar-sized parcel on the planet.
These days, Ms.
Harlow, who obtained her doctorate by collecting tales of banshees and bowlegged corpses in rural Ireland, spends most of her time in the shadow of the No. 7 train, making friends, gaining confidences and gathering material for a visitor's guide she is preparing on the ethnic enclaves that have entrenched themselves along the elevated line of the so-called International Express from Long Island City to Flushing.


Caution Seen in CBS Talks With Westinghouse
Although the chairmen of CBS Inc. and the Westinghouse Electric Corporation continued to "grind away" yesterday at negotiations, as one person close to the talks said, few expected Westinghouse to make a bid for CBS as early as today.
Several people close to the negotiations said the discussions between Laurence A. Tisch, the CBS chairman, and Michael H. Jordan, his counterpart at Westinghouse, were proceeding on track.
But one investment banker who is not involved in the talks said Westinghouse's need to borrow the full $5 billion for a CBS purchase helped explain why the two sides had not yet announced an agreement.


Interpublic Group of Cos.  (IPG,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


War Crimes Tribunal Indicts Serb Leaders
The International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia indicted the Bosnian Serb leader, Radovan Karadzic, for genocide, crimes against humanity and war crimes, a ruling that could complicate efforts to bring peace to the war-torn region.
The tribunal also indicted the commander of the Bosnian Serb military, Gen.
Ratko Mladic, as a war criminal.


Timken Co.(TKR,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Congressional Roundup; Cutting Mass Transit
Urban legislators in the House grumbled today about deep cuts in Federal spending on mass transit, but many voted anyway to approve legislation that would spend $91 million less on transportation in the 1996 fiscal year than is being spent this year.
The vote was 361 to 61, and the bill, providing $38.1 billion for transportation programs, now goes to the Senate.


Former City Aide Guilty Of School Repair Bribery
In the first trial to spring from a sweeping investigation of corruption in the public school maintenance agency, a former New York City official was convicted in Federal court yesterday of bribery and mail fraud for his role in a scheme to inflate bills on a construction project.
The defendant, Henry R. Fulton, was among 19 people indicted last year in what prosecutors called a seedy pattern of malfeasance within the facilities division of the Board of Education, where architects, engineers and contractors bribed school officials to get contracts, approve fake invoices and expedite payments to construction companies.


ACX Technologies Inc.(ACXT,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Mets Back In Familiar Territory: The Cellar
At times it looked like a game that neither team wanted to end.
It started as a slugfest and turned into a pitching duel.
Momentum turned as quickly as a plastic bag in the wind.
The Mets belted four home runs in a game for the first time in 363 days.
The Cardinals countered with a pair of homers by Brian Jordan.
The Mets blew three different leads, the Cardinals blew two.


Cooper Industries(CBE,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Laurence Wylie, 85, Scholar And Seeker of the French Soul
Laurence Wylie, an authority on French language and culture who spent decades in pursuit of the essence of the French soul, died yesterday at his home in Cambridge, Mass.
He was 85.
Dr.
Wylie retired in 1980 after 21 years as the C. Douglas Dillon Professor of the Civilization of France at Harvard University.
Earlier he taught at Haverford College in Pennsylvania.


Avery Dennison Corp.(AVY,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jul 1


Devon Group Inc.(DEVN,NNM) reports earnings for 1st qtr to Jun 30


Strawberry and Yanks Still Stuck on Seesaw
Darryl Strawberry was still not a Yankee tonight, and a day filled with intense negotiations failed to clarify when and if he might join them.
Although people involved in the negotiations said during the day that they were getting closer to resolving the dispute over contract language, the talks ended this evening still facing obstacles.


Off South Korea, a Tanker Spills Its Oil


Pataki Signs Sex-Crime Bill Modeled on 'Megan's Law'
Gov.
George E. Pataki signed legislation today that will require convicted sex offenders to notify the state about where they are living long after they are released from prison.
The legislation, modeled roughly after New Jersey's "Megan's Law," will also make detailed information about convicted sex offenders available to the public through a "900" telephone number and will authorize police departments to disseminate information on violent sexual felons to their communities.


California Action to Benefit Minority Students; A Proud Recipient
To the Editor:
I was saddened to learn that the Regents of the University of California have voted to abolish affirmative action (front page, July 21).


How We Keep Shakespeare in the Park Free
To the Editor:
Re Theodore F. Brandi's letter ("Free Shakespeare? Well, Not Exactly," July 21):


Bad Advice for Arafat
To the Editor:
Thomas Friedman's column ("Muffled Militants," July 19) on the Islamic fundamentalist challenge cites the new Palestinian state as an example of "secular authorities" improving living conditions because Yasir Arafat "today has 60,000 people on his payroll in Gaza," thus providing employment and weakening the ability of Hamas to recruit.


U.S. Petroleum Data
In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
Jul 21
Jul 14
Jul 22
1995
1995
1994
Gasoline production, daily
7.8
7.8
7.2
Distillate production, daily
3.0
3.2
3.5
Gasoline stocks
207.8
208.2
212.3
Distillate stocks
120.0
121.6
126.4
Crude imports, daily
6.7
8.1
7.4
Product imports, daily
1.7
1.9
3.0
Crude stocks
310.4
317.6
332.0
Crude production, daily
6.5
6.5
6.5
Refinery utilization (%)
94.1
95.1
94.8
Source: American Petroleum Institute


Brunswick Corp.(BC,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Sperm Bank Gets a Temporary Reprieve
A sperm and blood bank that had been ordered by the New York State Health Department to close its doors by the end of business yesterday has won a temporary reprieve allowing it to keep operating until a panel of State Court of Appeals judges can hear more arguments in the case.
Judge Betty Weinberg Ellerin of the State Court of Appeals on Monday granted a request by the Daxor Corporation; its president, Dr.
Joseph Feldschuh, and several subsidiary companies that temporarily put on hold an order that the Health Department issued last week demanding that they cease operations.


CDI Corp.(CDI,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


First American Financial (FAF,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Drama on a Scaffold High Above 3d Ave.
Two repairmen became the center of a life-and-death drama high above Manhattan yesterday when a fierce gust of wind smashed their scaffold through a window.
One man crawled through a broken window to the 22d floor, but the second dangled from a safety rope 20 floors above the sidewalk until a lawyer in the building, at 919 Third Avenue near 56th Street, rescued him.
"He crashed against the window a couple of times," said David Rosenthal, a lawyer at Shereff, Friedman, Hoffman &amp; Goodman.
As the man, Antonio Hernandez, 27, swayed back and forth, Mr.
Rosenthal looked for a chair to throw through the window, but decided he needed a heavier object.
He fetched a hammer and hit the window a few times.


Cabot Corp.(CBT,N) reports earnings for 3d qtr to Jun 30


Royal Caribbean Cruises Ltd.(RCL,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Liberties; Alfonse Unplugged
There is little point trying to be Henry Clay in a Congress that includes Sonny Bono.
Al D'Amato knows that.


Susan M. Swap, 50, Educator Who Focused on Parental Roles
Susan McAllister Swap, an educator and writer who focused on involving parents in their children's schools, died last Thursday at her home in Winchester, Mass.
She was 50.
The cause was brain cancer, her family said.


Financier Gets a Casino License
Ronald O. Perelman, one of the wealthiest men in the country, moved a step closer yesterday to getting into the gambling business.
The state Casino Control Commission decided unanimously that Mr.
Perelman was qualified to obtain a casino license.
He declined to specify what he might buy.


Mindless Murder in Israel
Suicide bombers struck again in Israel this week, killing five Israelis on a suburban Tel Aviv bus and abruptly ending a three-month respite from large-scale terrorism.
The first reaction must be revulsion and outrage.
There can be no getting used to the scenes of innocent people horribly mangled, their bodies soaked in blood.
There can be no adequate answer to the grief and anger of their relatives and friends.
But there can be some consolation in the indications that Islamic terrorists are losing ground in their efforts to block a compromise peace between Israel and the Palestine Liberation Organization.
In important ways, the tide is turning against these enemies of peace.


Lakehead PipeLine Partners L.P. (LHP,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Plea Bargain in Child's Killing
The Monmouth County man who kidnapped and killed Amanda Wengert, 6, will spend at least 55 years in prison under a surprise plea agreement approved yesterday in Superior Court, The Associated Press reported.


San Diego Gas &amp; Electric Co.(SDG,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Mets Have That Old Sinking Feeling
It was a 10-game road trip that figured to test the Mets' mental and physical character; an exhausting journey that carried them through five stops, three cities and two time zones.
When it began with three straight victories, there was a growing confidence that they had turned the corner and their best days were still ahead.
That feeling is gone.
The Mets are the Mets again, compiling defeat after defeat.
They lost their fifth straight game over all and their second extra-inning affair to the St.
Louis Cardinals in as many days today.
Relievers Doug Henry and Eric Gunderson combined on a pitiful performance that turned a hard-earned one-run lead in the 11th inning to a heart-wrenching 3-2 defeat.


Wilmington Trust Corp.(WILM,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Ionics Inc.(ION,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Downey Financial (DSL,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Where to Find It
AS recently as the 1980's, shutters were almost ignored as window treatments.
More rickety than polished wood venetian blinds, less glamorous than billowy Roman shades and not nearly so theatrical as ruched silk curtains, shutters seemed to turn up mainly in dusty old brownstones and country houses in need of a face lift.
But in the lean, clean 90's, an era of sleek architectural interiors, shutters have become a window dressing of choice, for everything from vast expanses of glass to small bathroom windows.


DAVIDIANS' OFFER WAS SEEN AS RUSE
Two F.B.I. officials testified today that because they had viewed the Branch Davidian leader's final proposal for surrender as an empty delaying tactic, they had rejected it without consulting with the Justice Department.
The officials, testifying on the sixth day of House hearings on the Government's siege of the sect's compound, near Waco, Tex., also said they had gone forward with plans for the tear-gas operation that ended a 51-day standoff there without warning the Davidians that Federal agents had given up on negotiations.
The first warning came as tanks carrying the gas began rumbling toward the compound.


Keane Inc.(KEA,A) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Brooklyn Union Gas (BU,N) reports earnings for 3d qtr to Jun 30


Newmont Gold Co.(NGC,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Canadian Occidental Petroleum Corp.(CXY,A) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Galey &amp; Lord Inc.(GNL,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jul 1


Blame the U.S. Consumer for Latin Sweatshops
To the Editor:
Bob Herbert, in his heart-wrenching columns (July 21 and 24) on the hapless Central American maquiladoras who produce our cheap clothes, shoots at the wrong target.
The culprit is not the ruthless capitalist who pays low wages, but the ruthless American consumer who would quickly punish more benign, high-cost producers.


Clark Tells of Collision's Ordeal
DAVE CLARK, injured in a scary crash with his Pittsburgh Pirates teammate JACOB BRUMFIELD, says he blacked out before his head rammed violently into the outfield wall.
Clark broke his left collarbone, badly loosened a tooth and sustained various cuts as he and Brumfield slammed into each other at full speed while chasing a fly ball Tuesday against Atlanta.


3 in World Trade Bombing Seek New Trial
Three of the four men convicted last year in the bombing of the World Trade Center argued in court yesterday that they had uncovered strong new evidence that would have changed the outcome of the trial.
But the trial judge immediately rejected their arguments, saying that the evidence was not new and was available to the original defense team.
Instead, the judge, Kevin Thomas Duffy of Federal District Court in Manhattan, said he would hold a hearing to determine whether the defendants' original lawyers were incompetent since they did not introduce the evidence at the trial.
"I'm telling you right now," Judge Duffy told the men's new lawyers, "I don't see anything new."


Pilots of All Ages Undergo Medical Testing
To the Editor:
Re "Elderly Pilots, Too, Need More Stringent Testing" (letter, July 19): Aircraft pilots of all ages undergo rigorous, regular medical testing during their flying careers to keep their licenses valid.
The least frequent is every three years, with airline pilots tested every six months.
This has kept the most handicapped specimens out of the pilot's seat.


Great Financial (GTFN,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Gaylord ContainerCorp.(GCR,A) reports earnings for 3d qtr to Jun 30


CHRONICLE
Oh, that unpredictable RICHARD GERE.
He said at a news conference in Moscow yesterday that he had been arrested in Russia last weekend during a fishing expedition, The Associated Press reported.


Money Store Inc.(MONE,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Tecumseh Products Co.(TECUA,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


A Best-Seller Plot Is Said to Be Charged
The authors of a book on successful business practices are reportedly being accused of manipulating their book onto best-seller lists across the country.
The book is "The Discipline of Market Leaders," written by Michael Treacy and Fred Wiersema and published by Addison-Wesley, a publisher of business and educational books based in Reading, Mass.


Tower Air Inc.(TOWR,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Ethereal Phrases on a Gritty Plain
Like some perverse mirage at the New York Philharmonic concert in Central Park on Tuesday evening, the image of Tanglewood kept bobbing to mind: listeners casually sprawled, perhaps picnicking, on an elegant, manicured lawn.
The Great Lawn of the park, in contrast, looked like a war zone, evidently denuded by the Disney screenings of "Pocahontas" last month.
Dirt loomed as far as the eye could see; if any scraps of grass remained, they must have been under the blankets of early arrivals.
Yet here, hunkering in the grit and sweltering in beastly heat and humidity, were 50,000 New Yorkers, by official estimates, some of them actually listening to the music.
An un likelier setting for the ethereal strains of Richard Strauss's "Rosenkavalier" could hardly be imagined.


Airgas Inc.(ARG,N) reports earnings for 1st qtr to Jun 30


For Used Cars, a Leap to a Fashion Pedestal
Like the devil at their shoulders, Automobile magazine inflames Americans' passion for cars and trucks each month, rolling out the sweetest new things that Detroit, Tokyo and company have to offer -- and, incidentally, making that Taurus in the garage seem dowdier than ever.
"Sell Your Soul!" the magazine urged on its May cover, tempting readers to buy a 402-horsepower, four-wheel-drive Porsche 911 Turbo.


Northern States Power Co.(NSP,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.75
8.75
7.25
DISCOUNT RATE
5.25
5.25
3.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
5.75
5.73
4.28
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.44
5.44
4.43
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.41
5.42
4.84
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.45
6.40
7.33
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.88
6.82
7.61
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.75
7.70
8.39
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.19
6.19
6.39
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Pay-Per-View Rivals Spar Over Two Heavyweight Bouts
Torrential rains obliterated HBO's plan to use Bryant Park in Manhattan yesterday to hype the third Evander Holyfield-Riddick Bowe bout on Nov. 4.
The soaked presentation ended abruptly with Rock Newman, Bowe's promoter, speaking into a microphone in a lightning storm.
But even while Holyfield and Bowe, now indoors, vowed to stage a memorable third fight, HBO remained a central character in an escalating scheduling controversy.
Holyfield-Bowe III is set to air on TVKO, HBO's pay-per-view unit, directly against the Mike Tyson-Brand X fight on Showtime's S.E.T. pay-per-view.


F.C.C. Set to Give Murdoch Waiver in Ownership Case
The Federal Communications Commission is about to give Rupert Murdoch's News Corporation an exemption from the commission's foreign ownership restrictions, a move that will formally end a two-year legal battle over the television stations at the heart of the company's Fox television network.
The decision, to be approved by the commission on Friday, will eliminate the one remaining uncertainty about the ability of the Australia-based News Corporation to retain control of the 12 stations that it owns or is in the process of acquiring.


M.D.C. Holdings (MDC,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  *
Case Corp., Racine, Wis., is selling $300 million of notes due in 2005 through CS First Boston Corp.
The notes are priced at 99.23 to yield 7.36 percent.
The noncallable issue is rated Baa3 by Moody's Investors Service Inc. and BBB- by the Standard &amp; Poor's Corp.


Riesenberg Just Says No, Then Carries On
There is a certain serenity to Giants offensive tackle Doug Riesenberg that makes him seem like a stranger in a strange land.
It is as if he knows the plan and no one else does.
He is not arrogant.
Not by a long shot.
But he possesses a calmness and confidence that seems out of place in a sport in which careers are short and lives can change in an instant.


Acuson Corp.(ACN,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Bank South Corp.(BKSO,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Comdata Holdings Corp.(CMDT,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Good Guys Inc.(GGUY,NNM) reports earnings for 3d qtr to Jun 30


Sovereign Bancorp Inc.(SVRN,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


INSIDE
Deal on Tobacco
Two Congressmen have proposed a plan that they say could curtail teen-age smoking without additional Federal regulation of tobacco.
Page A16.
U.S.
Shuns Trade Pact
Japan and South Korea agreed to join a global pact to liberalize trade in financial services, allowing it to go into effect without the U.S.
Page D1.
Sex Zoning Plan Under Fire
Across the city emotions are flaring over a zoning plan for X-rated shops that some fear only moves the problem to their own backyard.
Page B1.
Germless in Japan
The obsession with cleaniness is such that pens and pencils are now impregnated with an antiseptic chemical to kill bacteria.
Page A4.
George Romney Dies
The automobile executive who became Governor of Michigan, a Republican Presidential candidate and a Nixon Cabinet member, died at the age of 88.
Page D22.


Sports of The Times; Kotite Doesn't Tiptoe
WHEN someone on the Jets' defense jumped offside, Rich Kotite let him know it.
"The ball's right in front of you," the new head coach barked. "Let's go. Let's go."


U.N. Eases Way For Air Strikes
In a move that gives NATO a streamlined chain of command for more decisive action in Bosnia, Secretary General Boutros Boutros-Ghali agreed yesterday to turn over his authority to veto or approve NATO air attacks to United Nations commanders in the field.
The move appeared to ease the way for large-scale attacks on the Bosnian Serbs if they threaten the enclave of Gorazde, where the West has declared it will make a stand against Serbian aggression.
Article, page A8.


Coast Savings Financial Inc.(CSA,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Packwood's Legal Fund Shows Sharp Decline in Contributions
As pressure builds for public hearings on his case, contributions to Senator Bob Packwood's legal defense fund have dropped dramatically since the Senate Select Committee on Ethics determined in May that there was "substantial credible evidence" to support allegations of sexual and official misconduct against him.
From January 1993, when he started the defense fund, to last month, Senator Packwood, an Oregon Republican, collected $636,000, according to official records on file with the Senate.
In the 10 reporting quarters in that time, Mr.
Packwood collected a high of $157,700 from April to June 1993, and a low of $15,500 in the most recent reporting period, from last April to June.


BayBanks Inc.(BBNK,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


N.B.A. Players To Vote on Union's Future
The National Labor Relations Board yesterday authorized a vote on decertification of the National Basketball Association union, creating an intriguing choice for Commissioner David Stern.
Daniel Silverman, director of the board's New York office, ruled that players who were on N.B.A. rosters last season will be eligible to vote in the election, which will be conducted at board offices throughout the country around the end of August or beginning of September.


Sunbeam Corp.(SOC,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jul 2


Intertape Polymer Group (ITP,A) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


American Bankers Insurance Group Inc.(ABIG,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


DEFIANT SENATORS VOTE TO OVERRIDE BOSNIAN ARMS BAN
In a repudiation of President Clinton's policy on Bosnia, the Senate voted by a wide margin today to abandon American participation in the United Nations arms embargo against the war-ravaged nation.
The 69-29 vote came despite an intense lobbying campaign by the Administration that included visits to Capitol Hill by Cabinet members and last-minute telephone calls by Mr.
Clinton to wavering Democrats.
And it signaled the growing impotence and frustration of both Democrats and Republicans in the face of the brutal Bosnian Serb military attacks on United Nations-designated "safe areas."


Plan to Change Sex Zoning Rules Draws Vocal Opposition
In a stifling-hot junior high school in the Bay Ridge section of Brooklyn on Tuesday night, more than 400 neighborhood residents jammed into the auditorium to complain, often with fervor and passion, about the Giuliani administration's plan to impose strict zoning regulations on sex-related businesses.
To this crowd, brought together by City Councilman Sal F. Albanese, the proposal was an open threat to their neighborhood.


Allied Products Corp.(ADP,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Cortines Orders Cuts in District Offices
Schools Chancellor Ramon C. Cortines yesterday ordered local districts to cut administrative staffs before he allows them to increase class sizes or shorten school days.
Last week, the central board approved a plan to close a $250 million budget gap that gives superintendents the flexibility, with the Chancellor's approval, to increase class sizes in the first, second and third grades, to 27 from 25, and to shorten instruction time, to 26 hours a week from 27 1/2.


Storage Technology Corp.(STK,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Southern Co.(SO,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


No Headline
"'Sh-Boom' was a song about what could possibly be -- that if we gave a little effort life wouldn't be so hard. That's why we don't want the music to die. If it does, we lose that innocence we had as teen-agers before we learned about war, politics and all that stuff." SAMMY FAIN, at a wake for Jimmy Keyes, co-author of the doo-wop classic.  [ A1:2. ]


Coastal Bancorp Inc. reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Smith Defense Portrays a Life of 'Chaos'
Up to the point when Susan Smith drowned her two sons, Michael and Alex, she was, by all accounts, a perfect mother.
"I never saw Susan even spank Michael or Alex," her brother, Scotty Vaughan, testified today as the defense began its case in the sentencing phase of Mrs.
Smith's murder trial.
"I never saw Susan lose her temper with Michael and Alex."


Shuttle Safety Studied as O-Ring Concerns Resurface
The discovery of heat damage on a critical seal in rocket boosters for the last two space shuttle launchings has evoked somber memories of the Challenger explosion and will force space officials to decide soon whether it is safe to continue shuttle flights without change or whether they should be suspended for modifications.
The National Aeronautics and Space Administration said yesterday that post-flight analysis revealed that hot gas from burning rocket fuel left small singe marks on an O-ring seal on one of the two solid-fuel boosters used to launch the shuttle Discovery on July 13.


Corrections
A picture caption in The Living Section on July 19 with the Nation's Table column, about a man tending bar at the Flying Saucer Beer Emporium in Fort Worth, misstated his surname in some editions.
He was Shannon Daniels; the beer hall's owner is Shannon Wynne.


Deadly Current Takes 2 Lives Off Rockaway
On sultry summer nights, the urge to cool off in the waters off Rockaway Beach in Queens sometimes seems stronger than the undercurrents that pull dangerously at swimmers' legs.
In the ocean waves off the 97th Street boardwalk, a spot known for its riptides and crowded beaches, the urge twice proved deadly this week.


Total Petroleum (North America) Ltd.(TPN,A) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Disastrous Life of a Pioneer in Hype
FIREBRAND The Life of Horace Liveright  By Tom Dardis  Illustrated. 394 pages.
Random House. $27.50.


Gingrich Plays The Dealmaker On Budget Bills
Fearful that his majority might desert him on upcoming floor votes on two of the most important spending bills in the House, Speaker Newt Gingrich today struck deals with three discontented factions: moderates, conservatives and petulant freshmen.
Freshman Republicans and conservative Democrats who sought to hold his feet to the fire on balancing the budget won public agreement from Mr.
Gingrich to support a so-called "lock box" amendment to the bill that finances the Departments of Education, Labor and Health and Human Services, the largest of the 13 appropriations bills.
The provision is intended to insure that savings from future spending cuts would be used to reduce the Federal deficit, thus putting into law the promise of the budget resolution agreed to by the House and Senate earlier this year.


Maxicare Health Plans Inc.(MAXI,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Ohio Casualty Corp.(OCAS,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


CHRONICLE
JAMES A. LOVELL Jr., the commander of the nearly catastrophic Apollo 13 lunar mission in 1970, went to the White House yesterday, where President Clinton presented him the Congressional Space Medal of Honor.
Whom did he take along, besides his wife, Marilyn?
TOM HANKS, his cinematic alter ego.
The President took note of Mr.
Hanks, who plays Mr.
Lovell in the movie "Apollo 13," and Mr.
Hanks's son Colin, saying, "They're here not only because of Apollo 13, but because when they make the sequel to 'Forrest Gump,' he won't have to have a computer-generated President." In that movie, Mr.
Hanks, as the title character, is shown chatting with President John F. Kennedy.


A Special Birthday, As Baby Makes 3
For Susan and Martin Koos of College Point, Queens, July 26 has always been special.
Today, it became a little more so.
Mr. and Mrs.
Koos were both born on July 26, and they spent today in the delivery suite at Long Island Jewish Hospital as Mrs.
Koos gave birth to their daughter, Jacqueline.


Tenet Healthcare Corp.(THC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Breaking a Tradition on Leonardo
William H. Gates may be the richest person in America, and he certainly is the king of personal computers, but this 39-year-old chairman of Microsoft shies away from the sound of his own name.
This week he decided to break with tradition by not naming the Leonardo da Vinci notebook he bought at Christie's in November for $30.8 million after himself.
Instead of the Codex Gates, he is calling the 72-page manuscript the Codex Leicester, the name it had for 263 years until Armand Hammer bought it in 1980.


Angels Sign the No. 1 Pick
Major league baseball's No. 1 draft pick, DARIN ERSTAD of the University of Nebraska, signed a contract with the California Angels yesterday.
Erstad, an outfielder who batted .410 in the 1995 college season with 19 home runs and 76 r.b.i. in 58 games, also was the punter for Nebraska's 1994 national championship football team, with one year of eligibility remaining.


A Doo-Wop Dream Lives, Even in Death
A hit parade of doo-wop dignitaries streamed up to Jimmy Keyes's coffin Tuesday night, gray-haired but still sharp in their shades, Ban-Lon shirts and white patent leather shoes.
It was time to dedicate a special request.
"If we don't sing 'Sh-Boom,' " said Arthur Crier, a onetime member of the Chimes, "he'll come out of there!"


Noranda Inc. reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Capital American Financial Corp. reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Baruch Korff, 81, Rabbi and Defender of Nixon
Rabbi Baruch M. Korff, a confidant of President Richard M. Nixon who was a loquacious defender of him in the Watergate scandal, died yesterday at his home in Providence, R.I.
He was 81.
The cause was pancreatic cancer, said his daughter Zamira Korff.


Glendale Federal Bank (GLN,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Jun 30


Investors' Appetites Still Strong For High-Growth Equity Funds
Mutual fund investors have continued to show a voracious appetite for the most aggressive category of stock funds this month, pausing only briefly to digest last week's market turmoil before continuing to buy, fund companies said yesterday.
This month's heavy buying extended a torrid pace set in June, when more money flowed into aggressive growth equity funds than in any month since January 1994 -- the same month that the Dow Jones industrial average hit its high for the year.


Norfolk Southern Corp.(NSC,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Envirosource Inc.(ENSO,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Comptroller Blocks Water System's Sale, and City Hall Plans Suit
City Comptroller Alan G. Hevesi announced his final plans yesterday to block the proposed sale of the city water system, and within a few hours, the Giuliani administration angrily accused him of playing politics and said it would sue him to force his approval of the sale.
With that, for the first time the deeply contentious issue of the future of New York's water system erupted into open hostilities between City Hall and the Comptroller's office.
It raised the specter of the third major legal confrontation the Republican administration has had about the scope of its powers over other major elected institutions still dominated by Democrats.


Firstar Corp.(FSR,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Domestic Abuse Law Deserves Praise
To the Editor:
"Bad Problem, Wrong Solution" (Op-Ed, July 25) by Anita K. Blair misrepresents the state and Federal legal issues addressed by the 1994 Violence Against Women Act.


S.A.T. Remains Predictor of College Success
To the Editor:
Re "Dump the S.A.T." (letter, July 14): I concur with John K. Wilson's praise for all efforts to increase academic standards, within the National Collegiate Athletic Association and anywhere else.


Western Atlas Inc.(WAI,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Angels on Broadway


BC Telecom reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Currents; Chairs That Seem to Defy Gravity


Bridge
A curtain-raiser to the American Contract Bridge League's Summer Nationals, which begin tomorrow in New Orleans, is the playoffs in the Grand National Teams.
This began at the grass-roots level in 25 districts nine months ago, and each has sent its champion team to New Orleans.
A year ago, for the first time in the event's 22-year history, a New York City team won the title.
The same team, led by Jim Cayne of Manhattan, lost the district final 12 weeks ago by 45 imps.
The winners, who got themselves organized a few hours before the start, were Brian Glubok, Jim Rosenbloom, Mike Radin, all of Manhattan, and Fred Chang of Flushing, Queens.
For the playoffs, the Glubok foursome has recruited Zia Mahmood of Manhattan and Sam Lev of Forest Hills.


Libbey Inc.(LBY,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Albemarle Corp.(ALB,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


English Gardeners; A Cotswolds Refuge That Keeps the World at Bay
IT'S easy to get lost in the seven-acre garden at Westwell Manor, which unfolds from the doors of the 16th-century stone house in a maze of paths and hidden spaces, walled off from the outside world by stone and high hedges.
You might start out through the rose garden and end up in an orchard filmy with waist-high white cow parsley, or a round garden planted to catch the moonlight, wondering how you got there.
It has the richly textured effect of distinct rooms in a dream, in which you can't remember whether you took a right turn or a left.
An occasional gate or window in a hedge lets one peep out at the world.
But the overall feeling is of a world turning back upon itself.
These walls and enclosures hark back to medieval times, when the garden was a refuge, a place to escape the horrors of war and plague.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-13  SENATE VOTES TO DROP BOSNIA BAN  In a repudiation of President Clinton's policy on Bosnia, the Senate voted by a wide margin to abandon the arms embargo against the war-ravaged nation.
A1  U.N.
EASES WAY FOR AIR ATTACKS  Secretary General Boutros Boutros-Ghali agreed to turn over authority to veto or approve NATO air attacks in Bosnia to his commanders in the field, easing the way for attacks on the Bosnian Serbs.
A8  SERBS PRESS BOSNIA REGION  Serbian forces and a rebel Muslim faction pressed their attack on the isolated Bihac region, sending an estimated 8,000 refugees fleeing toward the town of Bihac itself, a U.N.-designated "safe area." A9  TOLL IN PARIS BOMBING AT 7  The death toll from the bombing in a Paris commuter train rose to seven.
The police said that many people had claimed responsibility for the attack, but that they had no reason to believe any of them.
A3  SOUTH AFRICAN ELECTIONS DELAYED
South African officials said that efforts to hold the country's first local elections had become so bogged down in political wrangling and logistical difficulties that many would have to be postponed.
A6  UNCERTAINTY IN GUATEMALA CASE  Senior C.I.A. officials said they were still unsure how deeply a Guatemalan colonel on the agency's payroll was involved in the deaths of an American innkeeper and a Guatemalan guerrilla.
A10  A newspaper is ordered to pay $678,000 in a Singapore lawsuit.
A5  Investigators are said to fault Radio Marti's director.
A10  Tokyo Journal: New line of products for those who fear germs.
A4  National A14-21,A24  FAT HORMONE IS FOUND  Researchers have discovered a hormone that makes animals rapidly lose body fat.
A1  KORESH PLAN IS CALLED PLOY  F.B.I. officials told members of Congress that they rejected David Koresh's final proposal for surrender without consulting with their superiors because they viewed it as an empty delaying tactic.
A1  DISPUTE ON WHITE HOUSE FILES  A Secret Service officer told the Senate Whitewater panel that he saw Hillary Rodham Clinton's top aide remove files from Vincent W. Foster Jr.'s office.
But the aide vehemently denied it.
A1  GINGRICH STRIKES DEALS  Fearful that his majority might desert him on two spending bills in the House, Speaker Newt Gingrich struck deals with three discontented factions -- moderates, conservatives and petulant freshmen.
A1  GETTING FILM MAKERS TO PAY  In California areas popular for filming, residents are sometimes making thousands of dollars from movie crews by promising to vacate outdoor sets, reduce noise or otherwise stop harassing them.
A14  JAIL FOR A RELUCTANT WITNESS  A woman who refused to tell a court about her relationship with Representative Mel Reynolds was held in contempt and jailed.
A14  SEEKING COMPROMISE ON TOBACCO  Two Congressmen proposed a plan they say could curtail teenage smoking without additional Federal regulation of tobacco.
A16  GAP FOR HISPANIC GRADUATES  The Census Bureau reported that the gap between the percentage of Hispanics and the percentage of non-Hispanics earning a college degree was widening.
A18  DONATIONS TO PACKWOOD DECLINE  Contributions to Senator Bob Packwood's legal defense fund have dropped sharply since a Senate panel determined that there was "substantial" evidence to support accusations against him.
A19  WITNESS FOR SIMPSON ACCUSED  Lawyers for O.J.
Simpson accused one of their own witnesses, an F.B.I. agent, of making his testimony more pro-prosecutorial after huddling with Marcia Clark.
A24  Metro Digest B1  SERENADE FOR JIMMY KEYES  Jimmy Keyes helped write the song that in 1954 made his group, the Chords, the first black group to crack the Top 10.
At his funeral on Tuesday, a hit parade of doo-wop dignitaries brought the tune, "Sh-Boom," back to life.
A1  IN HEAT, POWER USAGE HITS RECORD  The heat and fierce humidity that have made it feel like over 100 degrees for several days caused power consumption to approach record levels, and the heat wave showed no sign of abating.
A1  Business Digest D1  Arts/Entertainment C9-16  Robert De Niro and Al Pacino are starring together.
C9  William H. Gates buys and renames a Leonardo notebook.
C14  Two authors are scrutinized over their book's high sales.
C16  Music: Mostly Mozart.
C9  The Pop Life.
C13  New York Philharmonic in Central Park.
C12  Dance: "Degga." C9  Books: A biography of Horace Liveright, the publisher.
C16  Television: "Hiroshima: Why the Bomb Was Dropped." C14  The Home Section C1-8  Sports B6-11  Obituaries D22-23  Editorials/Op-Ed A22-23  Editorials  Let Bosnia defend itself.
Global grass-roots banking.
Mindless murder in Israel.
Letters  William Safire: Clinton abdicates as leader.
Maureen Dowd: Alfonse unplugged.
Catherine A. Abate: It isn't too late to fight the Nynex monopoly.
Francis Vicino: Tangling with the E.P.A.
Chronicle D24 Bridge C13 Crossword C16


A Newspaper Battle Looms in San Diego Suburbs
What appears at first glance to be just another suburban newspaper merger could pose a considerable threat to this city's dominant paper, The San Diego Union-Tribune, by escalating a battle for readers and advertisers in the fastest-growing area of San Diego County.
The Tribune Company of Chicago said recently that it planned to sell its remaining newspaper holdings in Southern California to South Coast Newspapers Inc., a unit of Howard Publications, a privately held company based in Oceanside, Calif., that owns 18 newspapers in 12 states.


FirsTier Financial Inc.(FRST,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


200 Years of House, 17 Years of Renovation
IN a splendid music room washed in moonlight from 10 grand and bull's-eye windows, under ceilings that soar to 15 feet, in this tidbit of early American history on a ridge overlooking the Potomac, guests sang "Happy Birthday" to John Dreyfuss.
But for Mr.
Dreyfuss, a 45-year-old Washington sculptor, it was just as much a celebration of the mansion that he has spent more than one-third of his life renovating.
The mansion, a 1783 Georgian jewel with a romantic and eccentric history, has for 17 years been a fascinating work in process for Mr.
Dreyfuss -- and has even longer held the fancy of Georgetowners.


It Isn't Too Late to Fight the Nynex Monopoly
On Friday, New York's Public Service Commission will approve a seven-year Nynex telephone rate and service plan.
The agreement, shaped in part by the company, will slightly lower telephone rates for consumers while allowing Nynex to keep excess revenues and pour profits into new communications services.
It is part of a sensible trend toward further deregulation of the Baby Bells.
But unless the commission monitors Nynex's performance and is willing to adjust the plan for changes in the market, the agreement is likely to hurt consumers and thwart competition.


Toru Kumon, Innovator, 81, In Math Studies
Toru Kumon, who was so dismayed when his 8-year-old son had trouble with second-grade math that he developed a streamlined teaching method now used by more than 2 million students in 29 countries, died on Tuesday at a hospital near his home in Osaka, Japan.
He was 81.
Mr.
Kumon was a high school math teacher in 1954 when his son Takeshi came home with a poor report card in arithmetic.
Prodded by his wife, he reviewed the child's textbook and was so appalled by what he found that he devised a back-to-basics home study program in which his son was required to complete one page of problems a day, progressing to a slightly higher level the next day.


Death Upheld for Contract Killer
The State Supreme Court ruled yesterday that carrying out the death penalty for a convicted murderer-for-hire would not be unfair because others had been executed for similar crimes.
The killer, Anthony DiFrisco, was convicted of the 1986 murder of the owner of a Maplewood pizzeria.


CCB Financial (CCBF,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Mihail H. Botez, 54, Envoy and Futurist
Mihail Horia Botez, Romania's Ambassador to Washington, its representative at the United Nations and an internationally known mathematician and futurist, died on July 11 at a hospital in Bucharest, the embassy confirmed this week.
He was 54.
The cause was internal hemorrhaging, the embassy said.


BCE Inc.(BCE,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Madame Chiang Kai-shek Returns to Congress


Loblaw Cos. reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 17


Corrections
An article on Tuesday about the trial of Susan Smith for the murder of her two sons, and six earlier articles on the subject, misstated provisions of South Carolina's death penalty law.
Under a change this month, if Mrs.
Smith receives a death sentence, she will be allowed to choose lethal injection or electrocution.
Electrocution is no longer the only method.


Morningstar Group Inc. reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Lawyer Is Charged in a Deadly Extortion Scheme
Gary Friedman, a criminal defense lawyer in Queens, never had much of a caseload.
This appears not to have been a great inconvenience, however, because prosecutors say he had three aliases and another, more lucrative source of revenue: extortion.
And Mr. Friedman's extortion practice, they said, led to murder.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an obituary on July 21 about Princess Sangwal Mahidol, the mother of the King of Thailand, listed her children incorrectly.
She had two sons and a daughter, not two daughters and a son.
The article also referred incorrectly to her late husband, Prince Mahidol of Songkhla.
He was King Chulalongkorn's youngest son by Queen Sawang -- one of three consorts carrying the title Queen -- but not the youngest son among 76 children fathered by the King.


INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS: 'A Wall in the Mind'; Rising Resentment in the East Divides Germany
The concrete-block factory sits abandoned on the outskirts of this eastern German town.
Inside, one of the most modern machines for making circuit boards for computers and televisions lies idle.
The company that owned the plant was sold by the Government to a subsidiary of Veba A.G., a utility giant in western Germany.
Veba already controlled two companies in the west making similar products, and it closed the plant here, saying it was losing money.
The circuit-board machine is now for sale to anyone who will take it out of Germany, so that it does not compete with Veba.


Sterling Chemcials Inc.(STX,N) reports earnings for 3d qtr to Jun 30


National Standard Co.(NSD,N) reports earnings for 3d qtr to Jun 30


CHRONICLE
Another marriage on ice: CHRISTIE BRINKLEY, the model who skied down from her mountaintop wedding last December to RICKY TAUBMAN, a real estate developer, is schussing away from that marriage, it was announced yesterday.
The couple had a baby seven weeks ago.
In a terse statement issued by Fran Curtis, her publicist, Ms.
Brinkley said, "After much thought and consideration, I have decided to separate from my husband, Ricky Taubman."


Horsham Corp.(HSM,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


AMP Inc.(AMP,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Census Report Finds Hispanic Americans Lagging Further in College Degrees
At a time when many labor experts see a college degree as increasingly important to financial well-being, the percentage of Hispanic Americans who have one is falling farther behind that of non-Hispanic Americans who do, the Census Bureau said today.
In a new report, the bureau said that only 9 percent of Hispanic Americans 25 or older held bachelor's or advanced degrees in 1994, as against 24 percent of non-Hispanic Americans.
Back in 1970, the Hispanic figure was 5 percent, the non-Hispanic figure 11.6 percent.


Dayton Economic Message Mixed, Like Nation's
At the Voss Auto Network, which runs five dealerships in the Dayton area, cars are hardly moving.
Things are not much better at the cavernous BHA Piano Center here, where a weak dollar has sharply raised the price of the Japanese and South Korean models that increasingly dominate the market.
Sales of homes are below 1994 levels, and Roberds Furniture and Appliances, with a half-dozen stores in and around the city, has increased its advertising but has yet to reap any benefits.
Six months ago, the Dayton region was riding the crest of an industrial revival in the heartland that had driven down the unemployment rate to 3.6 percent.
But now, in the city where the Wright brothers created airplanes in bicycle shops and where John and Frank Patterson built the cash register industry, there are discouraging, if inconsistent, signs of a downturn.


Ball Corp.(BLL,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jul 2


BUSINESS DIGEST
Court Will Decide Future of Smoking Suit
In a victory for the tobacco industry, a Federal appeals court in New Orleans ruled that it would decide whether a giant class-action against the nation's seven largest tobacco companies could continue.


Let Bosnia Defend Itself
The Senate and the Clinton Administration are headed in opposite directions on Bosnia.
The Senate approved by a veto-proof 69-to-29 margin yesterday a bill sponsored by Bob Dole and Joseph Lieberman scheduling an end to American compliance with the United Nations embargo on arms sales to Bosnia, a step that would speed the withdrawal of U.N. troops from that country.
Meanwhile, the Administration is pressing its European allies to widen the scope of a threatened NATO bombing campaign intended to keep the U.N. from withdrawing.
The Administration's desire to look forceful is understandable.
But the Senate's position is more in tune with the underlying realities, and American public opinion.
The way to restore coherence to American policy is for the Administration to change course and follow the Senate's lead.


Coherent Inc.(COHR,NNM) reports earnings for 3d qtr to Jul 1


In a Tobacco Industry Victory, Suit to Get Appellate Review
In a victory for the tobacco industry, a Federal appeals court in New Orleans ruled yesterday that it would decide whether a consortium of nearly 60 law firms could continue a giant class-action suit against the nation's seven largest tobacco companies.
The United States Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit agreed to review the case, called Castano v.
The American Tobacco Company et al.
The suit, the largest class action in history, could conceivably involve one of every four Americans and has been closely watched by Wall Street.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Addenda; Water Marketer Picks Team One
The McKesson Water Products Company in Pasadena, Calif., the unit of the McKesson Corporation that markets bottled-water brands like Sparkletts, has selected Team One Advertising in El Segundo, Calif., to handle its account, which was previously at Chiat/Day in Venice, Calif.
Adweek estimated the billings, which were not disclosed, at $4 million to $7 million.


Barings and Mexico Spur New Rules for U.S. Banks
Alarmed by the collapses last winter of Barings P.L.C. and the Mexican economy, Federal bank regulators are preparing new procedures to review the risks posed to big American banks by their futures and options brokerage units and by financial markets in newly industrializing countries, a senior regulator said today.
The Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, which regulates 3,300 federally chartered banks, is drafting two separate sets of guidance and procedures for Federal bank examiners to use in ruling on the safety and soundness of bank practices, Douglas E. Harris, the senior deputy comptroller for capital markets, said in an interview this afternoon.


Wang Laboratories Inc.(WANG,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Jun 30


2 Conflicting Accounts on Files From White House Aide's Office
A Secret Service officer today flatly contradicted the White House account of the night of Vincent W. Foster Jr.'s death, telling the Senate Whitewater panel that he had seen Hillary Rodham Clinton's top aide remove files from Mr.
Foster's office.
The aide vehemently denied doing it.
Testifying under oath before the special Senate committee investigating Whitewater, the officer, Henry P. O'Neill, said that on July 20, 1993, several hours after Mr.
Foster's body was found in a Virginia park, he saw Mrs.
Clinton's chief of staff, Margaret A. Williams, carrying two handfuls of folders from Mr.
Foster's office.


United Carolina Bancshares Corp.(UCAR,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Hearst to Drop Circulation Rates at 13 Magazines
In an extremely unusual move, Hearst Magazines plans to lower the circulation it guarantees advertisers at 13 of its 15 magazines in November, including such prominent publications as Good Housekeeping and Cosmopolitan.
The only magazines not affected are its two joint ventures, Marie Claire, which Hearst publishes with Marie Claire Album, and Smart Money, which is published with Dow Jones &amp; Company.


U.S. Inquiry Said to Fault Radio Marti
A Federal investigation into Radio Marti, the Government-financed station that broadcasts to Cuba, has found that the station's director improperly sought to dismiss or demote at least five employees who protested what they saw as abuses, officials familiar with the investigation said today.
They said the investigation, by the inspector general of the United States Information Agency, found that the director, Rolando Bonachea, sought to get rid of employees who alleged censorship, inaccurate and biased coverage and the hiring of unqualified staff members.


Economic Scene; Energy standards aren't as oppressive as they may seem.
DOES Washington know your needs better than you?
Most people, it is safe to assume, would like a little help from Uncle when it comes to choosing, say, pesticides or antibiotics.
But some Americans undoubtedly resent being told which water heaters to buy or how much insulation they should stuff in their walls.
And with that in mind, the House of Representatives voted last week to stop the Clinton Administration from spending any money to set energy-efficiency standards for household appliances or to design model building codes.


Pittston Services Group (PZS,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Phillips Petroleum Co.(P,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Heat and Humidity Bully New Yorkers With a Wet Blanket
The bad marriage of heat and humidity that for several days has made it feel as if it is over 100 degrees in the New York area pushed power consumption to near record levels yesterday, and showed no sign of abating.
An afternoon rainstorm briefly lowered the temperature, but brought high winds that slammed scaffolding, leaving two men dangling in Manhattan, and cut power lines to thousands of homes in Westchester County.
Although the reading in Central Park was only 90 degrees yesterday, the unusually high humidity, up to 70 percent even before the rain, made it feel like 102 degrees, meteorologists said.
The combination of stultifying humidity and temperatures hovering at 90 and above has continued almost uninterrupted for two weeks, turning a heat spell into a seeming eternity of sultriness, with the forecast calling for more of the same over the next few days.


New England Electric System (NES,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Environmental Aid for Trenton
Trenton will be one of 15 cities across the country to receive Federal money for a pilot program to redevelop abandoned, contaminated properties into new enterprises that can create jobs and tax revenues, The Associated Press reported.


METRO DIGEST
LATELY, IT'S THE HEAT AND THE HUMIDITY
The bad marriage of heat and fierce humidity that has made it feel like over 100 degrees for several days in the New York area pushed power consumption near record levels, and showed no sign of abating.  [ Page A1. ]
Two repairmen became the center of a life-and-death drama high above Manhattan when a fierce gust of wind smashed their scaffold through a window.  [ B4. ] A DOO-WOP DREAM LIVES, EVEN IN DEATH
A hit parade of doo-wop dignitaries streamed up to Jimmy Keyes's coffin, gray-haired but still sharp in their shades, Ban-Lon shirts and white patent leather shoes.
It was time to dedicate a special request.
"If we don't sing 'Sh-Boom,' " said Arthur Crier, a onetime member of the Chimes, "he'll come out of there!"  [ A1. ] NEW YORK CITY  GIVING SECURITY TO BATTERED WOMEN
A collaboration between the office of the Brooklyn District Attorney and more than a dozen security companies strives to provide an extra layer of security for some battered women in Brooklyn.  [ B3. ] JUDGE REJECTS ARGUMENT IN BOMB TRIAL
Three of the four men convicted in the bombing of the World Trade Center said in court that they had uncovered strong new evidence that would have changed the outcome of the trial.
But the judge rejected their arguments.  [ B3. ] LAWYER CHARGED IN EXTORTION SCHEME
Gary Friedman, a criminal defense lawyer in Queens, never had much of a caseload.
However, prosecutors say he had three aliases and a lucrative source of revenue: extortion.  [ B3. ] LOOKING AT WAYS TO EASE EAST-SIDE JAMS
A team of transportation experts studying ways to relieve overcrowding on streets and subways on the East Side of Manhattan unveiled a list of possibilities.  [ B2. ] ANOTHER SKIRMISH OVER WATER SYSTEM
City Comptroller Alan G. Hevesi announced his final plans to block the proposed sale of the city water system, and within a few hours, the Giuliani administration angrily accused him of playing politics and said it would sue.  [ B2. ] CURRENT TAKES 2 LIVES OFF ROCKAWAY
In the ocean waves at Rockaway Beach, a spot known for its riptides and crowded beaches, the urge to cool off proved deadly this week -- not once, but twice.  [ B2. ] Improved treatment and infection control have led to a decline in cases of drug-resistant tuberculosis in New York City, a health department official said.  [ A21. ] REGION  COUPLE AND SON ARE FOUND DEAD
It took at least a week, maybe even 10 days, after their deaths before neighbors in Rutherford, N.J., noticed that Abraham Jacobs was not emerging every morning to buy groceries for his wife, Shirley, and their disabled adult son, Barry.
By the time the apartment superintendent arrived, their bodies were badly decomposing.  [ B5. ] CRUNCHING NUMBERS SO THE BILLS ADD UP
By his own estimate, Alan R. Kooney's line of work doesn't strike sparks at social gatherings.
"I tell people what I do and watch their eyes glaze over," he said.
Unless, of course, the listener happens to be one of the lobbyists wise to the back corridors of power in Trenton.  [ B5. ] Metro Matters by Joyce Purnick B3


Bang-Bang Play Shoots Down the Yankees' Streak
Over and over, the Yankees peered at the replay of the dramatic play that ended tonight's game.
Five times, 10 times, 15 times, they stared at Wally Joyner sliding across home plate.
In slow motion and at regular speed, they gazed intently as Jim Leyritz tagged Joyner's left shoulder.
Agonizingly, they saw the umpire, Dale Scott, rule that Joyner was safe to give the Royals a 6-5 victory.
Buck Showalter was bitter, Randy Velarde was frustrated, Leyritz was confused and Don Mattingly congratulated his son for booing the umpires.
The Yankees were stunned that they had squandered leads of 4-0 and 5-4, perturbed that their seven-game winning streak had died and angry that they might have eventually won if Joyner was called out.


Currents; A Bolo Tie For Curtains
WONDER what the trendsetting window is wearing these days?
Try the "curtain bolo" -- a tieback that looks like jewelry for curtains.
Babette Holland, a TriBeCa designer, makes tiebacks of pendants attached to braided cords (left, the Imperial, a brass finial, $16.) And, Ms.
Holland said, "when your curtains are being cleaned, you can wear it as a necklace." Through the City Curtains fall catalogue: (800) 244-6020.


Currents; Now Entering Bermuda
COUTURIERS are not the only ones designing "bridge lines." F. Schumacher &amp; Company distributes a moderately priced wallpaper line called Village, with coordinating fabrics.
Its new collection, Summerhouse, includes Henry's Harbor Stripe, top, ($20 a 5.5-yard roll) and Hillside Cottages, above, a border inspired by the pastel houses of Bermuda ($20 a 5-yard spool), both by Laurette Kittle.
The patterns in cotton fabrics are $24 a yard.
At M. Epstein &amp; Son, 809 Ninth Avenue (at 53d Street), (212) 265-3960.
Information: (800) 552-9255.


AMC Entertainment Inc.(AEN,A) reports earnings for 1st qtr to Jun 29


Man Is Charged With Stabbing 4-Year-Old Daughter to Death
A 28-year-old Queens man was charged yesterday with stabbing his 4-year-old daughter to death at her home on Medford, L.I.
But, in a bizarre confession, the man maintained that he inflicted the fatal wound as an act of mercy, hoping to end her suffering after realizing that he had already wounded her.
The defendant, Mauricio Torres, said he was roughhousing with his daughter, Jennifer, on Tuesday when she fell against his 7-inch knife.
The police said Mr.
Torres laid her on her bed and used both hands to drive the serrated blade into her breastbone.


Murphy Oil Corp.(MUR,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


CNB Bancshares (CNBE,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


George Romney Dies at 88; A Leading G.O.P. Figure
George W. Romney, an automobile executive who became a three-term Governor of Michigan, a Republican Presidential candidate and a member of the Nixon Cabinet, died yesterday at his home in Bloomfield Hills, Mich., a Detroit suburb.
He was 88.
His wife, Lenore, whom he married in 1931, found him collapsed yesterday morning on the treadmill in the exercise room of their home, their son G. Scott Romney said.
The office of the Oakland County Medical Examiner issued a statement saying only that Mr.
Romney had died of natural causes.


Fresenius USA (FRN,A) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


National Sanitary Supply Co. reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Blame the U.S. Consumer for Latin Sweatshops; Sewn With Suffering
To the Editor:
I read Bob Herbert's "Children of the Dark Ages" (column, July 21) with a sense of growing frustration.
I support his cause and that of the child laborers he writes about.
However, I wonder if Mr.
Herbert has thought about the options available for the socially conscious consumer in this country, especially those who depend upon the moderate prices of the Gap and similar stores.


Lone Star Industries(LCE,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


A State Mission


Essay; Clinton Abdicates As Leader
The presence of one or two strong leaders can alter the course of history.
We saw that happen when Britain's Margaret Thatcher happened to be with George Bush at the critical moment of Saddam Hussein's invasion of Kuwait.
She admonished him not to "go all wobbly." (After the West's failure of will in Bosnia, she privately told friends: "I should be in the rent-a-spine business.")


Baker (Michael) (BKR,A) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


For the Abused, an Electronic Lifeline
Fifteen times in five years the man who says he loves her has attacked.
Her nose has been broken.
Her ribs have been broken.
Her eyes have been blackened.
"Eight months pregnant with black eyes," she said recently, sitting in a room at the Brooklyn District Attorney's office.
"In January, I had a knife at my throat while I was breast-feeding my baby."


House Bill Would Block New E.P.A. Pollution Rules
Just as the Environmental Protection Agency is about to issue its first comprehensive controls on toxic air pollution by the oil refining industry, the House of Representatives is preparing to vote on a measure forbidding enforcement of the rules.
It is one of the most striking reversals in pollution policy to be proposed as part of the regulatory rollback effort in Congress.
An entire industry would be exempted from regulations that others, like chemical plants, would still face under a law Congress passed by huge bipartisan margins just five years ago.
Because some oil refinery emissions are not only toxic but also cause smog, some communities might then have to impose other pollution controls if they are to meet national air quality standards and prevent asthma and other lung ailments.


Oryx Energy Co.(ORX,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Great-West Lifeco Inc. reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Comdisco Inc.(CDO,N) reports earnings for 3d qtr to Jun 30


Mostly Mozart Back, With Its First Lady
Tuesday night's season-opening Mostly Mozart concert must have been reassuring to the fans of this perennially popular summer series.
This year there were reports of phasing out Mostly Mozart in favor of more adventuresome offerings at Lincoln Center.
But Mostly Mozart and its music director, Gerard Schwarz, have signed a contract for another three years.
And this summer's season, though reduced to four weeks, began auspiciously.
Avery Fisher Hall was nearly sold out.
PBS broadcast the concert on the Live From Lincoln Center series.
And best of all to those who consider her the first lady of Mostly Mozart, the Spanish pianist Alicia de Larrocha was the featured soloist in Mozart's Piano Concerto No. 27 in B-flat major (K. 595).


Giant Industries (GI,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Provident Bankshares Corp.(PBKS,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


PanCanadian Petroleum reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


PP&amp;L Resources Inc.(PPL,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Long Island Lighting Co.(LIL,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Serbs and Friends Attack Enclave in the North
Serbian forces and a rebel Muslim faction pressed their attack on the isolated Bihac region in northwestern Bosnia today, sending an estimated 8,000 refugees fleeing toward Bihac town, a United Nations-designated "safe area."
The fighting has intensified over the last week in the Bihac pocket, a strategically important area with some 180,000 mainly Muslim residents and refugees that is surrounded by rebel Bosnian and Croatian Serbs.


California Federal Bank S.B.  (CAL,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Heritage Media (HTG,A) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Conseco Inc.(CNC,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Experts Offer a Wish List to Improve Transportation on the East Side
A team of transportation experts studying ways to relieve overcrowding on streets and subways on the East Side of Manhattan presented more than two dozen possibilities at a public hearing yesterday, from completing the abandoned Second Avenue subway line to starting a ferry line along the East River.
While it will be more than a year before the study is completed and as long as 10 years before work would begin on the most ambitious of the plans, the officials presented the options to an audience of about 70 people yesterday as a kind of grand wish list, from which a few of the best ideas would be chosen during the next six months.


Air Products &amp; ChemicalsInc.(APD,N) reports earnings for 3d qtr to Jun 30


Westinghouse Electric Corp.(WX,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Marine Midland Banks Inc. reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Hollins Is a Smash Hit in Triumphant Debut With Red Sox
Red Sox 5, White Sox 3
Dave Hollins singled to break a sixth-inning tie in his Boston debut, and Mike Greenwell drove in three runs as the Red Sox beat the Chicago White Sox, 5-3, last night at Fenway Park.


Michael Andrews, British Painter, Is Dead at 66
Michael Andrews, a painter who for more than 30 years was an elusive but legendary presence in the London art world, died on July 19 in London.
He was 66.
The cause was cancer, London newspapers reported over the weekend.


Center Financial Corp. reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Rio Algom Ltd.(ROM,A) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


South Africa to Delay Some Local Elections
South African officials said today that efforts to hold the country's first local elections since the collapse of apartheid had become so bogged down in political wrangling and logistical difficulties that they would have to be postponed in several districts.
The delay is a setback for President Nelson Mandela, who needs legitimate local governments up and running as soon as possible to achieve much of the agenda he has set for the country, including development programs for the poor.


Distinct Identities For Chrysler Vans
The Chrysler Corporation is introducing campaigns for its redesigned line of mini-vans, seeking to differentiate its three brands more fully.
Advertising for the 1996 Dodge Caravan, created by BBDO Detroit in Southfield, Mich., a unit of the Omnicom Group, is broadly focused, reflecting that brand's wider appeal; the theme is "Just as original as the original." The campaign for the Chrysler Town &amp; Country is meant to attract consumers who might otherwise buy luxury cars.
Those ads, created by the Bozell Worldwide unit of Bozell, Jacobs, Kenyon &amp; Eckhardt in Southfield, carry the theme "The Ultimate."


C.I.A. Agent's Tie to Deaths In Guatemala Is Still Hazy
Senior Central Intelligence Agency officials said today that they remained unsure how deeply a Guatemalan colonel on the agency's payroll had been involved in the deaths of an American innkeeper and a Guatemalan guerrilla.
"We haven't gotten to the bottom of it," one top C.I.A. official said, adding that the full story might never be known.


Calmat Co.(CZM,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Nutting, Nuts Hero
SCORNED after his death in 1941 as a sentimental crackpot with an unhealthy yen for Pilgrim days, the Rev.
Dr.
Wallace Nutting, a Congregational minister turned photographer, author, antiques expert and furniture manufacturer, is enjoying an unexpected revival.
"Antiques dealers used to pooh-pooh and say, 'Oh, we couldn't possibly carry junk like that,' " said George Monro of North Caldwell, N.J., who, along with his late wife, Justine, founded the Wallace Nutting Collectors Club in 1973.
"Now, every shop wants him." Initially, the club had three members; today it has nearly 350.


The French Repudiate Crimes of Vichy
To the Editor:
"Mr. Chirac Honors the Truth" (editorial, July 18) is just another distortion of the truth of the German occupation of France.
As a teen-age girl in Paris during that occupation, I can attest to the hatred millions of my compatriots felt for the Vichy Government.
Do you know that any Jew wearing a yellow star who boarded the Paris subway would always be assured of a seat?


Trade Accord Without U.S. Set in Geneva
Japan and South Korea agreed today to join more than 80 other countries in a pact to liberalize world trade in financial services, clearing the way for the accord to be put into effect without the United States, which has refused to participate.
Even though the Clinton Administration will not be signing on to the accord, which will cover the entry into countries of foreign banks, insurance companies and other financial institutions, American companies will still be able to benefit from the extra access that the participants in the agreement will offer one another.
The rules of the World Trade Organization, the new body that oversees international commerce, require that trade concessions extended to one member country be extended to all other countries.


French Police Search for Train Bombers; Death Toll at 7
As the death toll from the bombing in a Paris commuter train rose to seven, the police searched today for leads on who was behind the worst terrorist act here in nearly a decade.
The Government brought police reinforcements to Paris and other cities, and round-the-clock random security checks were carried out on roads and at the borders.
Security was visibly stepped up to calm public fear at airports and railroad stations, and a bomb scare forced the evacuation of 8,000 visitors at the Louvre.


Liberty Bancorp Inc.(LBNA,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Navratilova Set Despite Injury
Soldiering on despite a groin strain, the not-quite-retired Martina Navratilova insisted yesterday that she wouldn't miss her bizarre and ballyhooed exhibition with Monica Seles on Saturday in Atlantic City.
"It only hurts when I run fast, so I'm planning on serving and walking -- you know, just walking to the net, and half-volleying when I get there, so maybe that will throw Monica off a little bit," Navratilova said from her TeamTennis road match in Sarasota, Fla., where she and the New Jersey Stars were scheduled to face the Florida Twist.


Crestbrook reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


First American Corp.(FATN,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Johnstown America Industries(JAII,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Energen Corp.(EGN,N) reports earnings for 3d qtr to Jun 30


Bindley Western Industries(BIND,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Albank Financial Corp. reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Letter: On New York's Primary; To Get Ballot Access for G.O.P.
To the Editor:
"Fairness Denied in New York" (editorial, July 24), on the ballot access process for Republicans in the 1996 primary, raises good points.


Alleghany Corp.(Y,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


From the Sewers to . . . Queens


2 Players Charged With Rape
Statutory rape charges against two members of the Idaho State football team involve a 14-year-old girl, according to a grand jury indictment handed down last Friday in Pocatello, Idaho.
The names of those indicted were disclosed yesterday after they were formally served with court papers.


Keystone International Inc.(KII,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Crunching Numbers So the Bills Add Up
By his own estimate, Alan R. Kooney's line of work doesn't strike sparks at social gatherings.
"I tell people what I do and watch their eyes glaze over," he said.


Reclusive Couple and Son Are Found Dead in Home
Even by the reclusive standards of Hastings Street, there had always been something a little bit peculiar about the family in Apartment 22B.
It took at least a week, maybe even 10 days, after their deaths before neighbors noticed that Abraham Jacobs was not emerging every morning to buy groceries for his wife, Shirley, and their disabled adult son, Barry.
By the time the building superintendent, Leonard Walker, arrived on Tuesday, the stench of their badly decomposing bodies was so strong that he did not even venture into their upstairs apartment before calling the police.


Moore Corp.(MCL,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Paper Told to Pay $678,000 in Singapore Suit
In the latest assault on Western news organizations by the authoritarian Government of Singapore, the Supreme Court there ordered The International Herald Tribune today to pay libel damages of $678,000 to the country's top three leaders.
Judge Goh Joon Seng told the Paris-based newspaper to pay Prime Minister Goh Chok Tong the equivalent of about $250,000, and to pay former Prime Minister Lee Kuan Yew and his son, Deputy Prime Minister Lee Hsien Loong, the equivalent of about $214,000 each.


Cirrus Logic Inc.(CRUS,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jul 1


Bantamweight Victory Turns Heads
Like any other 18-year-old, Carlos Navarro likes to eat, and who counts calories?
But unlike most his age, there are times when his weight is a big concern.
Navarro is an amateur boxer from Los Angeles, America's best bantamweight (119-pound limit) and a solid candidate for an Olympic medal next year in Atlanta.
But at the 1996 Summer Games, he expects to be fighting as a featherweight (125 pounds).


Asians Make Up Much Of 'Hispanic' District
To the Editor:
News articles such as the one July 20 about the legal challenge to the 12th Congressional District in New York City characterize it as a "Hispanic district." This fails to give a complete picture.


AT HOME WITH/Judy Collins; Trying Steaminess On for Size
CURLED up in the morning light on one of her many sofas and smiling through her searing Caribbean-blue cat eyes, Judy Collins says she just felt like doing something different for a change, having fun with a new form.
So she spent the last eight years writing a novel called "Shameless," published this month by Pocket Books ($23).
"Shameless"?
From the soulful troubadour of the 1960's and 70's, the avatar of correct political causes?


West One Bancorp (WEST,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Clear Channel Communications Inc.(CCU,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


A Real Angel in the Outfield; Hard-Hitting Edmonds Helps His Boyhood Favorites Contend in West
The batter in front of him needs track shoes and the batter behind him needs a construction helmet.
The American League's r.b.i. leader is 173 pounds (and dropping), keeps his foot X-rays to himself and is not Mo Vaughn.
Jim Edmonds is a beanball incident waiting to happen, but, in the meantime, he continues to admire his home runs from ground zero.
The California Angels have first place to show for it, and Edmonds, who has absorbed everything the batting coach, Rod Carew, has showed him, suddenly finds himself a debonair center fielder.


Future Shop reports earnings for 1st qtr to Jun 30


National Fuel Gas Co.(NFG,N) reports earnings for 3d qtr to Jun 30


National Healthcare L.P.(NHC,A) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Dollar Tree Stores Inc.(DLTR,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Unocal Corp.(UCL,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


3 Icons Exploring Life's Horrors and Joys
One might be forgiven for fearing the worst -- a little too much didacticism, an excess of uplift -- when faced with a production whose title means "to hear" or "to understand" in another language.
But Bill T. Jones, Toni Morrison and Max Roach skirted that and other pitfalls in "Degga," presented on Tuesday night at Alice Tully Hall as part of the American Visionaries series at Lincoln Center.
Essentially this was an evening spent with three icons of American culture, who hold among them two MacArthur grants, a Pulitzer and a Nobel Prize.
Luckily, the three are also artists of irresistible vitality, whose intensity as performers made for theater that was a voyage of discovery through a familiar landscape filled with unexpected crannies.
Mr.
Jones and Ms.
Morrison took hold of each other's hands to walk across the stage at several points during the hourlong piece.
That was the sensation of watching "Degga," named after a term from the Wolof language of Senegal, a journey guided by three pairs of strong hands and clear eyes.


Mirage Resorts Inc.(MR,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Tambrands Inc.(TMB,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Bosnia Troops Cite Gassings at Zepa
For 20 days, 850 Bosnian Government soldiers, some armed with little more than hunting rifles, crouched in their trenches, holding off the Bosnian Serb forces who had surrounded the town of Zepa.
While the world considered them vanquished, they braved the shelling that gutted much of Zepa, some of the Bosnian soldiers said today.
The small houses that survived the shelling were filled with wounded soldiers and civilians, dozens of whom died, they said.


U.N. Military Aides Given Right to Approve Attacks
Secretary General Boutros Boutros-Ghali agreed today to turn over his authority to veto or approve NATO air attacks in Bosnia to United Nations commanders in the field.
The move appeared to ease the way for rapid and large-scale attacks on the Bosnian Serbs if they threaten Gorazde, the protected enclave where Western allies have chosen to declare their stand against Serbian aggression.


2 House Democrats Offer a Compromise on Tobacco Regulation
Two Democratic Congressmen, one from a tobacco state, have proposed a plan that they say could curtail teen-age smoking without additional Federal regulation of tobacco.
But one of the men warned that tobacco companies might not go along with the plan unless the industry received a guarantee that the Food and Drug Administration would never regulate tobacco as a drug.


Calendar: Garden Tours, Crafts Fair, Show House
Attracting Butterflies  Donald B. Lacey Display Gardens at Rutgers University, Ryders Lane, east of U.S. 1, New Brunswick, N.J.; (908) 932-8451.
An open house will be held at the garden on Saturday from 9 A.M. to 3 P.M., with guided tours and talks on growing annuals, composting and planting gardens to attract butterflies.
No charge for admission.
Works by 165 Artists


Tokyo Journal; Can the Pen Really Be Mightier Than the Germ?
The cashiers at the Ito-ya stationery store in the Ginza shopping district here recall the customer who was afraid to handle money because it was too dirty.
"She carried an envelope with money in it," said Yoshiko Ichihara, a customer service agent.
"At the register, she held the envelope for us to take some money out of. We had to put the change into the envelope, because she refused to touch it."


More Aid Urged for Runaways
At least 13,000 New Jersey youths run away from home each year, a private nonprofit group said yesterday.
Yet because the state only has nine shelters that will accept runaways without referrals from other agencies, many of these young people never get help, said Linda Kelly, executive director of the Garden State Coalition for Youth and Family Concerns.


The Never-Failing Optimism of Donald Trump
TO hear Donald J. Trump tell it, he is just about the luckiest man in New York.
A Congressman who opposes his Riverside South proposal, Representative Jerrold Nadler of the West Side, threw a Federal wrench right into the plan's soft middle this week.
So Mr.
Trump says he is thrilled, contending that it will now be easier and cheaper to develop the project.
"Jerry Nadler fell right into my trap," the adaptable builder said yesterday in an interview.
"He helped my development."


Accused Chief Asks for Leave
The West Orange Police Chief, who was found by a judge to have abused his wife, asked yesterday to be placed on leave until Sept. 5.
The chief, Robert Spina, admits no wrongdoing and will defend himself, his lawyer, Robert L. Penza, said.
The Township Council voted on Tuesday to request that Chief Spina take a paid leave while the findings are investigated.


National Gypsum (NGCO,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Pittston Minerals Group (PZM,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Simpson Team Says Witness Turns Hostile
Lawyers for O. J. Simpson today accused one of their own witnesses, an agent for the Federal Bureau of Investigation, of making his testimony more pro-prosecutorial after huddling with Deputy District Attorney Marcia Clark and her colleagues during a court break on Tuesday.
Questioned early that day, the agent, Roger Martz of the bureau's chemical toxicological unit, said his tests on a bloody sock and a blood smear on a metal gate behind the house of Mr.
Simpson's former wife, Nicole Brown Simpson, suggested the presence of a chemical preservative.
That point is crucial to the defense, which contends that police officers planted blood linking Mr.
Simpson to the murders of his former wife and her friend Ronald L. Goldman.


The Pop Life
Setting a Record
In its first week, "Dreaming of You," the crossover album by Selena, the Mexican-American pop singer who was killed in March, has fulfilled many of the hopes that friends and associates say she had for it.
The record sold 331,000 copies, according to Soundscan, a company in Hartsdale, N.Y., that tracks music retail sales, becoming the first album by a Latin artist to reach No. 1 on the pop charts.
On July 18, the day it was released, "Dreaming of You" had already sold more than 175,000 copies to become the fastest-selling album ever by a woman.


CitFed Bancorp reports earnings for 1st qtr to Jun 30


Blame the U.S. Consumer for Latin Sweatshops; Mexican Maquiladoras
To the Editor:
Bob Herbert's July 21 column raises serious and disturbing questions about the textile industry's practices in Central American sweatshops.
However, his careless broad brush risks tainting legitimate, safe and regulated free-trade zone factories in Mexico, also called maquiladoras, which may produce products as sophisticated as televisions or even cars.


M.A. Weinstein, 79; B'nai B'rith Pioneer
Maurice A. Weinstein, a champion of Jewish education on the national level, died on Tuesday at Carolinas Medical Center in Charlotte, N.C.
He was 79 and lived in Charlotte.
The cause was cancer, his family said.


Municipal Bond Regulation Debated at House Hearing
In the aftermath of the financial debacle in Orange County, Calif., Congress began asking today whether greater financial disclosure was needed in the municipal bond market to prevent similar catastrophes.
At a hearing before a House Banking subcommittee, no consensus emerged, even though spokesmen for both the Securities and Exchange Commission and the nation's two top credit-rating agencies testified that they had investigated Orange County's investment practices late last year and -- based on public information at that time -- found nothing amiss.


Goodbye for Weather's 'Helloo'
After 12 years of booming his distinctive "Hellooooo's," Lloyd Lindsay Young will sign off as Channel 9's weatherman Oct. 1.
"I'm a little sad, of course," Mr.
Young said yesterday about WWOR's decision not to renew his contract.
"They simply told me they were going in a new direction."


Lincoln Telecommunications Co.(LTEC,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League  AL -- Suspended Phil Garner, Milwaukee Brewers manager, and Terry Bevington, Chicago White Sox manager, for four games each for their involvement in a brawl during a game in Chicago on July 21.
National League


Currents; Building Residences for Teen-Agers in Need
HOW to build a successful residence for teen-agers who are troubled or have no parents?
Create a place with a collegial, homelike feel, "where kids can feel good about themselves," said James Campbell, the executive director of Leake &amp; Watts Services of Yonkers, a 164-year-old nonprofit social services agency.
More than 100 young people, ages 13 to 18, live in Yonkers on the agency's bucolic 30 acres, landscaped by Frederick Law Olmsted.
Recently, the agency allocated $40 million to design and construct 13 new buildings, including a new school and nine cottages, each to house only 14 teen-agers during a typical two-year-long stay.
Inspired by memories of summer camp, the architect, Richard Dattner, visited the teen-agers in their old residences, then devised two-story, Prairie-style brick dormitories with shingled roofs and skylight cupolas (with weather vanes) that flood the rooms with cheerful light.


DuPont Canada reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


First Hawaiian Inc.(FHWN,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


For Better or Worse, A Marital Milestone; Ithaca Officials Endorse a Gay Union
On Valentine's Day, hoping to reverse a streak of poor romantic luck, Toshav Greene took a chance, called Phillip G. Storrs and invited him on a blind dinner date.
By the time they got to the strawberry cake, it was plain that Mr.
Greene's luck had changed.
The two men quickly fell in love.
By mid-May, they had moved here together from nearby Elmira, hoping to marry and rear children.
When they went to City Hall to apply for a marriage license, however, they expected a rejection.


Cardinal Health (CAH,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Jun 30


Wellpoint Health Networks Inc.(WLP,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Brooklyn Woman Is Charged in Beating Death of Her Daughter, 3
A mother who lived with her husband and four young daughters in a cramped, subdivided Brooklyn apartment was charged with murder yesterday in the beating death of one of the children, a 3-year-old girl named Gabriella, who the police said bore the bruises of continual abuse.
The parents, Sara Munoz and Gilberto Vasquez, were illegal immigrants who came from Mexico several years ago, the police said.
They found their way to Sunset Park, where many poor immigrant families live in illegally divided apartments and work in local factories and sweatshops.


Cost of 'Quiet on Set' Is Escalating
In his seven years as a location manager in the film industry, Patrick McIntire has rented noisy chain saws just so he could turn them off and paid lawn crews to stop clacking their shears and revving their leaf-blowers.
Loud radios, barking dogs and immovable people have cost him a bundle.
Mr.
McIntire is not alone.
In Los Angeles and other California areas popular for filming, residents are sometimes making thousands of dollars from movie crews by promising to vacate outdoor sets, tone down noise or otherwise stop harassing them.
The problem has become so acute that the State Legislature has stepped in, drafting laws to make harassing film crews for profit a criminal offense.


T.R.A. Commissioner Faces Revived Threat
A new attempt to unseat Brian McGrath as commissioner of the Thoroughbred Racing Associations was expected to be mounted on Thursday when the executive committee of the organization meets in Chicago under the threat of withdrawal by several West Coast tracks unless changes are made.
The association represents about 50 tracks around the country, including most of the large ones.
But its control has been shaken in the last year since it hired McGrath, a television and marketing executive, to serve as its first commissioner.


Webster Financial Corp. reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Invacare Corp.(IVCR,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Station Casinos Inc.(STCI,NNM) reports earnings for 1st qtr to Jun 30


Russ Berrie &amp; Co. (RUS,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Bethlehem Steel Corp.(BS,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


RESEARCHERS FIND HORMONE CAUSES A LOSS OF WEIGHT
Researchers have discovered what they hope will be a magic bullet for obesity, or at least the forerunner of major new therapies: a hormone that makes overweight animals rapidly lose body fat.
The hormone is particularly impressive because it can make even lean animals shed almost all of what little fat they have.
The finding, which will be published tomorrow in three papers in the journal Science, has been greeted with great enthusiasm by scientists who see it as presenting a powerful new approach to treating obesity.


USF&amp;G Corp.(FG,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


De Niro and Pacino Star in a Film. Together.
For years, Robert De Niro and Al Pacino have met at parties and restaurants and pledged to find a project suitable for both of them.
"We used to get together and talk about doing something," said Mr.
De Niro.
"Nothing panned out."
Until now.


TB Case Linked to Infection of 45 at Bar
For months, a 48-year-old regular at a neighborhood bar in Minneapolis had a cough that worsened.
He breathed more than twice as fast as usual, felt feverish, became progressively weaker, lost 65 pounds.
As the man became sicker, he spent more time at the bar, slept under a bridge, in shelters and occasionally in a rooming house near the bar.
But he did not go to a doctor and no one sent him to a public clinic six blocks from the bar.
Finally, he went to a nearby hospital, where doctors diagnosed tuberculosis.


Premark Intl.(PMI,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jul 1


I.R.A. Gives Nod to International Panel
Gerry Adams, the political leader of the Irish Republican Army, today gingerly accepted the idea that an international commission to arrange the disarmament of the I.R.A. might lead to the start of full-fledged negotiations toward a political settlement of its 25-year fight against British rule.
The Irish and British Governments have said they are considering proposing such a commission to clear the way for talks involving both governments with Sinn Fein, the I.R.A. political wing, and Protestant Unionist parties.
The Protestant parties and the British Government have refused to sit down with Sinn Fein until the process of disarming the I.R.A. has begun.


Market Place; Viacom shows there's always a way to avoid capital-gains taxes.
SHREWD corporations and their lawyers have lots of ways to reduce their tax bills, a fact demonstrated in Viacom Inc.'s latest deal to sell its cable television systems to Tele-Communications Inc.
Just like the previous deal, which was blocked by an outraged Congress, this one enables Viacom to avoid capital-gains taxes while unloading the operations.
Over time, Viacom will pay less in taxes than it would have under the first deal.
But Tele-Communications will pay more in taxes.


Some Big Funds, Like Soros's, Have Difficulty Despite Trend
The stock market continues to reach new highs, but George Soros and several other well-known investors have recently found it difficult to make money.
Mr.
Soros's Quantum Fund, his largest, with about $3.5 billion of assets, lost more than $200 million in the first six months of this year.
In a July 14 letter to his investors, Mr.
Soros called the Quantum Fund's performance for the first half of 1995 "downright poor," and its 1994 results "less than satisfactory."


Baker Hughes Inc.(BHI,N) reports earnings for 3d qtr to Jun 30


The Tactics by Strawberry's Agent Draw Steinbrenner's Ire
With the Bible in one hand and the telephone he answered on the first ring in the other, Darryl Strawberry was waiting in a hotel in Norfolk, Va., today for the call that would finally send him to the Yankees and back to the major leagues.
Strawberry's wait will continue, though, because George Steinbrenner has told associates he is enraged at Bill Goodstein, the player's agent, for trying to manipulate the timing of Strawberry's being summoned from Class AAA and for intimating that the Yankee owner had lost the negotiation process.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Montblanc expands on Gertrude Stein to suggest that sometimes a pen is more than a pen.
IT has been a pen, but can it be an umbrella?
The pen in question is a Montblanc -- the cigar-shaped luxury writing instrument with the gold, individually numbered nibs and capped with a white star on the top. (It's not a star, actually, but is intended to represent a bird's-eye view of Mont Blanc's snow-covered peak.)


Brawling Managers Suspended
Managers PHIL GARNER of the Milwaukee Brewers and TERRY BEVINGTON of the Chicago White Sox were suspended for four games apiece yesterday following their brawl last weekend at Comiskey Park.
Bevington said he would appeal, meaning he can continue managing until a hearing is held with the American League president, GENE BUDIG.
Garner said he would not appeal, and his penalty will start tonight when the Brewers begin a four-game series at home against California.


Injured Officer Sues Driver
A year ago, John Naslonski, a Randolph police officer, saw that a car had fallen off a bridge into the brook below.
But Patrolman Naslonski, investigating on foot at night, failed to see that a guardrail had split in two.
He bumped into a steel splinter, breaking his nose and cutting his face.
The car was empty.


Lincoln National Corp.(LNC,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Kaneb Services Inc.(KAB,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Global Grass-Roots Banking
The World Bank, the Agency for International Development and eight other donors have joined to finance small loans to the poorest of the world's poor -- loans as little as $100, at low interest rates and with no collateral except the borrower's word.
These will be loans to underwrite the aspirations of ordinary people, from funds provided by international agencies accustomed to dealing in tens and hundreds of millions, with a level of caring not routinely shown by even a generous local banker.
"Like slavery in the 19th century, the fact that 700 million human beings are hungry in the 20th century is unconscionable," says Ismail Serageldin, a vice president of the World Bank and chairman of the new aid group.
"We are the new abolitionists."


Esiason and Mitchell in Unexpected Alliance
Make room for the oddest couple in New York football: Johnny Mitchell rooming with Boomer Esiason.
On the road, at any rate.
It will bring together players from backgrounds as dissimilar as the Mississippi farm where Mitchell was raised by his grandfather and the split-level world of Long Island where Esiason was the Golden Boy.


Tennis Association Picks a New Agency
The United States Tennis Association in White Plains said yesterday that it had selected Grybauskas Beatrice in New York to handle its account, which was at Ammirati &amp; Puris/Lintas in New York, a unit of the Interpublic Group of Companies, until that agency and the association mutually agreed to part company in December.
The billings were estimated at $1 million.


Behind Truman's Decision on the Atomic Bomb
Peter Jennings begins tonight's review of President Harry S. Truman's decision to drop the atomic bomb on Japan with these questions: "Did it shorten the war? Did it save American lives? Was it necessary?" The answer to all of them, rendered by a huddle of historians, is most likely not.
This cogently argued contribution to revisionist history takes particular aim at Truman for what it charges were his own attempts at revisionism, cooking up reasons after the fact for the demolishment of Hiroshima and then Nagasaki that omitted or concealed much of what actually went into the decision.


Securities Prices Fall; Traders Focus On New Issues
Prices of Treasury securities fell yesterday as traders focused on the supply of new issues poised to come to market over the next month.
Later the losses deepened as investors pondered conflicting reports over comments made by a Fed official and moved to the sidelines ahead of the durable goods report due today.
A rise in oil prices also kept the pressure on bond prices.


PMI Group Inc.(PMA,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Game Plan for Players' Security: Be Aggressive
On Saturday, Monica Seles is scheduled to step back onto the world stage for the first time since a knife-wielding stalker stabbed her during a tennis match more than two years ago.
That sort of danger is not new to athletes or other high-profile celebrities, but it is increasingly in the spotlight as the lunatic fringe becomes more aggressive in its thirst for attention.


Corrections
A caption in The Living Section yesterday for a picture by The Associated Press, with an article about the director Larry Clark, misidentified an actress and her role in his film "Kids." She was Yakira Peguero, playing Darcy (not Chloe Sevigny, playing Jenny).
The error also occurred in Weekend on Friday with a review of the film.


Brayton Injured in Crash
A Ford Thuderbird driven by Scott Brayton crashed into a wall at the Indianapolis Motor Speedway during a test run today, and Brayton suffered a concussion and a broken ankle.
"He's fine, alert, talking," said Charlotte Hatfield, a spokeswoman for Methodist Hospital, where Brayton was expected to stay a few days for observation.
No surgery was scheduled.


Devils: A Premiere and a Finale
The National Hockey League, in association with CBS/Fox, premiered its videotape celebrating the Devils' Stanley Cup campaign yesterday.
The video will be released in the New York-New Jersey area this week ($19.98).
At the same time, one of the members of that Devils' championship cast left the team for his first head-coaching job.
As expected, Larry Robinson accepted the Los Angeles Kings' vacancy yesterday.
The 44-year-old former Montreal Canadiens and Kings defenseman had been an assistant coach with the Devils the last two seasons, was signed to a four-year contract worth a reported $3 million.


Does He Take Aspirin?
To the Editor:
The report on Senator Bob Dole's health (front page, July 22) was notable for its emphasis on prevention of cardiovascular disease.
But I was surprised to find no mention of aspirin as part of Mr.
Dole's regimen.


COMPANY BRIEFS
ALLIED HOLDINGS INC., Decatur, Ga., an automobile carrier, received a five-year contract from Chrysler Corp., Highland Park, Mich., valued at $120 million to $130 million.


Restaurants
At this time of year I find myself ordering pasta with plain tomato sauce whenever I can.
Made with good, fresh tomatoes and a sprinkling of basil, it is perfect summertime fare.
But why is it so hard to find it done well in a restaurant?
I thought about that on my final visit to Novita.
Sitting in that small, elegant room, appreciating the deep yellow walls and hand-blown Venetian sconces, I couldn't help wishing that the food had the stark simplicity of the decor.
Certainly everything about the room is appealing, from the clean lines to the pleasant, caring service.
Novita is a family affair.
The owners are Marco Fregonese, who is also the chef; his wife, Elizabeth Yoshida, and her sister Gina.
The two women are as elegant and beautiful as the decor, and they seem committed to the idea of making you comfortable.
One night I watched them pull two chairs together to make a bed for a small, sleepy patron.
Another night they bustled around rearranging tables to accommodate an awkwardly large family party.
And one afternoon, Gina Yoshida helped an older woman negotiate the steps to the sidewalk with great solicitude.


Art in Review
'The Insistent Subject'  James Danziger Gallery 130 Prince Street SoHo Through Aug. 18
This summer show seems to have something to do with portraiture.
But despite its nebulous theme, the collection includes more than its share of interesting images.


Country Fairs Show Human Insensitivity to Other Creatures
To the Editor:
Re your July 21 article on country fairs: Fairs are a cruel and callous demonstration of what is wrong in our society: an abject insensitivity to those over whom we have taken dominion.
They are hardly the place to instill in one's children values of compassion and sensitivity to others.


2 Detectives Faulted
The New York City Civilian Complaint Review Board has determined that two detectives in the Bronx used unnecessary and excessive force when they fired 22 bullets into three young robbery suspects, killing two and injuring the other on Jan. 12, officials said yesterday.


INSIDE
AT&amp;T in Lobbying Blitz
AT&amp;T sent 3,000 managers to Washington for a dramatic lobbying blitz against a sweeping bill to deregulate telecommunications.
Page D4.
Disaster on 34th Street
It was a where-were-you-when moment: 50 years ago today, an airplane slammed into the Empire State Building, killing 14.
Page B1.
Crime Is Down in New Jersey
New Jersey's crime rate declined in all categories in 1994, the first such drop since uniform crime reports were first compiled in 1967.
Page B5.
A2 Business Day


United Wisconsin Services Inc.(UWZ,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Sports of The Times; There Goes The Boss's Nobel Prize
A funny thing happened to George Steinbrenner on his way to saving Darryl Strawberry's life.
He took some heat, and his team got hot.
As he sat behind the Yankee dugout in Detroit several weeks ago, scribbling copious notes and devising a plan to restore glory to New York's baseball summer, how could he have forseen that his team would have responded so quickly to his ceremonial firing of the pitching coach?


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article yesterday about proposals to limit teen-age smoking referred incorrectly to a statement by Representative Ron Wyden, Democrat of Oregon.
Mr.
Wyden said he strongly opposed any effort take away the Food and Drug Administration's power to regulate sales of tobacco products.
He did not say that he opposed efforts to give the agency such power.


Alexander Wylly; Curator Was 59
Alexander Campbell Wylly, an art consultant and former assistant curator at the Museum of Modern Art in New York, died on Saturday at Sibley Memorial Hospital in Washington.
He was 59 years old and lived in Chevy Chase, Md.
The cause was AIDS, said his cousin, Elizabeth Beuter, of Fairfax, Va.


Duracell International (DUR,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Jun 30


Valassis Communications Inc.(VCI,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Congressional Roundup; Resumption in Senate
Breaking a two-week logjam, the chairman of the Senate Ethics Committee announced today that the committee would reconvene next week on misconduct charges against Senator Bob Packwood and try to resolve the matter before the summer recess.
The announcement by Senator Mitch McConnell, the Kentucky Republican who chairs the ethics committee, followed a day of behind-the-scenes maneuvering in which he tried to force his nemesis, Senator Barbara Boxer, Democrat of California, to back down from her threat to force the full Senate to vote on whether to hold public hearings into the accusations against Mr.
Packwood, Republican of Oregon.


Brayton Leaves Hospital Day After Crash
SCOTT BRAYTON left an Indianapolis hospital yesterday, a day after his practice car for next week's Brickyard 400 stock car race spun out, leaving him with a concussion and fractured left ankle.
Brayton said he felt fine, but a chipped bone in the ankle means he will have to wear a cast for at least three weeks. (AP)


Legget &amp; Platt (LEG,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Romancing The Swan
IN "An Uncertain Hour," the choreographer Martha Clarke's latest work for Netherlands Dance Theater 3, women in evening gowns and men in hats and suits wander amid a rocky landscape, trying to make emotional contact.
Communication is not their forte.
It all has the feel of a movie by Michelangelo Antonioni.
Or so it seems until a woman simulates sex with a stuffed swan that was previously involved with one of the men, who acts as its handler.
In those images, all outside references -- even those of the mythic Leda and her Swan -- fade away and the piece becomes, momentarily and wonderfully, pure Martha Clarke: the performance suddenly assumes the pungency of her uninhibited brand of dance-theater.
Outrageousness combines with poignancy, and bold insight is married to the beautiful visual image.
The more distilled the movement, the more intense the emotional impact.
Again, as is common in her work, Martha Clarke at her wackiest is Martha Clarke at her best.


Higher Speed Limits Raise Fatality Risks
To the Editor:
In "Speed Doesn't Kill. Bad Drivers Do" (Op-Ed, July 24), Brock Yates is correct about bad drivers but wrong about speed.
The evidence is clear that (1) higher speed limits lead to higher travel speeds; (2) higher travel speeds lead to increased crash risks, and (3) when a crash occurs, the higher the travel speed, the greater risk of death.


Belden Inc.(BWC,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Sponsors Sign Up For On-Line Service
The Yahoo!
Corporation, which operates a popular directory of sites on the World Wide Web, said yesterday that it had signed five initial sponsors as part of a plan to redesign the service and become advertiser-supported.


Also of Note
Critics' choices of some other Manhattan gallery shows:  "A BENEFIT EXHIBITION FOR D.E.A.F. INC.," Nicole Klagsbrun Gallery, 51 Greene Street, SoHo, (through today).
This show, organized by Jeff Koons, is a hodgepodge of familiar names, but the installation by Joseph Grigely is worth a visit.
The lawn furniture, beer cans and cherry pits look like the aftermath of a summer party, and the dozens of handwritten notes scattered across the table are the remains of extended conversations between Mr.
Grigely, who is deaf, and friends (Holland Cotter).


Aquatic Armageddon With Plenty of Toys
THE torrent of loose talk that ushers in "Waterworld," the most wasteful feat of one-upmanship in Hollywood history, threatens to drown out the movie itself.
How can a made-up tale of rivalry and opportunism beat the backstage melodrama of bringing "Waterworld" to the screen?
Afloat on a sea of production crises, the makers of this madly inflated action film have been held accountable for just about every imaginable sin.
The melting of the polar ice cap, which sets the film's story in motion, is one of the few relevant calamities for which they have not been blamed.
What was the point of this hubris-filled exercise?
Finally we know.
Directed by Kevin Reynolds, "Waterworld" is a big, brawny, overzealously bizarre epic punctuated by daring action scenes, which are sloppily assembled (the sky or ocean color seldom matches in any two consecutive scenes) but still exciting.
It goes slack between taunts and explosions.


ITT Corp.(ITT,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


U.S. DETAINS ARAB TIED TO MILITANTS
United States officials have taken into custody a Palestinian they say is one of the senior leaders of Hamas, the militant Islamic group that has claimed responsibility for recent bombings in Israel, Attorney General Janet Reno said today.
Immigration officials said they detained the Palestinian, Mousa Mohamed Abu Marzook, at Kennedy Airport in New York on Tuesday as he was arriving from abroad because he was on a terrorist watch list.
Mr.
Marzook, who American and Israeli authorities say is the head of Hamas's political committee, is being held at the Metropolitan Correctional Center in Manhattan.


To Local Union Leaders, A Merger Means Power
When people active in the union movement digested today's news about the merger of the nation's steel workers, automobile workers and machinists, their surprise was quickly replaced by the view that preserving old identities -- and perhaps their jobs as union officials -- is a poor substitute for the bargaining power they believe will come with more consolidation.
"I knew we had been talking to others about closer ties but I was stunned by this like everyone else," said Mike Mezo, president of Local 1010, the steelworkers' unit representing more than 15,000 current and former employees of Inland Steel Industries' sprawling mill complex here at the southwest corner of Lake Michigan.
"My next thought was: It's about time."


Olsten Corp.(OLS,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jul 2


VIACOM INC. (VIA.B,A)
Viacom Inc., the entertainment giant, yesterday reported sharply higher operating performance for its second quarter, bolstered by across-the-board revenue growth.
The company's operating cash flow -- as defined by earnings before interest, tax, depreciation and amortization -- increased 36 percent from the 1994 quarter, to $595 million, well ahead of analysts' expectations.
"It was a much better quarter" than expected, said Keith Benjamin, an analyst at Robertson Stephens &amp; Company.


International Rectifier Corp.(IRF,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Jun 30


Coalition of Senators Pushes For Comprehensive Gift Ban
A bi partisan coalition tonight forced the Senate to take up a sweeping ban on gifts that would prevent lobbyists from buying senators expensive meals or paying for travel to charity golf, tennis or ski tournaments.
The bill is expected to be adopted on Friday, but not before battles to legitimize the charity sports trips and an effort by Republican leaders to raise the limits on permissible gifts.


Acme Metals (ACME,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 25


Paine Webber Charge Leads to Big Loss
Paine Webber Inc., one of the country's largest retail brokerage firms, said yesterday that it was taking a $200 million pretax charge in the second quarter to cover the costs of settling lawsuits arising from its sales of limited partnerships in the mid-1980's.
The one-time charge, which Paine Webber expects will cover the costs of paying fines levied by the Securities and Exchange Commission and lawsuits of individual investors, caused the firm to report a loss for the second quarter of $90.5 million.


War in Korea, Fast Receding, Gets Memorial
Under a sweltering sun worlds away from the cold war combat being commemorated, President Clinton and President Kim Young-sam of South Korea dedicated a new national memorial today intended to assure that the long-gone Korean War does not remain forgotten.
"The Korean War veterans endured terrible hardships: deathly cold, weeks and months crammed in foxholes and bunkers, an enemy of overwhelming numbers, the threat of brutal imprisonment and torture," Mr.
Clinton said of a conflict in which more than 54,000 Americans died, but which has faded in the public mind between the triumphs of World War II and the turmoil of Vietnam.
"They set a standard of courage that may be equaled but never surpassed in the annals of American combat."


Amerisource Health (ASHC,NNM) reports earnings for 3d qtr to Jun 30


Kemper (KEM,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Creating Peace From a Tug-of-War


Witco Corp.(WIT,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


AETNA DROPS ATTEMPT TO SELL AELTUS INVESTMENT UNIT
The Aetna Life and Casualty Company of Hartford said yesterday that it was no longer actively trying to sell Aeltus Investment Management, a subsidiary that manages more than $21 billion in assets.
The company said it would continue to seek a buyer for Aeltus's Asian equity business, which is based in Hong Kong.
Thomas M. O'Neill, chief executive at Aeltus, said he planned to leave the company at the end of July.


The Senate Takes Time Out to Celebrate an Old-Timer's 14,000th Vote
Senators of both parties laid down their arms briefly today to commend Senator Robert C. Byrd, Democrat of West Virginia, for casting his 14,000th vote.
It seemed a quaint exercise, given that Mr.
Byrd had long ago broken the most-votes record, held by Senator William Proxmire, Democrat of Wisconsin, when he cast his 12,134th vote on April 27, 1990.
The Senate will be planning a similar citation for Senator Strom Thurmond, Republican of South Carolina, who is only 34 votes behind Mr.
Byrd.


Market Place; A Bit of Insurance, a Lot of Stock Picking
Would you like to double your money every three years?
The Securities and Exchange Commission will not allow companies to sell stock on that promise, but that is the unstated lure for a proposed stock offering of Normandy America, a new company headed by a 30-year-old money manager with an astounding 10-year record.
Normandy America is one of two new companies -- Risk Capital Re is the other -- with pending stock offerings and similar business plans.
Both companies are in the insurance business but make no bones about their strategy of doing a little bit of insurance and lot of investing in the stocks of other companies.
Normandy America presents itself as a stock picker extraordinaire, while Risk Capital plans to concentrate on investments in the insurance business.


Overall Crime Rate Drops by 3% For State, Trenton Report Shows
All kinds of crime were down in New Jersey in 1994, the only across-the-board decline since uniform crime reports were first compiled for the state in 1967.
The overall drop was 3 percent when compared with 1993.
That decline matches the national average but lags behind the Northeast region, where the drop was 5 percent.


Port Agency Trims Budget And Its Scope
Under pressure from the governors who oversee it, the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey has begun a round of budget cuts that appear to be a prelude to more drastic steps, indicating that the agency may soon be forced to scale back its historical role as a power in the region's economic development.
The authority's new executive director, George J. Marlin, has moved forward in recent weeks on his mandate to trim its work force and costs by ordering a hiring freeze and reductions in travel and other expenses.
Yesterday, the authority's board began examining the first results of a study on how the agency can reduce its spending by eliminating some jobs.


New Tick Disease Almost Claims Surgeon
A surgeon from Rockland County nearly died in intensive care last month at a Manhattan hospital, and blood tests have found that he was suffering from two tick-borne infections, the all-too-familiar Lyme disease and a sometimes lethal illness caused by a newly identified bacterium, his doctors say.
The case, the first in Rockland County involving the new bacterium, is the most serious instance of tick-transmitted illness reported in New York State this year, state health officials said.


Midland Cogeneration Venture L.P. reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Few Reports of Atrocities After Latest 'Safe Area' Falls
More than 2,000 women, children and older men, including a 103-year-old woman and a 7-day-old baby, have arrived here in surprisingly good health and spirits, a day after they were forced out of Zepa by the Bosnian Serbs.
They brought tales of two weeks of living in caves in the wooded hills during the heavy bombardment of the United Nations-designated "safe haven," but did not recount atrocities like those people brought out of Srebrenica after the Serbs overran that "safe area" on July 11.


Kansas City Southern Industries(KSU,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Grossman's Inc.(NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


International Briefs; Deutsche Bank Reports A 9% Profit Drop
Deutsche Bank A. G., Europe's biggest commercial bank, said yesterday that its operating profit fell 9 percent in the first half of 1995 as declines in interest and fee income outweighed a sharp rise in trading profits.
But the bank said its lending business revived in the last three months and predicted operating earnings would show a clear improvement in the second half.


Herbalife International Inc.(HERB,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


A Joining of Three Varied Old Warriors
Putting to rest the once-fierce division in labor ranks that time has made irrelevant, a merger of the auto workers, the steel workers and the machinists, if it takes place, will unite three still powerful if diminished unions with colorful, varied histories.
The steel and auto unions were formed during the Depression-driven rush to organize entire industries in the 1930's; the machinists, in contrast, trace their roots to the last century, when highly skilled mechanics who kept the railroads running organized themselves along craft lines.


International Briefs; Spanish Cable TV Deal
The Spanish state-controlled telecommunications company Telefonica de Espana S. A. has signed an agreement with the TV station Canal Plus to operate and distribute pay television and multimedia through cable TV networks.
The business plan will be presented in the first two weeks of September.
The agreement covers all of Spain, although it will be based initially on pilot projects in Madrid and Barcelona.
The service will be operated by Cablevision, a company in which the two groups hold 66.6 percent.
Other companies with experience in cable TV and multimedia will be invited to participate. (Reuters)


How Some Foreign Art Got to U.S. and Britain
"Seekers of the Lost Treasure" is a four-parter about some 19th- and 20th-century adventurers who plucked notable collections of art and artifacts from other lands to enrich the museums of Britain and the United States.
The programs all rely on re-creations, which, along with the Hollywood spin-off of a title, lend them a fictional quality.
But how else is a producer to make up for the lack of a movie camera at the scene?
"The Michael Rockefeller Story," the first part of Sunday's opening two hours, tells of that young man's art-collecting journey to Dutch New Guinea, which ended with his much publicized disappearance in 1961.
Speaking of publicity, at moments Jeremy Irons's upscale narration sounds like a Rockefeller production: "Rockefeller fantasies did not remain fantasies for long."


KLA Instruments Corp.(KLAC,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Jun 30


Jones and Haselrig Put Sock Into Workout
They are two tough guys who need to make good impressions with their new head coach and revive their disappointing careers.
Marvin Jones, the Jets' injury-plagued middle linebacker, is attempting to play a full season at the level expected of a former No. 1 draft pick.
Carlton Haselrig, who sat out last season with personal problems, is hoping to return to his form of 1992, when he was a Pro Bowl guard for the Pittsburgh Steelers.


Century Telephone Enterprises Inc.(CTL,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


As Citizens Take On Role of Crime-Stopper, Some Find Themselves in Dock
Juan Manuel Roman says he was awakened at about 1:30 one morning in November 1992 by the sound of shattering glass.
In total darkness and gripped by fear, he says, he got up and opened the door to the adjacent room.
When he saw a "shadow," he says, he emptied his gun.


TNP Enterprises Inc.(TNP,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Nicknames and Show Are Rucker's Charm
The play-by-play man is a cross between Marv Albert and Snoop Doggy Dogg.
The scorer's equipment, the scoreboard and a microwave oven are all plugged into the same street light, and the warm air is filled with the sounds of basketball and music, and the smell of fresh popcorn.
The real electricity, however, comes from the players themselves, gifted athletes with nicknames straight out of the World Wrestling Federation: Black Widow, Afro Puffs, Predator, Long Fingers, the Handler, and, of course, the Undertaker.


New Jobs, But Low-Paid
New Jersey will gain nearly as many new jobs this year as last year (1.6 percent, compared with 1.7 percent), despite the continuing loss of manufacturing jobs, economic forecasters from Rutgers University said yesterday.
The catch, though, is that many of the new jobs are in the lower-paid retail and service industries, said Norman J. Glickman, director of the university's Center for Urban Policy Research.


They're Not Muzzled, and They'll Make Themselves Heard


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS  Agassi and Sampras Reach Quarterfinals
Andre Agassi and Pete Sampras, the world's top two players, moved closer yesterday to a showdown at the $2.5 million Canadian Open by easily advancing to the quarterfinals.
The top-seeded Agassi breezed by the Czech qualifier Daniel Vacek, 6-3, 6-2, and Sampras downed Mauricio Hadad of Colombia by 6-2, 6-3 on the hard courts at Jarry Stadium.


Shell Canada reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Household International (HI,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Houston Industries(HOU,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


CHRONICLE
ANTONINA TUMKOVSKY will turn 90 next month, so on Wednesday the School of American Ballet, where she has taught since 1949, took the occasion to congratulate her with Champagne and cake. (The school will not be in session on her actual birthday, Aug. 21.)
Mme.
Tumkovsky, as she is universally known, still teaches 13 hours of classical ballet a week at the school, which is the academy for the New York City Ballet.
Her students there have included Patricia McBride, Suzanne Farrell and Darci Kistler.
She has a reputation for being such a tough teacher that she is known as "The Tuminator."


Japanese Banks Find Themselves Under the Gun
Five years ago, Kichinosuke Sasaki was on top of the world, controlling $11 billion in real estate and riding a wave of optimism that saw property prices rise relentlessly.
These days, his empire has pretty much collapsed, amid a wave of pessimism that is relentlessly driving prices down.
Now, he says his assets are worth less than the $3.4 billion he owes the banks.


Columbus Shuttle Still in Holding Pattern
The wait continued for Darryl Strawberry, the punishment continued toward Bill Goodstein, and George Steinbrenner wanted everyone to believe that his refusal to promote the former Met from Class AAA Columbus was strictly a baseball decision.
While the Players Association considered whether to file a grievance on Strawberry's behalf because of Steinbrenner's hesitance to recall him, the 33-year-old outfielder with the solid statistics for Columbus was prepared to toil over the next four days in Scranton, Pa.
The Metrodome, where the Yankees open a three-game series Friday against the Twins, looked far away to Strawberry.
One club official said Strawberry will not join the Yankees on this road trip, which ends in Minnesota.


Crown Central Petroleum Corp.(CNP.A,A) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Simpson Defense Advances Police-Conspiracy Theory
Lawyers for O. J. Simpson today began a three-pronged effort to prove a conspiracy by the police to frame their client, arguing that rogue officers planted blood on a sock, planted a bloody glove behind Mr.
Simpson's house and planted rigged laboratory test results with the press.
The defense advanced the first prong in testimony, with their blood-splatter expert stating that blood on the sock found at the foot of Mr.
Simpson's bed had got there by touch rather than by splatter and that some of that blood had seeped through, something that could not have happened had Mr.
Simpson been wearing it at the time.


Gay and Idle In a Summer On Cape Cod
Wally White is the writer, director, co-producer and star of "Lie Down With Dogs," the story of a young, struggling, gay New Yorker named Tommie who spends one summer playing in Provincetown.
While all those credits may make Mr.
White sound like an auteur, "Lie Down With Dogs" resembles a film-school exercise, an apprentice work filled with pseudo-arty visual images and humor that strains to be clever.
As Tommie, Mr.
White talks straight into the camera, but he is an unnatural actor.
There is an overhead shot of him lying in bed thinking about his life; then the camera actually begins to swirl in a circle.


Allied Signal Inc.(ALD,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


A Promotion Is Set For 'Seinfeld' Reruns
Columbia Tristar Television Distribution, part of the Sony Corporation, will join General Mills Inc. and the Coca-Cola/Packer Plastics unit of the Coca-Cola Company to promote the introduction of syndicated episodes of the hit sitcom "Seinfeld." The promotional budget was estimated at $25 million.


Omnicom Group Inc.(OMC,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Report Offers New Tactics For E.M.S.
In a report issued yesterday, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani recommended a series of changes at the Police Department and at the Emergency Medical Service to avoid the kind of miscommunication that led to a 35-minute delay in dispatching an ambulance to aid gunshot victims at a shootout in Rego Park, Queens, in December.
Both departments were criticized after the Dec. 18 shootout, in which police fired 247 shots during a four-block pursuit of a disgruntled tenant who killed his two landlords and wounded a bystander, later killed by police fire.
Four other people were wounded.
Victims' repeated calls to 911 resulted in E.M.S.'s confusion and delay.


Five Indicted in Extortion by Meatpackers' Union
Five current and former officials of a meatpackers' union extorted bribes from meat and food wholesalers and a supermarket chain in the New York region to guarantee deliveries and labor peace, Federal prosecutors charged yesterday.
Mary Jo White, the United States Attorney in Manhattan, said the union officials shared the bribes with the Gambino and Genovese organized crime families who, she said, "supervised and protected the criminal activities of the defendants and their co-racketeers."


WPL Holdings Inc.(WPH,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Interlake Corp.(IK,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jul 2


Westinghouse and CBS May Soon Vote on Deal
The Westinghouse Electric Corporation and CBS Inc. have tentatively scheduled meetings of their boards next week to vote on Westinghouse's cash bid to buy CBS at $81 a share, according to several people with knowledge of the negotiations.
But even if a Westinghouse buyout of CBS is approved, there will still be months when another bidder could challenge that bid.
According to one investment banker who specializes in media, the $5 billion deal could not close until Westinghouse actually paid for the CBS shares.
Westinghouse could not do that until the Federal Communications Commission approved the transfer of its television and radio station licenses, a process that could take months, giving any rivals ample time to put together their bids.


Giants Rich in Talent For the Running Game
Rodney Hampton worked out almost every day in Houston during the off season and showed up for training camp in the best shape of his career.
Gary Downs is hungry and so far may have had the best camp of any Giants player.
Herschel Walker is 33 years old and still outran half the defense during a Tuesday scrimmage.
Tyrone Wheatley, expected to arrive in camp soon, was an all-American at Michigan.
This is just part of the Giants' backfield, which is talented, big and crowded.
There are nine running backs/fullbacks on the roster, and the Giants will probably keep only five.
Walker, Hampton and Wheatley are sure to make it.
That leaves six players competing for the two remaining spots.


Fort Howard (FORT,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


A Silent-Film Femme Fatale As Victim, Too
The most remarkable thing about G. W. Pabst's 1928 silent-film masterpiece "Pandora's Box" is Louise Brooks's thoroughly modern portrayal of Lulu, a showgirl and prostitute whose downfall culminates in an encounter with Jack the Ripper.
Adapted from Frank Wedekind's play "Pandora's Box," which was the basis of Alban Berg's opera "Lulu," the movie paints its central character as an ambiguous femme fatale, as much victim as destroyer.
As she drifts from lover to lover (they include a stuffy editor who commits suicide and his son, a compulsive gambler), Lulu remains unaware of the devastating erotic charisma that she beams at every man who crosses her path.


Australian Doctors Get Right to Assist Suicide
Because of the pencil-thin green oxygen tubes that snake across his kitchen floor, Lloyd Nickson can rarely risk leaving his small apartment.
His lungs are thick with scar tissue from pulmonary fibrosis, so it is a never-ending struggle to drag enough oxygen into his diseased chest.
Still, he did force himself out of the apartment this year -- to lobby his neighbors in Darwin, Australia's northernmost city, the gateway to the parched red soil of the outback, for passage of a bill that would allow his doctors to help him die.


Nussbaum Becomes Focus Of Whitewater Testimony
A Justice Department lawyer today testified that prosecutors were surprised and frustrated when the White House counsel, Bernard W. Nussbaum, refused to allow them to inspect the papers of Vincent W. Foster Jr., breaking an agreement they believed they had reached.
The Senate Whitewater committee also heard today from a lawyer who represented the family of Mr.
Foster, the deputy White House counsel, describing the discovery of the scraps of a note detailing Mr.
Foster's disillusionment with Washington in terms that were sharply at odds with Mr.
Nussbaum's account.


BCE Mobile Communications Inc. reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


La Quinta Moves To Publicis/Bloom
La Quinta Inns Inc. has named Publicis/Bloom in Dallas, a unit of Publicis S.A., to handle its general advertising and direct marketing account, with billings estimated at $5 million to $6 million.
The account had been handled for a year by the J. Walter Thompson Chicago unit of the WPP Group until that agency and La Quinta mutually decided last week to part company.


FMC Corp.(FMC,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Shanahan Dealt to Whalers for Pronger
BRENDAN SHANAHAN, a star left wing with the St.
Louis Blues who broke an ankle during the playoffs as the Blues were eliminated in the first round, was traded last night to the Hartford Whalers for the young defenseman CHRIS PRONGER.


Last Chance
Here is a sampling of shows and exhibitions in Manhattan that are to close soon:  Closing This Weekend "WOMEN PHOTOGRAPHERS OF THE WEIMAR REPUBLIC," Jewish Museum, 1109 Fifth Avenue, at 92d Street.
Images by more than 50 photographers who worked in Germany during the 1920's and 30's.
Sunday only, 10 A.M. to 5:45 P.M.
Admission: $7; $5 for students and the elderly.
Information: (212) 423-3200.


We Won't Get Far Without Affirmative Action
To the Editor:
I agree with Andrew Sullivan's contention in "Let Affirmative Action Die" (Op-Ed, July 23) that the huge discrepancy between the scores of black and white candidates for admission to law schools is a result of the neglect of public education in the inner cities and not due to systemic racism on the part of law schools.


Donnelley (R.R.) &amp; Sons Co.(DNY,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Baby's Death From Scalding Bath Water Is Investigated
From the day he was born, with cerebral palsy and severe asthma, Dy'kqim Edmundson's life was a painful struggle.
The simplest tasks were almost beyond his reach -- sitting up, eating, even crying.
"The baby didn't really cry," his grandmother, Deborah Edmundson, remembered yesterday.
"When you fed him, he would kind of sing, make a happy sound. And he could smile."


World News Briefs; Spaniard Denies Role In Killings of Basques
In a tense debate in Parliament, Prime Minister Felipe Gonzalez today refuted recent allegations that he or his Socialist Government had any ties with death squads that attacked Basque separatists in the 1980's, calling the reports "absolutely false."
Mr.
Gonzalez, 53, has rejected demands to resign and call elections, and today he obtained the support of his former parliamentary allies, the Catalan nationalist Convergence and Union Party.
Ten days ago the Catalans had withdrawn their formal support but guaranteed the stability of Mr.
Gonzalez's minority Government until the end of the year.


4 Chinese Athletes Banned for Doping
Four Chinese track and field athletes have been banned from competing after testing positive for doping, two of them for steroids, the State Physical Culture and Sports Commission said yesterday in Beijing.
ZHANG TAIBING, a men's 200-meter runner, and ZUO XINXIA, a women's marathoner, were banned for four years for testing positive for steroids, the commission said.
LU JING and LIU JIANSONG were given three-month suspensions for "unintentionally" taking cold medicine during competition, the commission said.


The Mets Stumble Off Course Again
The Mets thought their season had turned into something other than the miserable experience it started out to be.
After the three-day All-Star Game break, Brett Butler burst out of a hitting slump.
Bobby Bonilla was on a tear of his own, giving the Mets more leverage against any contending team wanting his services.
The bullpen was finally putting out fires instead of igniting them, and third base was no longer a burial ground for stranded Met base runners.
Winning six of their first seven games made them one of the hottest teams in baseball.


For Sale: A Lawyer's Surroundings


Corrections
Because of an editing error, a brief report on Wednesday about the Nigerian Government's prosecution of coup plotters misstated the target of sanctions threatened by the United States and the European Union.
It is Nigeria, not Kenya.


Treasury Prices Up as Orders Slow
Prices of Treasury securities rose yesterday after a report showed weaker-than-expected factory orders, easing investor concern that strong economic growth would accelerate inflation.
The Commerce Department said orders for big-ticket items designed to last for more than three years fell a tenth of a percent in June; a gain of seven-tenths of a percent had been expected.


Hoechst Celanese Corp. reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


CHRONICLE
SAM DONALDSON, the ABC News correspondent, will undergo surgery on Tuesday to remove a malignant tumor from a lymph node.
The cancer, in his right groin, has been diagnosed as melanoma, Eileen Murphy, a spokeswoman for ABC News, said yesterday.
He is to enter the National Institutes of Health Clinical Center in Bethesda, Md., on Monday and remain there for about a week, Ms.
Murphy said.
The hospital treats patients who meet specific criteria, and Mr.
Donaldson qualified for a study on melanoma.


Transamerica Corp.(TA,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Carter's Done Little For Aristide's Haiti
To the Editor:
In reporting the Carter Center's attempt to discredit the elections in Haiti (news article, July 21), you say the center is "normally a strong supporter of President Jean-Bertrand Aristide." Jimmy Carter has tried to undercut President Aristide, and seems to be doing so again.


Art in Review
Yuri Dyshlenko  Phyllis Kind Gallery 136 Greene Street SoHo Through today
In 1974, when the unofficial artists of Leningrad held a four-day exhibition, 40,000 people showed up to see it.
Throughout the 1970's and 80's, the Leningrad artist Yuri Dyshlenko supported himself by doing book illustrations while refining his own version of Russian Conceptualism.
He moved to New York in 1989, and died this year.


Adm. Redfield Mason Dies at 91; Code Breaker and TV Quiz Whiz
Redfield Mason, an Indiana farm boy who helped the Navy break the Japanese military code in World War II and then won national fame when he won $100,000 on a television quiz show with an unlikely mastery of Greek and Roman mythology, died on July 9 at a nursing home in Warrenton, Va.
He was 91.
His family, who reported his death this week, said he had lived on a farm near Warrenton since his retirement from the Navy as a rear admiral in 1966.


CHRONICLE
Once again, DEE DEE MYERS, President Clinton's former press secretary, tried to dodge reporters' questions, but this time the questions were about her own arrest for driving under the influence of alcohol, The Associated Press reported.
"I've said all I want to say about this," Ms.
Myers said yesterday, as she went into her arraignment, where she pleaded not guilty to the misdemeanor charge.
The day after she was charged on June 27 with driving the wrong way on a one-way street in Washington, Ms.
Myers, now a co-anchor of "Equal Time" on CNBC and the Washington editor of Vanity Fair, conceded she should not have been behind the wheel.


Pettitte Controls Emotions And Royals
Andy Pettitte was emotional today because he is always so inclined when he throws a baseball.
He cannot control that.
The Yankee pitcher with the droopy brown eyes that make him appear as if he is sleeping when off the mound needs to be fiery and excitable to perform on it.
Both Mike Stanley and Don Mattingly are aware of this and have worked diligently this season to keep the rookie left-hander focused on firing effective pitches, not pitches he presumes will carve holes through bats.


Portland General Corp.(PGN,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Church &amp; Dwight (CHD,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


McDermott (J.) Ray (JRM,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Clinton and the Economy; Even if Growth Rebounds, the President May Not Win Comparable Political Gains
On Friday morning, the Commerce Department will issue a figure that until very recently the White House was dreading: an accounting of the economy's paltry growth in the second quarter of the year, a grim statistic that for much of the year looked as if it would be the first step off a steep cliff.
The number will likely be around five-tenths of a percent, a long, long fall from the economy's spectacular performance last year.
But now there is a growing consensus among economists and traders that the figure will likely be the year's worst and that a rebound is already under way.


Shocking . . . Gut-Wrenching . . . a Must-See
With its premiere last week, the movie "Kids" has focused attention on the enemy at home: youngsters freed for the summer to run like wild, untamed Vikings across the front stoops and sidewalks of America.
"The subjects of 'Kids' manage to kill 24 hours by hanging out and then drifting off again, moving from one place to another only to forage for drugs, alcohol and sex," says The New Yorker.
The lost teen-agers "seem to be wandering in total darkness, and their nihilism outdoes even the celebrated pessimism of Generation X."


Murray Miron, 62, Psychologist Who Aided F.B.I.
Dr.
Murray S. Miron, a psychologist who advised the Federal Bureau of Investigation about the minds of criminals for two decades, died on Wednesday at Crouse Irving Memorial Hospital in Syracuse.
He was 62 and lived in Syracuse.
He had pancreatic cancer, the Syracuse University news office said in announcing his death.


Medaphis Corp.(MEDA,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Sonat Inc.(SNT,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Betz Laboratories Inc.(BTL,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


F.C.C. Is Ordered to Delay an Auction for Wireless Licenses
For the second time in four months, a Federal appeals court here has blocked the Government from its plan to reserve a block of wireless telephone licenses for small businesses.
Responding to complaints raised by a small New York company, the United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia today ordered the Federal Communications Commission to delay an auction for the licenses that had been scheduled to start on Aug. 29.


Union Files Complaint Over Fees
The Communications Workers of America, a union that represents 34,000 state workers, says the Whitman administration is illegally holding back money that rightfully belongs to the union, to coerce members to accept a new contract.
The disputed sum -- about $270,000 a month -- is the amount the union usually collects from the 9,000 state workers who do not choose to be members.


About Real Estate; Agents Say Home Sales Remain in the Doldrums
As the summer doldrums settle in, real estate agents across the metropolitan New York region are hoping for cooler weather -- and more sales.
With the exceptions of small bustling pockets of good business and a few agents who insist that this is one of their best seasons ever, the spring and the months of June and July have left many agents glum.


Carter-Wallace Inc.(CAR,N) reports earnings for 1st qtr to Jun 30


Kerr-McGee Corp.(KMG,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Screen King Has Plot Twist
For a race called the Screen King, this one had a smash ending.
Mr.
Greeley, trained by Nick Zito, was the 3-5 favorite and had never lost at six furlongs.
Lord Carson, trained by D. Wayne Lukas, was the second choice and led all the way until they were 100 yards from home.
And then there was the long shot, Kings Fiction, trained by Allen Jerkens, who was running last with a quarter of a mile to go.


Diner's Journal
Asian Appetizers
If you like to be startled when you eat, you'll probably like Silk, an Asian-fusion restaurant on Third Avenue.
It looks like a slightly fancy Chinese restaurant, at least until the menu arrives.
But when you open it up, you find that every dish is out of the ordinary.
Consider the crispy seafood dumplings with cucumber salad in Sichuan peppercorn sauce.
The "dumplings" are big curls that crackle when you take a bite, then give way to the softness of seafood.
The texture is echoed by the sharpness of the sauce so that eating the appetizer is an entirely satisfying experience.


A Delicate Asian Flower In a Motorcycle Jacket
When Jade Li (Sandra Oh), a young Chinese-Canadian woman, is approached by a handsome white stranger, she plays the shy flower.
She smiles, blushes, covers her mouth and casts her eyes downward, acting the perfect picture of Asian daintiness.
But for Jade, the heroine of Mina Shum's wry and winning "Double Happiness," this is a cosmic joke.
And Mark (Callum Rennie) really should have known better.
He should have noticed that this little lotus blossom was wearing a black leather motorcycle jacket, standing outside a nightclub.


New Finance Decontrol Bill From G.O.P.
Republicans on the House Commerce Committee announced plans today for a broad review of American securities laws, beginning with hearings in September.
Representative Jack Fields, the Texas Republican who heads the Commerce Committee panel that will start the review, introduced a draft bill today that would rewrite many laws that have stood unchanged since the 1930's.
He proposed to move many regulatory functions from the states to the Federal Government, limit brokers' liability in lawsuits by institutional investors, end some curbs on mergers and acquisitions and relax rules that require that investors be given prospectuses before buying stock in initial public offerings.


Congressional Roundup; Gingrich Tells Ethics Panel About His Deal for Book
Speaker Newt Gingrich testified in private before the House ethics committee about his book deal today, but the senior Democrat on the panel demanded that he come back again and said the committee's sloppy procedures invited the charge of cover-up.
The Democrat, Representative Jim McDermott of Washington, said he and other committee members were "totally unprepared" to question Mr.
Gingrich because of inadequate staffing and too little time to prepare.


Bank's Chief Resigns After Failed Deals
In a surprise move, the chairman and chief executive of the Bank of Boston Corporation, Ira Stepanian, quit last night after an all-day board meeting.
The board promoted the bank's president, Charles K. Gifford, to replace Mr. Stepanian.
The shake-up follows the embarrassing collapse of a deal to merge with Corestates Financial of Philadelphia.
The proposed deal, which was called off on Saturday night, was sharply criticized by investors and divided the board.
Some analysts saw Mr.
Stepanian's resignation as a result of his insistence on keeping the company independent.


Dentist Charged in Sexual Abuse Of a Sedated Female Patient
A Manhattan dentist was charged yesterday with sexually abusing a patient while she was sedated during a bridgework procedure.
David Molho, a 58-year-old dentist who lives with his wife and two children in Scarsdale, N.Y., was arrested at his office on East 58th Street for sexually groping the patient and forcing her to touch him while she was sedated with nitrous oxide, also known as laughing gas, the authorities said.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  COUNCIL STANDS BY SEX ZONING
City Council leaders, facing increased public criticism of a plan to impose strict zoning regulations on sex-related businesses, said that their support for the measure had not wavered.
Despite the growing opposition, they said the proposal represented the best possible compromise.  [ Page B3. ]


War Turns Sarajevo Away From Europe
With faith in the West extinguished, an outgunned army on the defensive and most of the capital's intellectuals and professionals in exile, this city is turning away from a cosmopolitan European past and embracing a nationalism built on religious identity and indifference to its tradition of artistic and cultural wealth.
"The people in Bosnia feel betrayed by the Western international community," said Tarik Kupusovic, the Mayor of Sarajevo.
"All the promises that have been made by the West, after all, have never been fulfilled. People are beginning to look at Europe, and themselves, differently."


Doubt Recalled on Using Gas at Waco Siege
A top F.B.I. official testified today at Congressional hearings on the raid on the Branch Davidian compound that he did not realize that the on-scene commander had concluded that a tear-gas operation proposed for gradually ending the siege near Waco, Tex., was almost certain to escalate quickly into a broad assault.
The official, Larry A. Potts, also testified today that from the start he had doubts about the plan to use gas.
At the time of the siege, Mr.
Potts was the head of the agency's criminal division and the official in Washington with overall responsibility for action against the sect.


COMPANY NEWS
BANK OF BOSTON CORP. raised its quarterly dividend to 37 cents a share, payable on Aug. 25 to shareholders of record on Aug. 8.


The Paradoxes of Chinese Porcelain Motifs
In Chinese art, something new often turns out to be something old, reclaimed and transformed.
And images that to the casual eye appear genial and carefree can be coded emblems of discontentment and nostalgia.
Such is the message conveyed by "Chinese Porcelains of the 17th Century: Landscapes, Scholars' Motifs and Narratives," organized by Julia B. Curtis at China Institute.
Many of the 65 jars and bowls on view are virtuoso examples of the craftsman's art.
But as the exhibition and its informative catalogue suggest, they are also subtle indicators of political upheaval.


Giuliani Orders a Study on Two Airports
Criticizing the Port Authority's stewardship of the two New York City airports, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani yesterday commissioned a study on the future of the airports as a first step toward possibly bringing them under city control.
Mr.
Giuliani said Kennedy International and La Guardia Airports were lagging behind Newark and other major gateways in preparing for the future of air travel and said it was time the city made its own decisions on how to improve airport facilities and access.


Keep the Water System
After weeks of haggling, Mayor Rudolph Giuliani has failed to persuade the City Comptroller, Alan Hevesi, to approve the sale of New York City's water system for an infusion of budget funds.
Now Mr.
Giuliani says he will take Mr.
Hevesi to court.
The legal issues are complicated and subject to differing interpretations.
But we continue to believe that it would be unwise public policy for the city to sell a vast and valuable asset to pay for construction projects over the next four years.
As originally proposed in Mr.
Giuliani's budget, the city would transfer ownership of its network of reservoirs, pipelines and sewers to another government entity, the New York City Water Board.
Part of the proceeds from the sale would be used to retire existing city debt, and $1 billion would pay for capital improvements, including $200 million this year for schools alone.


Nellcor Inc.(NELL,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Jul 2


We Won't Get Far Without Affirmative Action; Not a Recompense
To the Editor:
Andrew Sullivan (Op-Ed, July 23) is right on some points.
The criteria for affirmative action should not be racial.
There is no valid reason for giving the children of black or Hispanic (not to mention Asian) academics or business executives or upper-echelon government officials or high-ranking military officers preference in hiring or admission to postsecondary education over those of working-class whites.


Reliance Steel &amp; Aluminum Co.(RS,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Rich Get Richer: Angels Land Abbott; Indians Add Hill
While the Yankees continue their pursuit of David Cone, two American League division leaders have added established pitchers to their starting rotations.
The Cleveland Indians yesterday grabbed Ken Hill from the St.
Louis Cardinals, and a few hours later the California Angels reacquired Jim Abbott from the Chicago White Sox.
The Indians and the Angels, with the league's best records, look like they should have no trouble winning division championships, but they traded for the pitchers to bolster their chances in the playoffs, where they would play each other in the first tier of games.


No Headline
"I'm so excited about this it almost brings tears to my eyes." -- GEORGE BECKER president of the steelworkers union, discussing a giant merger.  [ A1:6. ]


David G. Hays, 66, a Developer Of Language Study by Computer
David G. Hays, a social scientist and early practitioner of the budding discipline of computational linguistics, died on Wednesday at White Plains Hospital.
He was 66 and lived in the Inwood section of Manhattan.
The cause was lung cancer, his family said.


G.O.P. Lawmakers Offer a Ban On Federal Affirmative Action
A group of Congressional Republicans led by Senator Bob Dole, the front-running candidate for the party's Presidential nomination, today introduced legislation that would effectively bar the Federal Government from granting any benefits on the basis of race, ethnicity or sex.
Sponsors of the bill, offered only a week after President Clinton's ringing endorsement of affirmative action, said it would not come up for a vote until next year, a schedule that would inject the divisive issue of race- and sex-based preferences into the campaign for the White House.


Maxxam Inc.(MXM,A) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


In America; City Job, Minimum Wage
Patricia Forbes and Okeefer Thompson work for the City of New York. Sort of.
They work full time in a Human Resources Administration office in downtown Brooklyn, trying to resolve cases in which welfare clients have been unable to pay their Con Edison bills.
They are supervised by H.R.A. personnel, who also have the power to fire them.
But they are not paid by the city.
They are paid by a company called Tri-State Employment Services.
And considering what they are paid, they might as well be on welfare themselves.


Mixed-Species Organ Is Set for Transplant
An organ that is a combination of animal and human genetic material will be transplanted to a human for the first time within the next month, researchers announced today.
Experiments with these mixed-species organs, called transgenic organs, were granted clearance by the Food and Drug Administration last week and are aimed at developing two new medical technologies: the use of animal organs outside the human body, where they would act much like dialysis machines, and the use of animal organs for direct transplant into humans to replace organs that have failed.


Board Says 2 Officers Used Excessive Force on Suspects
The Civilian Complaint Review Board has determined that two Bronx detectives used unnecessary and excessive force when they fired 22 bullets into three young robbery suspects, killing two and injuring the other, officials said yesterday.
Although officials refused to disclose the details of their findings, one person familiar with the board's work said that the two detectives were not in danger when the shots were fired and that all of the bullets were fired from behind the victims.


Horace Mann Educators (HMN,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Carpenter Technology (CRS,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Jun 30


Butler International (BUTL,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


12 Charged With Racketeering
Twelve men suspected of having ties to organized crime were arrested yesterday in New Jersey and New York after a 10-month investigation by the State Attorney General's office and the State Police, The Associated Press reported.
Evidence against the men was gathered in tape recordings made by an informant and an undercover agent who infiltrated the Lucchese crime family in northern New Jersey, said Robert T. Buccino, who headed the investigation.


Senator Grassley's Surf Police
An academic study suggesting that the Internet is awash in bestiality, pedophilia and other kinky sex turns out to have been seriously flawed.
Politicians like Senator Charles Grassley who waved the study around as an argument for intrusive regulation have stopped doing so.
But Mr.
Grassley and his allies have not backed off from their drive to draft unnecessary legislative restrictions on computer communications.
Earlier this summer, Senator James Exon attached an amendment to the Senate version of a telecommunications bill that would impose Federal penalties on those who made available material deemed unsuitable for children.
The unreliable study that did much to spur this bad legislating was conducted by Marty Rimm, then an undergraduate at Carnegie-Mellon University.
It was reprinted in the Georgetown Law Journal and served as the basis for a credulous Time magazine article early this month.
Mr.
Rimm's academic supervisors have since made clear that the study had serious defects.
The likelihood that children will be accidentally deluged with sexually charged computer graphics is much smaller than Mr.
Rimm and his promoters suggested.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 2-8  ANGUISH ON SENATE BOSNIA VOTE
Senators of both parties acknowledged that a vote to break the arms embargo on Bosnia could produce no results this year and expressed anguish over making a judgment that peacekeeping had failed.
A1


International Briefs; Ricoh Bid for Gestetner
Gestetner Holdings P.L.C., a British distributor of office automation equipment, said yesterday that it had received a takeover bid of $:179 million, or about $286 million, from the Ricoh Company of Japan.
Ricoh, which makes photocopiers and other office equipment, said two weeks ago that it was mulling over the offer for London-based Gestetner.
Ricoh already owns more than 28 percent of Gestetner's stock, but also has an agreement to buy another 15 percent holding from Inchcape P.L.C., a British marketing and business-services company.SQN####(Dow Jones)


International Briefs; Imperial Chemical Profit
Imperial Chemical Industries P.L.C. of Britain said yesterday that its pretax profits more than doubled in the year's first six months, helped mostly by its industrial chemicals business.
The London-based chemical, paint and explosives concern said profits from its industrial chemicals division soared from the first half of 1994, because of lower costs and higher selling prices.
Imperial's six-month pretax profit was $:510 million, or $812.6 million, compared with $:234 million a year earlier.
Sales were $:5.1 billion, or $8.13 billion, up 14 percent from $:4.5 billion last year. (Dow Jones)


G.O.P. Urges Big Spending To Cure Capital's Problems
With Republicans everywhere else in Congress urging less spending and bureaucracy, five of them from the House today recommended an array of new programs for the District of Columbia that would cost the Federal Government billions of dollars.
Sounding unexpectedly like the Democrats they criticize for excessive spending, the Republican lawmakers said at a subcommittee hearing that the programs would help create a vision of the urban future that could serve as a model for other troubled cities.


Fund American Enterprises Holdings Inc.(FCC,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Tiny Foot Bones May Show A Giant Leap for Mankind
Footprints preserved in volcanic ash show that human ancestors in Africa were walking upright as early as 3.7 million years ago, making this behavior one of their first and most distinctive departures from all other primates.
But was walking the only way these protohumans got about?
Were they still climbing trees, in the manner of chimpanzees, for safety, sleeping and gathering fruits and nuts?
These questions have long puzzled and divided anthropologists studying crucial evolutionary changes in the early hominids, or human forerunners, after their divergence from the apes.
Now the discovery of four foot bones in South Africa has produced the best fossil evidence yet for how the ancestors of modern man moved about, and may yield compelling answers or simply rekindle the flames of old debates.


Unabating Heat Wave and Humidity Keep Emergency Crews Busy
The stagnant heat and humidity that have afflicted the New York region have taken a particular toll on the elderly and those with respiratory problems, causing a 15 percent increase in emergency calls in New York City's five boroughs, officials said yesterday.
While slightly lower humidity and a slight breeze offered some respite yesterday, people suffering from asthma and other respiratory ailments have been staying indoors, their air-conditioners locked on high.
Over the last five weeks, poor ozone conditions have made breathing difficult for those most vulnerable, sometimes forcing them to emergency rooms or to seek advice from physicians, paramedics, even the weatherman.


Zeigler Coal Holding Co.(ZEI,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Niagara Mohawk Power Corp.(NMK,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Abroad at Home; Crimes Against Humanity
In the tumult of recent events in and about Bosnia, the significance of one has not been adequately understood.
That is the indictment of the Bosnian Serb leaders, Radovan Karadzic and Gen.
Ratko Mladic, on charges of genocide and crimes against humanity.
Given the horrors on the ground, the indictments may have seemed a legal abstraction remote from reality.
After all, how would the defendants be brought to trial?


Methanex Corp.(MEOHF,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


AT&amp;T Sends a Message to Washington, Person to Person
The AT&amp;T Corporation sent 3,000 of its managers into the nation's capital today for a last-minute lobbying blitz on the only major question that seems unsettled concerning a sweeping House bill to deregulate the communications industry: the date of the vote.
The bill would change almost every aspect of the communications industry, from broadcasting and cable television to telephones, with long-distance phone companies the only clear losers.
The long-distance industry is now fighting to keep the House from voting next week.





THREE BIG UNIONS ARE SET TO MERGE, CREATING A GIANT
In the face of the American labor movement's long-skidding fortunes, three of the nation's biggest industrial unions -- the steel workers, the automobile workers and the machinists -- declared today that they would merge.
They invited other unions to join them.
The merger announced today will take five years to complete, the unions' leaders said, but the result will be a two-million-member behemoth.
Together these unions' wage gains of the 1950's and 1960's led American blue-collar workers into the middle class.
Now these workers are losing ground to inflation, cuts in benefits, and the shrinkage of manufacturing industries.


An Elephant, a Chocolate Bar and Vietnam
In 1968, a group of Green Berets arranged the delivery of an elephant to a small Vietnamese village.
The delivery was airborne.
According to production notes for "Operation Dumbo Drop," Disney's cheery account of that mission, "Were it not for the fateful day the Dumbo Drop mission took place -- the day Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. was assassinated -- this would have been a newsworthy event."
Well, better late than never.
Now "Operation Dumbo Drop" turns what cannot have been strictly a sunny story into blithe family entertainment, largely overlooking the fact that there was a war going on.
The model for this is a lot closer to "McHale's Navy," which is mentioned here, than it is to "Platoon." But in the end, this generally lighthearted Vietnam caper does try to teach a lesson of sorts, since the gift of an elephant becomes a form of war reparations.
As one of the film's American officers puts it, "Maybe we all need to do one good thing before we go."


Budget Cuts Begin At Port Authority
Under pressure from the governors who oversee it, the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey has begun a round of budget cuts that may be the first step in scaling back the agency's dominant role in the region's economic development.


Appearances Affect Water Protection Plan


At the Bar; Wherein a 'New York style litigator' is cast as the heavy in the Whitewater affair.
Even people who used to be Bernie Nussbaum's friends are saying unkind things about him these days, saying he could make an innocent person look guilty.
Although Bernard W. Nussbaum, the former White House counsel, is not scheduled to testify before the Senate committee investigating the Whitewater matter until at least next week, he has already been an important presence in the hearings.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.75
8.75
7.25
DISCOUNT RATE
5.25
5.25
3.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
5.81
5.76
4.30
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.38
5.44
4.40
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.34
5.41
4.83
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.42
6.45
7.27
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.84
6.88
7.54
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.72
7.75
8.34
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.17
6.19
6.40
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Another Take on 'Uncle Vanya,' Set in Australia
For a man who rarely leaves his estate, Uncle Vanya seems to be everywhere lately.
In the last year, he has turned up as Wallace Shawn in the modern-dress film "Vanya on 42d Street" and as Tom Courtney on Broadway.
Another Vanya film, directed by and starring Anthony Hopkins, is in the works.
This explosion of Vanyas is a tribute to the enduring emotional truth and turmoil in Chekhov's rich and malleable play, which has been given yet another unexpected twist in "Country Life." As written and directed by Michael Blakemore, it is less an adaptation than a spinoff of "Uncle Vanya."
Mr.
Blakemore transports Chekhov's plot and characters to a sheep ranch in Australia in 1919, and creates a film of charm and visual splendor.
He greatly enhances the comedy of the story, in direct proportion to how much he short-changes its emotions.
"Country Life" is Chekhov Lite, and it works best as a terrifically acted comedy of manners.


IMC Global Inc.(IGL,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Jun 30


Alberto-Culver Co.(ACV,N) reports earnings for 3d qtr to Jun 30


Rule Changes Are Coming For Truckers
The rules that govern how many hours a truck driver may work were written in 1937, and the consensus of both the industry and its regulators is that it is time to change them.
There are Interstate highways now, gears that shift more easily and suspensions that smooth the ride so that a driver's head no longer hits the cab ceiling with each bump.
There are quiet cabs, air-conditioning and cruise control, all making it obvious that change is needed.
But it is not so obvious what that change should be.


Three Resign After an Error In Transfusion
Two nurses and a laboratory technician involved in a botched blood transfusion performed on an Emergency Medical Service paramedic have resigned, a spokesman for Coney Island Hospital said yesterday.
The spokesman, Kenneth Kiernan, said that a head nurse, a nursing supervisor and a lab technician at the hospital, where the procedure was performed last week, had resigned "in lieu of disciplinary action."


Williams Cos.(WMB,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Allies Condemn Vote
Western European governments and Russia consider the Senate vote a grave mistake, and they warned again that American arms shipments to the Bosnian Government would lead to the withdrawal of all United Nations forces.
Having recently strengthened the United Nations force with about 10,000 additional troops and won United Nations assent to increased NATO air strikes if the Bosnian Serbs attack the enclave around Gorazde, Western European governments said the Senate vote could undermine the impression of greater allied resolve.


Home Video
Thanks largely to best-selling Disney videos, about 115 million of the 235 million cassettes sold in the United States during the first quarter of 1995 were intended for children.
But like the movie category, fast-growing "kid vid" always needs fresh material, and it also helps if a title's reputation precedes it.
On Tuesday, for example, Polygram issued the first two cassettes of "The Busy World of Richard Scarry." More than 100 million books by the acclaimed illustrator and storyteller, who died last year, have been sold, and his stories have been incorporated into an animated television series.
To date, however, Mr.
Scarry has been a limited presence on home video.


Pitney Bowes Inc.(PBI,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


A City Of Glitter, Salt Water And Casinos
WE were low-rollers in a high-roller town.
My wife and I learned that the moment we arrived at Bally's Park Place to spend a weekend in Atlantic City.
Here was a city, I'd anticipated, for pop-culture epiphanies.
Its streets are on the Monopoly board; Miss America is crowned there every September.
It's a place where American dreams of easy money and perpetual pleasure are vigorously marketed, where there are shows every night and the ocean is just a few steps away from the hoopla.
Beyond three evenings of entertainment -- Donna Summer, the Beach Boys and a revue called "Hot Cha Cha" -- our plans were indefinite: stroll the boardwalk, laze on the beach, eat seafood and gamble a little.
We lost our first gamble at the reception desk.


Flaming Horror on the 79th Floor; 50 Years Ago Today, in the Fog, a Plane Hit the World's Tallest Building
The last thing the air traffic controller at La Guardia Airport told the pilot that foggy Saturday morning 50 years ago today sounded almost like an afterthought: "At the present time, I can't see the top of the Empire State Building."
"Roger, tower, thank you," the pilot, Lieut.
Col.
William F. Smith Jr., muttered into his push-to-talk cockpit microphone, heading west toward Newark.


China Says Detained American Rights Advocate Admits Falsifying TV Documentaries
China said today that Harry Wu, the American citizen being held here on charges of spying, had confessed to deliberately falsifying information in two documentaries he helped prepare last year on China's penal system.
But a videotape sold here today by a Chinese company, showing Mr.
Wu being interrogated under intimidating circumstances, failed to fully back up the Chinese Government's allegations.


Dogs, Cats and a Boa Constrictor, Singing
There may be great passion, even nobility, in people's relationships with their pets.
But in the telling, the details of such relationships, like cute baby stories and sexual specifics, tend to be embarrassing and remarkably monotonous.
Unless you are J. R. Ackerly or James Thurber, they are probably best divulged only to intimate, tolerant friends.
Even as nimble a wit as A. R. Gurney doesn't avoid the sticky, sentimental cliches inherent to the subject in his popular comedy "Sylvia" (though Sarah Jessica Parker, as a canine object of desire, does).
There is now, however, a musical revue that makes that dog lover's exercise in fluff seem like "The Critique of Pure Reason." It is called (in a wishful echo of the title of the eternal hit "Cats") "Pets!," and it opened last night at the Theater East.


Rangers' Rally Ends Slide At 10
Rangers 2, Orioles 1
Will Clark and Mickey Tettleton hit consecutive run-scoring doubles in the eighth inning last night to help the Texas Rangers end their 10-game losing streak with a 2-1 victory over the host Baltimore Orioles.
The Rangers were on the verge of their fourth consecutive one-run loss before rallying to beat the Orioles for the first time in five games this season.
The 10-game skid was the longest in the majors this season and the Rangers' longest since a 12-game drought in 1982.


Road Warriors in Pink In a Biking Documentary
The most likable of the several women profiled in "She Lives to Ride," Alice Stone's breezy documentary film about women on motorcycles, is an 82-year-old road warrior named Dot Robinson who tools around Florida on a pink Harley-Davidson that has a lipstick case built into its handlebars.
Although she might well reject the label, Ms.
Robinson is certainly a feminist pioneer.
In 1935, she and her husband, Earl, set the record for a cross-country motorcycle run (89 hours), with a sidecar attached.
After winning a 500-mile endurance run on the East Coast, Ms.
Robinson waged a successful campaign to overturn the American Motorcycle Association's ban on including women in its national competition.
She went on to found the Motor Maids, a flourishing women's motorcycle club whose members wear quaint blue uniforms, white boots and white handkerchiefs.


Florio's Turn as Talk Show Host
Jim Florio is the latest deposed governor to take to the airwaves as a talk-show host.
Scheduled topics for his official debut today between 5 and 7 P.M. on WCTC-AM are the new Korean War Memorial in Washington and proposed cuts in veterans benefits, said Renee Kancylarz, a station spokeswoman.


Equitable of Iowa Cos.  (EIC,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


For Children
'Explore Korea'  'A Visit to Grandfather's House'
Newark Museum  49 Washington Street  University Heights  (201) 596-6550  Recommended ages: 4 to 12  Through January 1997
Your grandfather's house may have never looked this calm or neat.
Where the Newark Museum once had a recreated ancient Egyptian home, in its children's Junior Gallery, there now stands a recreated rural Korean landowner's home.
Like the Egyptian house, the Korean one is Spartan in spirit and imparts a strong sense of culture.


Ultramar Corp.(ULR,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


For the Victims
To the Editor:
"After Decade, a Child Abuse Case Lives On" (front page, July 19) mentions dramatic changes in standards for investigating child sexual abuse.
You allude to the number of interviews children in this case had to go through (more than a dozen), suggesting that numerous interviews can "subtly pressure children to model their stories to please the practitioner."


Art in Review
'Other Rooms'  Ronald Feldman Fine Arts 31 Mercer Street (near Grand Street) SoHo Through Aug. 4
This exhibition insinuates other voices into the SoHo gallery context by extending invitations to four artist-run spaces and collectives from Brooklyn: Pierogi 2000, Sauce, Momenta Art and Four Walls.
Each space has organized its own mini-exhibition within the cavernous Feldman setting, tilting at the windmill of the group show format in ways that range from serious to irreverent.


Lewis Still Has a Goal or Two in Mind, Even if It Takes Him 30 Feet
Carl Lewis has just turned 34 years old.
This is his 17th year as a world-class athlete, and illness has slowed him for weeks.
But he is here to long-jump Saturday in Colorado Springs in the United States Olympic Festival, and today, in an hourlong news conference, he told why he is here and why, at an advanced track and field age, he is still sprinting and jumping.
He may be the most glamorous athlete in his sport, and with seven Olympic gold medals he is certainly one of the most successful.
He has won the long jump in the last three Olympics.


Union Texas Petroleum Holdings Inc.(UTH,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Lincoln Electric reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Do You Exist if the Internet Erases You?
Anyone who has ever been trapped in voice-mail hell -- when a computer-generated voice answers the phone and gives five minutes of options you can't escape -- will latch onto the neat, technophobic idea behind "The Net." Sandra Bullock, as a meek computer expert named Angela Bennett, stumbles across a program so powerful it can tamper with Wall Street, air-traffic control and the Federal Government.
When the program's vile owners come after her, they create a big-time equivalent of the machine that ate your bank card: the computers eat her identity.
Her fingerprints, Social Security number and picture I.D. are transferred to someone else, and Angela Bennett vanishes.
If the computers say you don't exist, how can you prove that you do?
This paranoid fantasy is so resonant that it makes "The Net" an enjoyably creepy thriller, even though Irwin Winkler belongs to the nothing-is-too-obvious school of directing.


Art in Review
Leigh Bowery  Tanya Bonakdar Gallery 130 Prince Street SoHo Through today
This posthumous exhibition introduces Leigh Bowery, performance artist, drag queen, model and fashion designer extraordinaire, and, as an afterthought, acknowledges his better-known persona, the Leigh Bowery who appears, large and naked, in several of Lucian Freud's best recent paintings and prints.
Mr.
Bowery was large and well-proportioned, with a great sense of humor and style, as well as a beautifully androgynous face that took well to imaginative makeup.
He operated in the gap between art and fashion, and the evidence here suggests that he fulfilled his destiny with unusual efficiency.


Penny-Pinching on Nicaragua
Senator Jesse Helms's vindictiveness should not be allowed to threaten the tiny amount of foreign aid Washington now sends to Nicaragua.
Mr.
Helms, chairman of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, has cooked up a bogus issue to hold over the head of Nicaragua's President, Violeta Chamorro.
He says her Government has not made enough progress in settling the claims of American citizens whose property was seized by the Sandinistas after their revolution in 1979.
Before Monday President Clinton must certify that Nicaragua's actions on settling the property disputes and on human rights is satisfactory.
Otherwise aid will be cut off unless he grants a waiver.


Wounded Man Pulls Bullet From Head
A 73-year-old retired Manhattan construction worker who was shot above his right eye by his 53-year-old companion used his fingers to pull the bullet from the wound in his forehead while being treated at Harlem Hospital Center, the police said.
The victim, John Bryant, of 305 West 149th Street, was shot during an argument with Florence Grady, his companion for the last 15 years, said a police spokesman, Doram Tamari.
But the .22-caliber bullet, fired by a small, two-shot Derringer pistol, apparently failed to penetrate his skull.


When Artwork Has a Sticky Back
The ancient Romans liked to decorate their rooms with frescos of villas and landscapes.
Wallpaper designers in the 19th century depicted Gothic castles.
"Kitsch to Corbusier: Wallpapers From the 1950's," at the Cooper-Hewitt National Design Museum, opens with a 1954 design showing modern houses nestled on leafy Californian hillsides: you could enjoy the fantasy of inhabiting a sprawling villa even if you actually lived in a cramped city apartment.
Joanne Kosuda-Warner, the curator of "Kitsch to Corbusier,"presents the 1950's as a golden age of wallpaper, prompted, paradoxically, by a drastic drop in sales.
Manufacturers strove to make their papers easier to hang, more durable and, above all, more fun.
To overcome wallpaper's stodgy image, designers adopted modern motifs like rocket ships and television antennas, ranch houses and electron orbits.
What's more, they adopted the visual language of modern art.


Inside Art
San Francisco Museum Expands
Los Angeles won't be the only West Coast city with an interesting mix of just-renovated museums: San Francisco is catching up fast.
In January, the San Francisco Museum of Modern Art opened its new $60 million, 225,000-square-foot building.
Now the Legion of Honor has announced that in November it will reopen its building, a 1924 reproduction of an 18th-century French palace, which has been closed for three years.
The project completes the reorganization of all the art belonging to the Fine Arts Museums of San Francisco.
The Legion of Honor renovation, which has not altered the building's neo-classical facade, includes a 35,000-square-foot expansion, increasing the museum's space by 42 percent.
The garden level gained a 9,500-square-foot temporary exhibition gallery, skylit courtyard and study center.
The museum has also been strengthened to protect it from earthquakes.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Big Charge at Paine Webber Leads to $90.5 Million Loss  Paine Webber took a $200 million pretax charge in the second quarter to cover the costs of lawsuits arising from its sales of limited partnerships a decade ago.
The one-time charge, which Paine Webber expects will cover the costs of paying S.E.C. fines and settling suits by individual investors, caused the firm to report a $90.5 million loss for the second quarter.  [ Page D3. ]
3Com to Buy Chipcom  3Com agreed to buy Chipcom for roughly $700 million in stock, creating the nation's second-largest maker of computer network equipment.
The acquisition would enable 3Com to sell a wider range of products to corporate customers.
In response, 3Com's shares lost $2.125, while Chipcom's shares gained $7.50.  [ D3. ] 'Soft Landing' May Be Here  Economists and traders expect today's gross domestic product to be the year's worst.
At the White House, officials are already declaring that the much talked-about "soft landing" has finally arrived.
The merged union would have two million members.  [ A1. ] Union members were surprised, but happy foreseeing greater bargaining power.  [ A14. ] AT&amp;T Invades Washington  Thousands of AT&amp;T managers swept into Washington for a lobbying blitz.
The company shaved operating costs by $250 million, or 8 percent.  [ D4. ] Dow Chemical Earnings Soar  Dow Chemical said second-quarter earnings more than doubled to $503 million, or $1.84 a share, reflecting higher prices.  [ D4. ] No Trade Gain Seen for U.S.
The Director General of the World Trade Organization said the United States would gain no advantage by not joining the agreement on trade in financial services.  [ D2. ] Hotel TV Going Interactive  Those closed-circuit TV services for hotel guests are getting a wake-up call by interactive technology, but advertisers are still cautious.
Stuart Elliott: Advertising.  [ D7. ]


Harsco Corp.(HSC,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Jannock Ltd.(JANNF,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Executive Changes
AMWAY CORP. , Ada, Mich., said its co-founder and chairman, Jay Van Andel, would step down on Sept. 1 and be replaced as chairman by his son, Steve Van Andel.
EASTMAN KODAK CO. , Rochester, promoted Carl Gustin, its digital-imaging head, to senior vice president and chief marketing officer.


Parents' Deaths Were Fatal To Helpless Son
For a week before he died, officials say Barry Jacobs, who was mentally and physically handicapped, lay on his living room couch without food or water, unable to help himself as his parents lay dead in the same room.
Mr.
Jacobs and his parents were found dead on Tuesday at the Hastings Village condominiums after neighbors complained of a foul odor from their one-bedroom apartment.


In Justice Breyer's Opinion, A Footnote Has No Place
Any reader of Supreme Court opinions knows that the devil is in the details: those pesky footnotes that Justices use to amplify, minimize or otherwise muddy what they have just written in the text.
Justices also use footnotes to bash one another or, less frequently, to offer an olive branch to a colleague whose vote they need to hold a fragile majority.
Given that context, it is notable, if not unprecedented (no one keeps records on this sort of thing), that Justice Stephen G. Breyer went through his freshman year on the Court without writing a footnote.
This was scarcely an oversight.


Times Mirror Chief Stresses Primacy of Newspapers
After weeks of announcing layoffs and closing newspapers, Mark H. Willes, the new chief executive of the Times Mirror Company, laid out in his first interview here today a surprisingly conservative view of the company and how he intends to expand it by focusing largely on its papers.
Mr.
Willes insisted that the heavy rounds of cutbacks, which included the swift shutting down of New York Newsday and hundreds of layoffs at The Los Angeles Times, were painful but necessary to restore the company's financial health.
He said that more cuts were coming in the corporate headquarters, but that other publications, like The Hartford Courant, were safe.


Sleazy Sex in Manila To Support the Family
Late in "Midnight Dancers," Mel Chionglo's sprawling drama of three brothers caught up in Manila's subculture of male prostitution, the youngest brother, Sonny (Lawrence David), stops for a moment to reflect on the spiritual cost of selling one's body to strangers night after night.
"We lost something," says the character, who with his baby-faced pout looks barely 18.
"I don't know what, but something, somehow is lost."


Supporters Of Sex Zoning Stand Fast
City Council leaders, facing increased public criticism of a plan to impose strict zoning regulations on sex-related businesses, said yesterday that their support for the measure had not wavered.
Despite the growing opposition, they said, the proposal represents the best possible compromise.


Grace (W.R.) &amp; Co. (GRA,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


New Chief for Detention Center
For years, the Essex County Youth House has been criticized by government officials and clergymen for overcrowding, cockroach-infested rooms and brutal beatings of juvenile offenders detained there.
Yesterday, James Treffinger, the County Executive, announced that he had found someone capable of turning the center around.
The new director will be Joe Clark, the former principal of Eastside High School in Paterson, whose approach to education was portrayed in the 1989 movie "Lean on Me."


Hexcel Corp.(HXL,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jul 2


Jaime de Mora y Aragon, 70, A Noble Spanish Bon Vivant
Jaime de Mora y Aragon, a flamboyant Spanish aristocrat whose amiable antics made him the toast of the Costa del Sol, died on Wednesday at a hospital near his home in Marbella, Spain.
He was 70.
His doctors said the cause was the latest of a series of a heart attacks he had suffered in recent years.
Whether he was playing the piano in a Marbella cabaret or wrestling in Argentina, Mr. de Mora cut a memorable figure.
With his tall, slender build, slicked-back hair, waxed mustache, monocle and cane, he was once likened to a blue-blooded Salvador Dali.
As a fixture in Marbella since the early 1960's, Mr. de Mora, or Jimmy as he was widely known, became such a favorite among the wealthy and wellborn who make the resort their summer playground that he was named by the city's tourist office as its official greeter.
The role suited him.
For although he was at various times a waiter, bullfighter, taxi driver, model and movie actor, Mr. de Mora was primarily a promoter, one who provided the public face for an assortment of business ventures from nightclubs to theatrical productions financed with other people's money.
Even his lavish annual parties were someone else's extravagance, that of the Saudi financier Adnan N. Khashoggi.
The son of a wealthy count and a member of a collateral line of the Spanish royal family, Mr. de Mora was born in Madrid with an array of advantages, most of which he promptly put behind him.
Dropping out of school at the age of 17, he entered the bohemian life of Paris, learned to play the piano and married a Mexican actress and later a Swedish model.
His role as an international gadabout was curtailed somewhat in 1965, when he was convicted in asbentia in Italy for passing bad checks.
For all his popularity in Spain, Mr. de Mora was apparently considered a bit much by the Belgian royal family.
In 1960, when his sister, Fabiola, married King Baudouin, he was excluded from the wedding.
Mr. de Mora secured some revenge of sorts.
Cast as the Belgian Ambassador in an Italian film, he played the diplomat in drag.
Even in his official role with the tourist office, Mr. de Mora tended to go over the top.
Last August, for example, to publicize an annual gathering of motorcyclists, he put out the word that Michael Jackson and Lisa Marie Presley had chosen Marbella for a belated honeymoon.
The announcement drew a horde of gullible photographers as look-alikes enlisted by Mr. de Mora were escorted by 50 motorcycles.
He is survived by his wife, the former Margit Ohlson, and his adopted son Fernando, who as Fernando Diaz Santiago had been his longtime personal secretary before a legal adoption in 1992.


Transatlantic Holdings Inc.(TPH,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


A Train Along the Nile Reflects a 'Real' Egypt
Train 857, four dented and unpainted third-class passenger cars attached to a 20-year-old diesel locomotive, clanked and groaned its way out of the Aswan station, barely outpacing the donkey carts along the road.
Some of the passengers who were jammed into the cars would be carried for the next 11 hours through dun-colored mud-brick villages and green fields of corn, sunflowers and rice paddies to the Luxor station, but many hopped off at the 35 stops along the route.
The train never strayed from the fertile ribbon of land that hugs the Nile.
Though 98 percent of the country's people live along the river, a third-class railroad car is a reminder that Egypt is two countries.


Air Express International Corp.(AEIC,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Hercules Inc.(HPC,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Nipsco Industries(NI,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Hauling Nature Back Down to Earth
The Organic Machine The Remaking of the Columbia River  By Richard White  130 pages.
Hill &amp; Wang. $17.95.
Our Natural History The Lessons of Lewis and Clark  By Daniel B. Botkin  300 pages.
Grosset/Putnam. $25.95.


Country Fairs Show Human Insensitivity to Other Creatures; RocklandFest Beckons
To the Editor:
Your July 21 article on country fairs was disappointing only in that RocklandFest, the country fair of New York's Rockland County, was not mentioned.


Quebecor Printing Inc. reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Art in Review
Carmen Lomas Garza  Whitney Museum of American Art at Philip Morris 120 Park Avenue (at 42d Street) Through Sept. 22
Carmen Lomas Garza's painting "Beds for Dreams" was one of the strongest images from "Chicano Art: Resistance and Affirmation," a show that traveled the country four years ago, and it was also one of the quietest.
It depicted a small white clapboard house at night.
On the roof, two young girls gazed, enchanted, at the full moon breaking through clouds, while in a room below their mother spread coverlets on their beds.


Art in Review
JoAnn Verburg  Robert Mann Gallery 42 East 76th Street Through Aug. 18
The soft light of Italy lends many of JoAnn Verburg's color photographs a languid air.
Ms.
Verburg records casual moments of Italian vacations, from a man reading poetry on a balcony to a vase of pink flowers shimmering in a sun-dappled courtyard.


Seles Nervous About Return Tomorrow
One day shy of 27 months from the day she was stabbed, MONICA SELES makes her long-awaited return to competitive tennis tomorrow.
"If I step on the court, there is nothing that is bad," the 21-year-old Seles said yesterday via satellite.
"Just to be there and play some great tennis."


Senate Vote to End Embargo May Prove a Pyrrhic Victory
After their vote to break the arms embargo on Bosnia, senators of both parties acknowledged today that their action may well produce no result this year and could lead to the dispatch of American troops to help in the withdrawal of the United Nations force.
A number of senators expressed their anguish about a vote that amounts to a judgment that the peacemaking effort in Bosnia is futile and that the warring sides must be left to fight to the bitter end.
But they said they had concluded that the alternatives were much worse.


Canadian Airlines reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


We Won't Get Far Without Affirmative Action; A Backward Move
To the Editor:
I applaud President Clinton for taking a strong position to uphold affirmative action.
Republican attempts to dismantle this program designed to achieve equal opportunity for minorities and women in the work force is mean-spirited and antithetical to the aims of what we claim America to be as a democracy.


Article Says 2 Authors Tried to Exploit Times List
Business Week reported yesterday that a careful campaign may have manipulated the sales of a nonfiction book to get it on the influential best-seller list of The New York Times.
The magazine described what it said was an effort "to inflate and breach the integrity" of The Times's system for measuring book sales by placing bulk orders and systematic small orders with book sellers whose sales results might be tallied by the paper.


FoxMeyer Health Corp.(FOX,N) reports earnings for 1st qtr to Jun 30


AMERICAN INTERNATIONAL GROUP INC. (AIG,N)
The American International Group, one of the country's largest insurance companies, said yesterday that its second-quarter net income rose 15.3 percent.
Profits increased in all of the company's major lines of business, with gains of more than 20 percent in both life insurance and property and casualty insurance business.
There were also gains in its airplane leasing and other financial businesses.


Fletcher Challenge Canada Ltd. reports earnings for Qtr to Jun 30


No Time for Showtime On U.S. Olympic Team
In a variation on the theme of pro basketball's summer, all those perceived as showoffs and troublemakers from last year's United States team at the world championships have been locked out of the 1996 Summer Olympics in Atlanta.
According to a person close to USA Basketball, written or oral acceptances have already been received from the first 10 players picked by the selection committee.
The list, predictably enough, does not include many of the controversial young guns from last summer's world championship team like Derrick Coleman, Alonzo Mourning, Larry Johnson and Shawn Kemp.


Outback Steakhouse (OSSI,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


International Briefs; Allianz Profit Is Up
Allianz Versicherung A. G., Europe's largest insurer, said yesterday that its profit rose 11 percent in 1994, excluding one-time gains, as a "significant reduction" in its underwriting loss compensated for premium-income growth of less than 1 percent.
Net income in 1994 was 1.34 billion Deutsche marks ($964 million) compared with a 1993 net profit of 1.46 billion marks, but that included a one-time gain of 253 million marks from tax benefits.
The results were in line with preliminary figures released by the company in May. (Bloomberg Business News)


The Baby Bells and their new technology begin to shake up the hotel-based television industry.
SPONSORED information services for hotel guests, once as drowsy as a tired traveler, are getting a loud wake-up call in the form of interactive technology.
But advertisers are proceeding cautiously as some big new entrants to the field are already deciding to, well, check out.
The industry was long characterized by small, entrepreneurial companies producing programs on videotape loops or laser disks for the closed-circuit television systems of hotels and resorts.
The services were prototypically passive: guests need only turn on the set -- often pretuned to the channels carrying them -- and watch.


China Offers a Video Interrogation


Investigating Attacks on Turtles
Who (or what) is mutilating the sea turtles of New Jersey?
In the past month, at least three turtles have been deliberately killed and four others badly cut, The Associated Press reported.
Mechanical causes -- a tugboat, used by the Army Corps of Engineers in a dredging project, for example -- have not been ruled out, but some of the turtles were clearly attacked by people, state officials said.
The corps and the National Marine Fisheries Service are investigating.


Rutgers Protesters Plead Guilty
Six Rutgers University students who took part in an April protest demanding the resignation of the school's president pleaded guilty yesterday to obstructing a highway.
They were sentenced to 60 hours of community service and fined $302 each.


On My Mind; Arresting The Negotiators
The top political and military leaders of the Bosnian Serbs must be arrested and held for war-crime trials if they appear in any country in the world.
This decision by a United Nations tribunal pleases Western governments trapped in the Bosnian disaster as it will please millions passionate against the Bosnian Serbs.
All right, then, the question is: What now?
How do you negotiate with men you demand be arrested on sight?
The answers I get from officials of the U.S., the U.N., the tribunal and diplomatic veterans of Bosnian peace negotiations are totally clear: "We don't know."
The price of making negotiations impossible by issuing arrest warrants for one side can be terrifyingly high.
Without peace talks, the ever-deeper Western involvement can bring Europe to where it stood 81 years ago this week -- at the cusp of a world war.
The issue was what Bismarck had predicted would bring war one day -- "some damn foolish thing in the Balkans." It turned out to be Serbia.
Crowds in Austria, which wanted to swallow Serbia, screamed, "Serben mussen sterben." Serbs must die.
The outlines of a Bosnian solution have been heartbreakingly obvious.
Yesterday I received a faxed letter from one of the indicted men, the Bosnian Serb President, Radovan Karadzic.
It came after I had inquired among supporters of the Bosnian Serbs in the U.S. about the Serbs' bottom line.
Dr.
Karadzic said the "blueprint for peace" was a European plan of 1993, originated by Lord Owen of Britain and Thorvald Stoltenberg of Norway.
It called for the recognition of Muslim, Croatian and Serbian republics within a loose Bosnian government.
The plan gave 49 percent of the land to the Muslim republic, 33.5 to the Serbs and 17.5 percent to the Bosnian Croats, and proposed two years of U.N. administration of Sarajevo.
Dr.
Karadzic said that the plan meant self-determination for all parts of the former Yugoslavia.
Interpretation: The Serbs must have the same rights of self-determination and alliance that the Muslims and Croatia have won.
The Bosnian Serbs and Croats accepted the European plan; the Muslims did not.
Two years later, the West has to recognize that putting pressure on the Bosnian Serbs will not bring peace unless some is also put on the Muslims.
But how to resume negotiations?
One way would be for the top Serbs to fly off somewhere, maybe Pakistan or Iran, which have offered to jail them, and hold out their wrists.
Or the West could do what the Muslims want -- stall negotiations until the Bosnian Serbs are smashed.
That would take a massive Western invasion, followed by an occupation to keep the Serbs submissive, something not even the Nazis managed.
The other is to think of gimmicks to get around the negotiating roadblock of the arrest edict.
Hold them in Bosnia?
No, that would make the site an instant death trap.
U.N. headquarters?
Not legal, says the tribunal prosecutor.
An Italian judge even raises the question whether any country can negotiate with indicted men.
So -- "We don't know."
The concept of war-crime trials is important.
But after the World War II trials, the nations lost enthusiasm.
Saddam Hussein was not tried for invading Kuwait.
Hafez al-Assad of Syria got away clean with capturing Lebanon.
That fellow in Libya, whose terrorists the West says blew up Pan Am 103, still sits in his deluxe tent, receiving figs and ambassadors.
Pol Pot faced no court for mass murder in Cambodia.
The Communist Chinese not only get away with using torture and slavery as tools in the international market, but have a judge sitting on that U.N. tribunal.
The nations run from every war-crime trial that is politically or economically inconvenient, which has meant everybody but the Bosnian Serbs.
Still, the world should not bury war-crime charges with the victims.
The tribunal has not finished looking into charges against Muslims and Croats.
Any trials should come when peace is negotiated -- and for accused from all sides at the same time.
Like Congressional pressure to arm the Muslims, the Serb-only indictments, coming now, postpone peace.
Every delay kills more people, every single day, to no avail.
In that other July, in 1914, then too the great men of power did not believe it could ever really happen, the guns of August.


Art in Review
'Large Bodies'  Pace/MacGill Gallery 32 East 57th Street Through Sept. 1
Group shows based on the body have been done to death in recent years.
But by concentrating on oversized photographs, this summer exhibition manages to find twitches of life left in the theme.


Trade Chief Sees a U.S. Loss on Pact
The Director General of the World Trade Organization said today that the Clinton Administration would not gain an advantage by choosing not to join the new agreement to liberalize trade in financial services.
In fact, he said the United States was likely to reverse its position eventually and join the pact.
Renato Ruggiero, head of the trade body, said in an interview that the United States was mistaken to think it could win better foreign access for its banks, insurance companies and other financial companies by negotiating directly with individual governments in Asia and Latin America.


A Royal Tribute Without the Guest of Honor
It was music minus one, a kingdom without a king, an event conceived around an absence to make the heart grow fonder.
Carnegie Hall's three sold-out concerts celebrating the music of Frank Sinatra on Monday through Wednesday conjured up many of the elements of Mr.
Sinatra's musical world except the one most essential: the singer himself.
The Voice, the Chairman of the Board, Ol' Blue Eyes, whatever you want to call him, chose not to attend.


PRO FOOTBALL: In Minnesota, Hardship and a Fallen Star; Rocky Off Season for the Vikings Culminates in Moon's Arrest in Assault
Off season in the National Football League is a time for each club to lick its wounds, to reload, to rededicate and to prepare for the grueling 16-game run to the playoffs and the Super Bowl.
For the Minnesota Vikings, however, it has been sheer turmoil.
Their brutal off season began last winter after a stunning, listless 35-18 playoff loss at home to the Chicago Bears (a team Minnesota had beaten twice in the regular season) was quickly followed by accusations of sexual harassment against the Vikings' head coach, Dennis Green, and the team's defensive backs coach, Richard Solomon.


Kelly Services Inc.(KELYA,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jul 2


International Briefs; Philips Earnings Jump 45% in Quarter
Philips Electronics N. V. said yesterday that its earnings for the second quarter jumped 45 percent, helped by strong sales of its semiconductors.
Philips, the Dutch consumer electronics company, earned 583 million guilders, or $376 million, on sales of 14.66 billion guilders, or $9.4 billion.
That compares with last year's earnings of 402 million guilders on sales of 14.3 billion guilders.
Sales in the first six months rose 4.7 percent, to 29.28 billion guilders, or $18.8 billion, from 27.96 billion guilders last year.
Philips said semiconductor sales "performed exceptionally well," growing 27 percent. (AP)


Capitol American Financial Corp.(CAF,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Transactions
Baseball  American League
CALIFORNIA ANGELS -- Acquired Jim Abbott and Tim Fortugno, pitchers, from the Chicago White Sox for McKay Christensen, outfielder, and Andrew Lorrain, Bill Simas and John Snyder, pitchers.


House Rebuffs Many Budget Amendments
The House today turned down dozens of spending bill amendments that sought to protect billions of dollars in housing and environmental programs, many of which were landmark achievements of liberal Congresses stretching back nearly a quarter-century.
"This bill is going to be very controversial without any question," said Representative Jerry Lewis, the California Republican who heads the subcommittee that wrote the bill.
"But it does put us on a pathway that gives us a real shot of balancing the budget by 2002."


Managua Journal; Ghosts in Nicaragua? No, Somozas in the Flesh
Their name may still be regarded here as a synonym for corruption and brutality.
But ever so cautiously, the Somoza family is beginning to return to Nicaragua, hoping to find a place now that memories of its five decades of dictatorship are beginning to fade.
Three brothers, grandsons of the founder of the dynasty that ruled this country as a classic banana-republic dictatorship from 1933 to 1979, are leading that effort and say ordinary Nicaraguans are proving surprisingly receptive.
Eduardo Sevilla Somoza, a 42-year-old Washington-based businessman, visited recently for the first time since the Sandinista National Liberation Front overthrew his uncle, Anastasio Somoza Debayle.


NVR Inc.(NVR,A) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Desegregation Study Suggests Magnet School
A court-ordered study on how to desegregate Dwight Morrow High School in Englewood suggests, among other ideas, creating a magnet school district with specialized programs to serve students from 20 northern New Jersey communities.
The study, released yesterday, is a result of a lawsuit filed 10 years ago by Englewood, which had long educated the high school students of the nearby small and wealthy town of Englewood Cliffs.


HBO-Showtime Clash Is Pretty Fine Bout, Too
As rain pelted an umbrella at Bryant Park shortly after Wednesday's Evander Holyfield-Riddick Bowe outdoor news conference was canceled, a well-dressed young man calmly ate a sandwich and discussed the bubbling excitement he felt about Mike Tyson's return.
"I'd pay to watch him fight my mother," he said.
But would he pay for Bowe-Holyfield ("The People's Championship") and Tyson-His Mom if both aired on pay-per-view the same night?


Defending Smith, Stepfather Says He Also Bears Blame
Susan Smith's stepfather, who admitted that he had molested her when she was a teen-ager and had consensual sex with her as an adult, told her and his town that he shared her guilt in the drowning deaths of her young sons.
Mrs.
Smith's defense, which rested its case today in the penalty phase of her murder trial, did what many people in this small town have wondered about for months: it called to the stand her stepfather, Beverly Russell, to accept part of the blame for the deaths of the two little boys last Oct. 25.


2 Dead in Bodega Robbery
A store owner and an employee were shot and killed last night during a robbery at a bodega in Bedford-Stuyvesant, Brooklyn, the police said.
Shortly after 10 P.M., two men entered the grocery store at 235 Stuyvesant Avenue and announced a robbery, said Detective Mark Patterson, a police spokesman.


A New Formula for Health Plans
American employers have been trying for years to tame rising medical costs by pushing workers into health maintenance organizations and other plans that limit their choices of doctors and hospitals.
But many employees balked at the restrictions.
So the employers found a compromise -- plans in which members are encouraged to use an H.M.O. or other network, but can also choose doctors or hospitals outside the network and still be repaid for part of the cost, although not as much as under their old plans.
These so-called hybrid plans are now the fastest-growing kind of health plan, with almost 10 million members by last month, more than double the number just two and a half years earlier.
Employers are counting on them to bring the most reluctant of their workers into the world of managed care; indeed, many small and medium-sized companies are now offering their employees a hybrid plan and nothing else.
Hybrids were a big attraction for the United Healthcare Corporation when it agreed last month to buy Metrahealth, the health insurance venture of the Travelers Group and the Metropolitan Life Insurance Company.
With the addition of Metrahealth, United Healthcare would have 2.8 million members in hybrid plans.


Wicor Inc.(WIC,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Wrigley (Wm.) Jr. (WWY,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Rick Ferrell, Hall of Famer, 89, Catching Half of Brothers' Pair
Rick Ferrell, a member of the Baseball Hall of Fame since 1984 and the catching half of one of the game's more famous pitcher-catcher brother combinations, died on Thursday.
He was 89.
Ferrell, who lived in Troy, Mich., for the past 18 years, died of arrhythmia, according to a statement from the Woodward Hills Nursing Home in the Detroit suburb of Bloomfield Hills.


Matlack Systems (MLK,N) reports earnings for 3d qtr to Jun 30


Borg-Warner Sevurity (BOR,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


AT&amp;T Cutting Computer Unit And Some Jobs
After struggling for years to stem losses at its troubled computer subsidiary, AT&amp;T has decided to shrink the unit substantially and focus instead on its core strengths, employees were told yesterday.
In a memo distributed from the division's headquarters in Dayton, Ohio, employees of AT&amp;T Global Information Solutions were told that its ambitions were simply too broad to enable it to operate profitably.
The memo said the unit would now focus exclusively on the financial, retail and communications industries, where it feels it has a strong advantage over competitors.
In addition, its various hardware and services offerings would be consolidated into two discrete operations.


Stein Mart Inc.(SMRT,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jul 1


Maybelline Inc.(MAY,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


20th Century Industries(TW,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Bridge
The Summer Nationals of the American Contract Bridge League began here today, with thousands of players, including some from other continents, ready to do battle in the 10-day tournament.
The immediate focus is on the Grand National Team Championship, which began at the grass-roots level eight months ago.
In semifinal play today, New York opposes Las Vegas, and Chicago faces New England.
The New York team, consisting of Michael Radin, Brian Glubok, Jim Rosenbloom, Zia Mahmood and Fred Chang, was involved in a close quarterfinal match Thursday night against Tennessee, but dominated play in the final session to win by 49 imps.


Minnesota Power &amp; Light Co.(MPL,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Fear in the Sky
Another unnerving string of computer crashes has disrupted air traffic control operations in the nation's busiest skies -- the airways above a five-state area centering on Chicago.
The Federal Aviation Administration insists that these repeated breakdowns have posed no threat to safety, because backup systems keep all aircraft a safe distance apart.
But this does little to reassure travelers who take little comfort from techno-speak about backup technology.
Some air traffic controllers voice the same concern.
The malfunctions at the control center in Aurora, Ill., outside Chicago, were not the same as the troubles at the New York center on Long Island in the spring.
There was one ominous similarity, however.
Both episodes involved old equipment, some of it 25 years old.


Otter Tail Power Co.(OTTR,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Correction
An editorial on July 18 ("A Pathmark for Queens") stated that a Pathmark supermarket planned for East Harlem would be built on land donated by the city.
In fact, the city would provide a mortgage allowing a nonprofit developer to buy the land over 25 years at a 1 percent interest rate.


Otter Tail Power Co.(OTTR,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Bell Microproducts Inc.(BELM,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Heat Is Relentless, as Are Air-Conditioner Buyers
Rosario Silva was determined to suffer no more.
For two weeks, she had sat in her living room, wet towels draped over her body.
Four times a day she had made a mad rush to the bathroom for a cold shower.
Her two window fans seemed only to mock her, blowing hot air into her face.
On Friday, after another day of unbearable heat and a string of sleepless nights, she made a life-changing decision: she would buy an air-conditioner.


Wajax Ltd. reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Greyhound Lines Inc.(BUS,A) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


OHM Corp.(OHM,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Synopsys Inc.(SNPS,NNM) reports earnings for 3d qtr to Jun 30


It's Anger, So They Scream
Filter, which performed on Tuesday night at Limelight, is an exercise in bottled rage.
The band, whose debut album, "Short Bus" (Reprise), has been slowly climbing the pop charts for three months, consists of five ordinary-looking guys expressing their anger in the simplest way a rock band can.
They scream and play their guitars loudly.
But Filter doesn't play heavy metal, grunge, punk or industrial rock, though two members used to work with the group Nine Inch Nails.
It plays something in between.
Taking a tip from the minimalist composers Glenn Branca and Rhys Chatham, Filter has learned that when a short progression is played simultaneously on multiple instruments, the result can be power and intricacy.
At Limelight, three guitarists and a bassist hammered power chords in unison as Matt Walker mechanically beat a hard, brittle rhythm.
Occasionally, Brian Liesegang supplemented his guitar frenzy with electronic drones and noises, which he triggered by stepping on a keyboard that lay at his feet.


Avenor Inc. reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Ashland Coal Inc.(ACI,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Shaw Communications reports earnings for 3d qtr to May 31


Itel Corp.(ITL,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Preferences Are Splitting Republicans
Divisions among Congressional Republicans over the issue of affirmative action flared into the open today with one of the party's most prominent black lawmakers declaring that Speaker Newt Gingrich had lied to him and blocked his efforts on the issue.
He said that a proposal by Senator Bob Dole, the majority leader, was unacceptable.
The lawmaker, Representative Gary A. Franks of Connecticut, said he could not support a proposal by Mr.
Dole, Republican of Kansas, to abandon all Federal efforts to set sex or race preferences.
But he expressed rage at Mr.
Gingrich who, he said, was blocking an amendment he drafted to halt Federal set-asides, which allot a percentage of Federal contracts to minorities and women.


Pinkerton's Inc.(PKTN,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 16


Cold Metal Products (CLQ,N) reports earnings for 1st qtr to Jun 30


Mississippi Chemical Corp.(MISS,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Jun 30


Chiquita Brands International Inc.(CQB,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Beliefs
Fifty years later, the question will not be put to rest.
What went into the decision to drop the atomic bomb?
The debate is about morality as well as history, but often the history is written as though it settled the morality.
Opinions collide, for example, over how many American lives President Harry S. Truman and other high officials thought might be lost if the Allies had invaded Japan.
Estimates from American military sources from before August 1945 range from 16,000 to 46,000 deaths, with four times as many wounded.


Sullivan Dental Products Inc. reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Crown Pacific Partners L.P.  (CRO,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Primadonna Resorts (PRMA,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


New Jersey Loses Battle On Air Traffic
New Jersey lost and New York City won in the battle over aircraft noise with an all-but-final decision by the Federal Aviation Administration yesterday on flight patterns from the region's three major airports.
The F.A.A. rejected a New Jersey proposal to reroute air traffic away from northern New Jersey's suburbs and send the planes out over the ocean instead.
The agency said the over-water routes favored by New Jersey citizens groups and the state's Congressional delegation were too dangerous and, in any case, would simply shift the noise over to the homes of people on the Jersey Shore.


Power Corp. of Canada reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


North Carolina Judge Rules Against Simpson Legal Team
With a juror ill and in the hospital, the focus of the O. J. Simpson trial moved today to North Carolina, where a judge ruled that a woman who said that Detective Mark Fuhrman used an incendiary racial epithet need not testify in the case.
In Los Angeles, meanwhile, Judge Lance A. Ito revisited but did not rule on whether the defense can argue that the killings of Nicole Brown Simpson and Ronald L. Goldman were drug-related.
The judge also ruled that Mr.
Simpson's lawyers may see some of the prosecution's original photographs of Mr.
Simpson wearing leather gloves in his sportscasting days.


Lavish Casting of 6 Pianists for Mostly Mozart
They could have divvied up the "Hexameron" Variations, by Liszt and friends, as an encore.
Instead, the six pianists on hand for the Mostly Mozart concert on Thursday evening at Avery Fisher Hall stuck to the program of Mozart concertos.
So lavish was the casting that Alexander Korsantiya, a young pianist from the Republic of Georgia who created a stir in the early rounds of the 1993 Cliburn Competition, played only the rudimentary third-piano part of Mozart's Concerto for Three Pianos (K. 242).
He and the Ukrainian duo Valentina Lisitsa and Alexei Kuznetsoff supplied an abundance of personality in this relatively slender work, written when Mozart was 20.


Shuttle Flight Is Delayed Because of Faulty Seals
The next flight of a space shuttle, scheduled for Saturday, Aug. 5, has been postponed indefinitely as engineers try to figure out how to prevent the scorching of critical seals in booster rocket nozzles, space agency officials said yesterday.
The delay could last a week or more, officials said, but they added that it was not expected to upset the schedule for later missions this fall.


Oglebay Norton Co.(OGLE,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


French Investigation Aims at Salomon and Swiss Bank
Salomon Brothers Inc. and the Swiss Bank Corporation confirmed yesterday that they were being investigated by the French stock market regulatory agency in connection with possible insider trading in shares of Eurotunnel, but they vehemently denied any wrongdoing.
The agency, Commission des Operations de Bourse, said this week that two financial institutions were suspected of insider trading in the shares of Eurotunnel before a $1.2 billion stock sale in May 1994.
The two were among the underwriters of the issue.
The commission did not identify the institutions, but the names of Salomon Brothers, a unit of Salomon Inc., and Swiss Bank later appeared in the French press.


Colombia Gets Tough With Drug Cartel
To the Editor:
Although I like and respect Steven Gutkin, I cannot agree with the basic conclusions he puts forth in "Is Colombia's Drug War for Real?" (Op-Ed, July 22).
In the last two months, the Colombian military and national police, under orders of President Ernesto Samper and my direct supervision, have taken unprecedented actions against the Cali cartel that have virtually destroyed the world's most notorious organization.


Man Is Killed In Park Area Along Hudson
A man who appeared to be in his 50's was shot and killed in the middle of the afternoon yesterday in Riverside Park, and his body -- with a single bullet hole in the forehead -- was discovered sprawled beneath a park bench.
Even though the shooting occurred between 91st and 92d Street in a section of the park usually filled in the afternoon with joggers and families, investigators said they were having difficulty finding reliable witnesses, and they did not know last night who the man was or why he was killed.


A Brooklyn Hospital Needs the Parking More Than the Park
To the Editor:
The July 22 Op-Ed article "A Park Dies in Brooklyn" by Charlotte Fahn prompts this response.
Upper Van Voorhees Park, adjacent to Long Island College Hospital, is not "a perfectly good park." It is a noisy, unhealthy, unpleasant space next to a heavily trafficked highway.


SENATE, 98-0, SETS TOUGH RESTRICTION ON LOBBYIST GIFTS
Fighting off temptation and habit, the Senate voted today to deny itself unlimited lobbyist-paid lunches and free trips to glitzy charitable golf, tennis and ski events.
After wavering for a while, the Senate voted 98 to 0 to adopt rules that would forbid senators, their aides and other Senate officers from accepting privately paid travel to "recreational" events, and from accepting any gifts or meals worth more than $50, or more than $100 worth of gifts and meals from any individual in a year.


Electronic Arts (ERTS,NNM) reports earnings for 1st qtr to Jun 30


Al Joyner Seeks Recognition and a Bid to Atlanta Games
It was Mike Conley, the 1992 Olympic champion, against Al Joyner, the 1984 Olympic champion, in the triple-jump super matchup on the first of three days of track and field at the United States Olympic Festival.
But the matchup proved a bust because Conley was bad until he won on his last jump and Joyner was just plain awful.
Conley had trouble with his approach, and after five of the six rounds he had cleared only 53 feet 3 3/4 inches (his career best is 58-7 1/2).
He seemed about to finish fifth.


Trenwick Group Inc.(TREN,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


No Headline
"Roosevelt with a cigarette was Roosevelt to a generation of people. Do we try to be so politically correct that we end up rewriting history?" -- KEVIN BERGIN a councilman in Hyde Park, N.Y.  [ 26:1. ]


Not Opposed to Religion
To the Editor:
It was surprising to read (news article, July 23) that unnamed advisers of President Clinton urged him not to assert that the First Amendment "does not convert our schools into religion-free zones." According to the article, the advisers feared alienating the Jewish community.


10 Rivals for Casino Rights Converge on Bridgeport
Ten casino operators and development groups passed easy tests this week in the competition for rights to build a casino in Bridgeport, filing notice that they intended to bid, and showing up today for a conference with the state officials who will review the bids.
The real test, stock analysts say, comes in three weeks, when bidders must submit their proposals along with letters of credit for $610 million to cover the revenue the state would lose over the next three years if the Mashantucket Pequots carried out their threat to cut off payments from their Foxwoods casino as soon as a Bridgeport casino is authorized.


New England Investment Cos. L.P.(NEW,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


High Efficiency, but Zero B.T.U.'s


Dames &amp; Moore Inc.(DM,N) reports earnings for 1st qtr to Jun 30


Genlyte Group Inc. reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jul 1


Schools Need Key Repairs In Newark, Study Finds
Inspection teams dispatched by the state administration, which is now controlling the Newark school system, have catalogued a host of problems at all 82 school buildings, including roach infestations, collapsed floors and hazardous playgrounds, a state official said today.
"The overall condition of the buildings is at best deplorable," the official, Carol Perry, acting chief of staff for the state administration, said after reviewing the work of all seven teams that started inspections after the takeover July 12.


Selling a Military Base, On-Line
Internet surfers are used to surprises, but maybe not information touting the real estate benefits of a military base.
Hudson County and Bayonne officials are signing up for a new on-line service of the United States Commerce Department's Office of Economic Conversion that is designed to attract business interest and replace lost jobs at military bases targeted for closing -- specifically, the Military Ocean Terminal in Bayonne.


Pacific Telecom Inc.(PTCM,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Corrections
An article on Monday about Yale University's investment portfolio misspelled the surname of the university's chief investment officer.
He is David Swensen, not Swenson.


Cementos Mexicanos S.A. reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Wallace Steinberg Dies at 61; Backed Health Care Ventures
Wallace C. Steinberg, the chairman of the Healthcare Investment Corporation, the largest venture capital fund devoted to health care, died on Wednesday at his home in Rumson, N.J.
He was 61.
He died in his sleep, said Dr. James H. Cavanaugh, the company's president.


Tokyo Aide Calls Estimate Of Bad Bank Debt Too Low
A senior Government official has suggested that bad debts in the Japanese banking system are higher than had been previously believed, but he said the authorities would not allow a money center bank to fail or let a banking crisis spread overseas.
Under the new estimate, which uses international accounting standards and a broader definition of problem loans than the Government uses, the amount of bad debt rises from 40 trillion yen, to 50 trillion yen, or $572 billion.


Marsh Supermarkets Inc.(MARSA,NNM) reports earnings for 1st qtr to Jun 24


AGCO Corp.(AG,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Long Spa Streak in Jeopardy
Weekend Madness, a 5-year-old mare from Ireland, won the Saratoga Budweiser Breeders' Cup today for the second straight year.
But the public fixed its fancy, two races earlier, on the 10-year-old gelding Fourstardave, who ran and lost for the second time in five days' time, putting into jeopardy his eight-year streak of winning at least one race at Saratoga.
The streak stalled when "Dave" ran fifth on Sunday, and it stayed stalled today when he ran fourth in an allowance race.


Patrick Industries(PATX,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


McDowell Has Trouble With a Twins Rookie
It will be remembered as the day the Yankees made a bold statement by acquiring David Cone.
It will be remembered as the day they exchanged problem children by trading Danny Tartabull to Oakland for Ruben Sierra.
What the Yankees do not want to remember about tonight is the stunning two-run homer Dan Masteller crushed off Jack McDowell in the ninth inning to catapult the Twins to a 5-3 victory.
So while Yankee officials were celebrating superb moves made off the field in the Bronx and Tampa, Fla., the team was dejected after succumbing to the hapless Twins and failing to make the day a total success.
McDowell walked Matt Walbeck to start the bottom of the ninth in poor fashion, and the Yankees were expecting Masteller, a .183 hitter, to bunt.
Instead, the rookie pounded McDowell's high fastball into the right-field upper deck for his first career homer.


Marcus Corp.(MCS,N) reports earnings for Qtr to May 25


Capstead Mortgage (CMO,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Allied Group Inc.(ALGR,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Valhi Inc.(VHI,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Jefferson-Pilot (JP,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


CDW Computer Centers reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Protective Life Corp.(PL,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Oshkosh B'Gosh Inc.(GOSHA,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


INSIDE
Death at a Brooklyn Bodega
Perceo Melo died in the doorway of his newest bodega in an eruption of gunfire.
His son Julio Antonio died a few steps away.
Page 21.
New Rivals for 'Jeopardy'?
The F.C.C. will allow television networks to sell programs for an hour of prime time now dominated by syndicated game shows.
Page 35.
Growth Stalled in Quarter
The economy barely grew in the last quarter, but economists and the White House pointed to signs of recovery in the second half.
Page 35.


National Steel Corp.(NS,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Cipsco Inc.(CIP,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Mississippi Chemical Corp.(MISS,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Jun 30


Alternative Ways and Means
What is dance and what is a dancer?
"Mobility Junction Dance" raised interesting questions in a program on Thursday at the Dimson Theater at the Vineyard by companies that feature physically disabled dancers and musicians.
Infinity Dance Theater, making its New York debut, stars Kitty Lunn, a radiant former ballet and show dancer who now performs in a wheelchair.
In the opening duet in "The Love Triangle," choreographed by Spider Duncan Christopher to popular music, Ms.
Lunn swept across the stage with an ice skater's freedom and constraint.
But her wheelchair was treated like an encumbrance in the two other sections, performed with Christopher Nelson and Robert Koval.


Ryland Group (RYL,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Intermet Corp.(INMT,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jul 2


Datascope Corp.(DSCP,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Jun 30


Tembec Inc. reports earnings for 3d qtr to Jun 30


Seagull Energy Corp.(SGO,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Imperial Holly Corp.(IHK,A) reports earnings for 1st qtr to Jun 30


Oglebay Norton Co.(OGLE,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Pinkerton's Inc.(PKTN,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 16


Connecticut Natural Gas Corp.(CTG,N) reports earnings for 3d qtr to Jun 30


Harris Corp.(HRS,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Jun 30


U.S. Offers China 2 Olive Branches, but Not on Taiwan
Hoping to halt the deterioration in its relations with China, the Clinton Administration has offered two positive gestures but ruled out the one concession Beijing wants: a ban on all future visits to the United States by Taiwan's President.
On the positive side for the Chinese, Secretary of State Warren Christopher said today that the Administration had decided not to impose punitive economic sanctions on China, at least not for the moment, for selling missile technology to Iran and Pakistan.


Moscow Journal; There's a Big Demand for a Few, Too Good Men
The Russian Mr.
Right is 30, sexually active but monogamous.
He is healthy and does not smoke or drink.
And he has two children.
This is the ideal for anonymous sperm donors set by Russia's largest private infertility clinic.
Such a man is hard to find.
There are plenty of Russian men who have fathered two children.
But the dearth of men who neither smoke nor drink nor sleep around is not only something Russian women have complained about for generations, it is now the lament of Russian infertility specialists.


Patti Smith, With Nuances of Mourning
"A sacred peep show" was how Patti Smith, the influential punk poet and musician of the 1970's, described a 1972 Rolling Stones concert.
Her performance on Thursday night at Central Park Summerstage was similar.
She went through a whirlwind of emotions: she was nervous and confident, sad and joyful, vulnerable and strong.
But above all, she was mesmerizing.
As she stumbled and found her way again through her poems and songs during this rare public appearance, an adoring and empathetic audience of around 9,000 seemed to experience every high and low along with her.
It was a short performance, but an exhausting one.
"I shall not return," Ms.
Smith, 48, said at the beginning of the show, "because I was never gone." She was referring to her move in 1979, when she left the life of rock and prose in New York to raise a family in a suburb of Detroit with her husband, Fred (Sonic) Smith of the proto-punk band the MC5.
Last year, Mr.
Smith and Ms.
Smith's brother, Todd, both died.
One reason the concert was so tenuous and fragile was these undertones of grief, recovery and, though Ms.
Smith might not like to admit it, re-emergence.


Warnings Follow 6th Drowning
Weekend ocean bathers are being cautioned to follow lifeguards' instructions and obey warning flags as uncertain riptides and undertows continue to swirl off North Jersey beaches.
On Thursday, the body of the latest drowning victim, 19-year-old Douglas L. Cueva-Morales, was pulled out of the ocean.
He drowned on Wednesday while swimming near an artificial jetty in strong surf.
Lifeguards managed to rescue four others who had been nearby.
Mr.
Cueva-Morales was the sixth to drown this month off New Jersey beaches.


Use Real Trains for New York Airport Rail Link; Lower Manhattan Ferry
To the Editor:
The loss of some 5,000 jobs connected with the coffee and cotton exchanges has dealt yet another blow to the viability of Lower Manhattan as an important commercial center.
Thousands of jobs in banks, brokerage houses, insurance companies and law firms have been lost to midtown Manhattan, the outer boroughs and other states.


In Miami, A Search For Calm
All was quiet today in Coconut Grove, the Miami neighborhood where a mostly white world of affluence and tourist glitz mixes with a mostly black world of poverty and drugs.
But the calm masks tensions that erupted in violence on Thursday night.
In the section known as the "black Grove," with its litter-strewn yards and drug dealers, neighbors say there is frustration not only because of what many deem unequal and sometimes abusive treatment by the police, but also because of the economic disparity with the thriving Coconut Grove of expensive homes, outdoor cafes and tourist shops just blocks away.


Treasury Urges Merger of Bank Insurance Funds
Warning of the possible collapse of the deposit insurance fund that protects 66 million accounts at the nation's savings institutions, the Clinton Administration today proposed to merge it by 1998 with the fund that protects deposits at commercial banks.
Today's proposal by Treasury Department officials at a Senate Banking Committee hearing raises an issue that few in Congress are eager to handle.
The collapse of hundreds of savings institutions in the 80's not only cost taxpayers at least $150 billion but also ruined the careers of several senior senators and representatives.


Alza Corp.(AZA,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Fugitive Is Ordered Back
A Federal appeals court here has ordered the extradition to Northern Ireland of a fugitive who says he fears he will be persecuted or killed in that British province.


Friends, Romans, Police Greet Seles for Return
Finally, on the eve of Seles versus Navratilova, the exhibition match that has taken on all the dimension and dementia of a soap opera, the mystery player showed up in the flesh today, proof positive that tennis history can happen in the strangest of spots, even a hot spot like this gaudy boardwalk.
There wasn't a racquet in sight, but there was this weekend's version of a prizefight, Monica Seles -- the one who was stabbed in midmatch in April 1993 -- against Martina Navratilova -- the one who's not really retired -- up in neon chaser lights at oceanside.


Apache Corp.(APA,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Minnesota Power &amp; Light Co.(MPL,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Corrections
A chart in Business Day on July 1 with an article about 100-year Santa Fe railroad bonds maturing that day misstated the inflation-adjusted value of a $1,000 bond.
That face amount today has the purchasing power of $55.40 in 1895 dollars, not $5.54.


Buttafuoco Denies Violation of Probation
Joey Buttafuoco, Long Island's most famous body shop owner, was back in Nassau County Court today where he pleaded not guilty to violating probation.
The charges stem from his soliciting sex from an undercover police officer posing as a prostitute in Hollywood in May.
Mr.
Buttafuoco, 38, had pleaded no contest to the solicitation charge in a Los Angeles courtroom on July 7.
He was ordered to pay $1,715 in fines and fees, undergo testing for the AIDS virus and complete an AIDS education class.
The California judge said he would leave the issue of jail time up to New York State officials.


UNC Inc.(UNC,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Growth Stalled In 2d Quarter, But Signs Point To Resumption
The economy barely grew over the last three months as companies chose to forgo expansion and instead sold off part of their backlogs of goods, the Commerce Department said today.
But traders and financial economists, together with Clinton Administration officials, shrugged off the announcement that gross domestic output rose by only half a percentage point during the second quarter.
They pointed to signs over the last month that economic growth might gradually recover in the second half.


Death to the Tax Code
The Internal Revenue Code is inordinately complex, imposes an enormous burden on taxpayers and thus undermines compliance with the law.
Repeated efforts to simplify and reform the law have failed.
We have reached the point where further patchwork will only compound the problem.
It is time to repeal the Internal Revenue Code and start over.
Fortunately, interest is growing in fundamental change, and Congress has gotten the message.
Republicans and Democrats alike are coming forward with proposals for overhauling the system.
The National Commission on Economic Growth and Tax Reform, of which I am a member, was created by the Senate majority leader, Bob Dole, and the House Speaker, Newt Gingrich, to design a "simpler, fairer, flatter" system.


Maybelline Inc.(MAY,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Cameco Corp. reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Marsh Supermarkets Inc.(MARSA,NNM) reports earnings for 1st qtr to Jun 24


Kellogg Co.(K,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Journal; Bob Dole's Bod
Not since Mao went swimming in the Yangtze River in 1966 has there been a photograph of a politician athlete so peculiar as last week's widely distributed snapshot of Bob Dole on his treadmill.
Like Mao back then, Mr.
Dole has just turned 72.
Like the Mao photo, Mr.
Dole's is meant to show the world that a septuagenarian still has the muscle to lead a new cultural revolution.
But how humiliating!
The Senator is wearing striped shorts whose provenance seems to be either a prison workshop or the J. Crew remainder catalogue.
His top is a blue Oxford-cloth dress shirt.
And then there's that totally undignified, un-Dole-like grin.
Mao had the good sense to draw the line at saying "cheese."


MacMillan Bloedel reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Weatherford Intl.(WII,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Alltrista Corp.(JARS,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jul 2


Bruncor Inc. reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


TBC Corp.(TBCC,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Algoma Steel reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


2 New Teams To Meet Today
The Carolina Panthers and Jacksonville Jaguars would like to think that today's Hall of Fame Game will do more than prove which team is the best of the worst in the National Football League.
"We will have a lot of guys playing together for the first time, but we want to be sharp and professional," Carolina Coach Dom Capers said.


Israel May Seek Extradition of Arab Detained by the U.S.
Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin said today that Israel would like to seek the extradition of a man identified as a top leader of Hamas, the militant Islamic movement, from the United States and was exploring whether this was feasible.
The man, Mousa Mohamed Abu Marzook, was detained on Tuesday on his arrival in New York on the ground that he belongs to a terrorist organization.
He is described by Israeli officials as the political leader of Hamas, which opposes any agreement with Israel and has carried out several terror attacks against Israelis.


Employee Benefit Plans Inc.(EPB,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Pacific Telecom Inc.(PTCM,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Corrections
A report in the Chronicle column yesterday about Dee Dee Myers, President Clinton's former press secretary, who pleaded not guilty to a charge of driving under the influence of alcohol, included an erroneous account from The Associated Press about the circumstances of her arrest last month.
She was accused of having driven on the wrong side of the street, not with having driven the wrong way down a one-way street.


Central Maine Power Co.(CTP,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Giants' Cross Tries Blocking Out the Pain
He is one of the best blocking tight ends in football.
If he isn't clicking on all cylinders, the offensive line of the Giants is in deep trouble.
And right now, Howard Cross is sputtering.
He will fight through it, of course.
He is a tough player and it would take a lot to keep him off the field.
He has not missed a game in his six-year career and has made 64 consecutive starts.
But this off season, he had surgery done to repair a torn labrum, a tendon that keeps the shoulder in place.
Structurally, the shoulder seems to be fine, and Cross is having his usual good camp.


Riverside Park Death
A middle-aged man was shot and killed in the middle of the afternoon in Riverside Park yesterday, and his body -- with a single bullet hole in the forehead -- was discovered sprawled beneath a park bench.
Even though the shooting occurred between 91st and 92d Streets in a section of the park usually filled with joggers and families, investigators said they were having difficulty finding witnesses.
Article, page 23.


Stanhome Inc.(STH,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Maxwell Files Grievance Against Rockets
VERNON MAXWELL has filed a grievance against the Houston Rockets for terminating his contract after they waived him, the player's agent said yesterday.
"When they failed to pay him and decided to claim termination of his contract, we were obligated to file a grievance, which we have done," the agent, KYLE ROTE Jr., told KRIV-TV of Houston.


On Issue of Family Values, Clinton Unveils an Agenda of His Own
Synthesizing many of his recent positions into a platform to compete with the reigning conservative manifestos, President Clinton today outlined a 14-point "American Family Values Agenda" ranging from a higher minimum wage to a national crusade against teen-age pregnancy.
Mr.
Clinton made clear that he would not let the Republicans alone define family values.
He outlined measures that he said would help families grapple with the economic and social problems they face, proposals for the preservation and expansion of gun-control laws, for instance, and for moderate increases in health insurance coverage.


AETNA LIFE &amp; CASUALTY CO. (AET,N)
The Aetna Life and Casualty Company reported a second-quarter loss yesterday, mainly as a result of a previously announced increase of $488 million, after taxes, in its reserves for claims arising from environmental cleanups.
The company said it lost $296.9 million, or $2.62 a share, compared with net income of $132.4 million, or $1.17 a share, in the second quarter of 1994.


Aztar Corp.(AZR,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 29


Power Corp. of Canada reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Rezoning the Sex Shops
As might have been predicted, Mayor Rudolph Giuliani's plan to impose strict zoning regulations on sex-related businesses is being criticized by opponents who fear that the new rules will drive such establishments into their neighborhoods.
Council Speaker Peter Vallone and Councilman Walter McCaffrey of Queens, the plan's key supporters when the Council approved the plan in draft form late last year, are standing firm.
They are right to do so because the Mayor's strategy of regulating the location and concentration of sex-oriented adult businesses is sound.
Under the current proposal, which the Council must vote on again if, as expected, it is approved by the City Planning Commission in September, sex-related businesses could operate only in manufacturing districts and "commercial zones of high density" in Manhattan, including parts of this newspaper's Times Square neighborhood.
To prevent any area from becoming an unappealing "red light" district, the plan pursues a dispersal strategy.
It would prevent sex-related businesses from operating within 500 feet of residences, schools and houses of worship and within 500 feet of one another.


Stratus Computer Inc.(SRA,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jul 2


New England Investment Cos. L.P.(NEW,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Unicef Helps in Bosnia
To the Editor:
Nearly everyone has criticized the United Nations peacekeeping performance in Bosnia.
But there has been remarkably little attention paid to the organization's humanitarian role.
Few commentators seem to know that a number of United Nations agencies, including the United Nations Children's Fund, have been providing food, water, essential medicines and clothing to the many thousands of terrified and distraught women and children caught in this savage civil war.
Unicef has sent teams of trauma experts to work with children in the refugee camps in Tuzla and other areas.
They've also been helping to carry out a rapid immunization program for refugee children against measles, polio, diphtheria and tuberculosis.


New Jersey Resources Corp.(NJR,N) reports earnings for 3d qtr to Jun 30


Dyersburg Corp.(DBG,N) reports earnings for 3d qtr to Jul 1


Glenayre Technologies Corp.(GEMS,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Primadonna Resorts (PRMA,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Croatia in Drive on Rebel-Held Area
In a broadening of the Balkan strife, Croatian forces were reported tonight to be pressing forward through Serbian-held territory in a possible campaign to regain their own occupied land.
The immediate effect of the Croatian incursion may be to relieve the beleaguered forces of the Bosnian Government in the northwestern enclave of Bihac, which has been under attack by Serbian troops over the last week.


Ex-Official Says President Had No Role in Waco Siege
Webster L. Hubbell, a friend of President Clinton and once the third-ranking official at the Justice Department, testified today at Congressional hearings on the siege of the Branch Davidian compound near Waco, Tex., that the President never tried to influence the decision to use tear gas to end the standoff.
At the start of the hearings, which ended their eighth day today, Republicans had hinted that they might unearth secret contacts between Mr.
Clinton and officials like Mr.
Hubbell, who played a role in the decision to attack the compound.
But a panel of current and former officials of the Federal Bureau of Investigation and the Justice Department who were questioned today gave them no such ammunition.


Let's Make Workplace Immigration Sentinel
To the Editor:
It is one thing to misrepresent an idea so as to discredit it, but it is even worse to criticize a constructive solution without even bothering to offer an alternative.
Such are examples of Jack Kemp's and Senator Joseph Lieberman's discourse in "Real Americans Register Here" (Op-Ed, July 21) against the worker verification system, an idea proposed to help curb illegal immigration and the millions who sneak into America to work.


New Jersey Resources Corp.(NJR,N) reports earnings for 3d qtr to Jun 30


LTV Corp.(LTV,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Carmike Cinemas (CKE,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Louis DeSario, 64, S.I. Educator And City School Board Member
Louis DeSario, the Staten Island representative to the New York City Board of Education and a former Superintendent of the Staten Island schools, died yesterday at St.
Vincent's Hospital on Staten Island.
He was 64.
He suffered a heart attack several months ago from which he never fully recovered, according to his family.


Corrections
A picture caption on July 21 with an article about the dispute over grazing rights on public land in the West misidentified the mountain range shown and the vantage point.
The scene included the Lost River Range northeast of Sun Valley, Idaho, but not the White Cloud Mountains.
The picture was taken from public land, not the private ranch of William Hewlett and David Packard.


Kuhlman Corp.(KUH,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Carlisle Plastics Inc.(CPA,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Pacific Scientific (PSX,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Corrections
A picture caption with a related article, about the unions' history, misidentified a gathering of steel workers in Homestead, Pa.
It was a 1936 organizing rally, not the famous battle between workers and Pinkerton guards at Homestead, in 1892.


INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS: The Capitalist Pioneers of Prague; Young Westerners Blaze Way to Top of Czech Commerce
Go East, young man!
Give up the anonymity of being a trader.
Come to Prague, get in on the ground floor and at thirtysomething acquire the power and prestige of a big, strapping fish in a tiny pond.
After the Berlin wall fell, a handful of ambitious young dealers in financial capitals in the West, convinced there was a fortune for the taking, heard the siren call.
Where the giants of Wall Street, Frankfurt or London did not see enough scale or profit to bother, these entrepreneurs left jobs at firms like Prudential Securities, Salomon Brothers and CS First Boston and landed here in the Czech Republic just as the Government was plunging into capitalism.


Brown &amp; Sharpe Manufacturing Co.(BNS,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Advanced Marketing Services (ADMS,NNM) reports earnings for 1st qtr to Jul 1


T.R.A. Head Dismissed
Less than one year after naming him its first commissioner, the Thoroughbred Racing Associations as expected voted today to dismiss Brian McGrath and close his office because its member race tracks could not agree on a national direction for racing.
Four race tracks had withdrawn from the organization this year and the three major Southern California tracks were threatening to withdraw.
McGrath, a television and marketing executive, was hired last year at a salary of $650,000 to give a national focus to the T.R.A., which is composed of 46 racing associations operating 39 race tracks in the United States and Canada.
His first major initiative, the National Best Seven betting program, lasted only 10 months before it was abandoned for not raising enough money.


Phycor Inc.(PHYC,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Sports of The Times; Old-Fashioned Swap Meet Adds a Spark
DOES this mean things are back to normal?
As the dust settled on yesterday's blockbuster baseball trades, there was a sense that the dramatic transactions that made Bobby Bonilla an Oriole and David Cone a Yankee were sure signs that the game had regained its stride.


Improvising And Other Musical Jokes
What musicians on the bandstand are doing can often be strikingly different from what the audience thinks they are doing.
Take George Coleman's first set on Tuesday night at the Village Vanguard, for instance.
A 60-year-old saxophonist who is a resourceful improviser, Mr.
Coleman has been performing with two members of his quartet -- Harold Maburn, the pianist, and Jamil Nasser, the bassist -- since they attended high school in Memphis.
Their familiarity with one another allows them to turn each performance into a series of inside jokes.
Whereas the crowd could easily have been absorbing the signs of musical emotionalism, including Mr.
Coleman's long-held high notes or his repeated riffs, the musicians were involved in a high-speed, improvisational game.


Reward for Turtle Information
The Humane Society yesterday offered a $5,000 reward for information leading to the conviction of anyone responsible for the killing of several sea turtles.
"We're witnessing more sick kinds of behavior now than I've ever seen before," said Nina Austenberg, an official with the Humane Society's Mid-Atlantic office, describing a recent spate of deliberate killings and mutilations of endangered giant leatherbacks and loggerhead turtles off the Jersey Shore.
The number for reporting information is (201) 927-5611.


Megan's Law, Rewritten
"Megan's Law," which requires that citizens be notified when a convicted sex offender moves into their community, has survived a challenge in the New Jersey Supreme Court, but it took an odd bit of jurisprudence to do it.
In order to avoid holding the law unconstitutional, the court rewrote it from the bench, inserting safeguards that a panicky New Jersey State Legislature failed to include last year.
Nevertheless, this well-intended law still violates the United States Constitution's prohibition against state laws that retroactively add to the punishment for past crimes.
Even if the state courts ignore this flaw, enacting these laws is unwise.


Noneducators in the Running To Fill Top Education Post
For the first time, the New York State Board of Regents is considering naming a noneducator to the state's top education job.
The board has narrowed its search for an education commissioner to six candidates, including Madeleine M. Kunin, a former three-term governor of Vermont who is deputy Secretary of Education, and Roderick Chu, a former New York State Tax Commissioner.


Disney's Deal: A special report.; A Mix of Glamour and Hardball Won Disney a Piece of 42d Street
It was 3 o'clock one morning in late 1993, when Frank S. Ioppolo Sr. decided he had had enough.
As the chief real estate negotiator for the Walt Disney Company, he had been meeting with New York City and state officials through the night about his company's interest in restoring the decrepit New Amsterdam Theater on 42d Street.
But after several hours of trying to persuade the public officials to absorb more of the project's costs, Mr.
Ioppolo grew incensed.


COMPANY BRIEFS
EASTMAN CHEMICAL CORP., Kingsport, Tenn., said it would invest $50 million to build a chemical manufacturing operation in Malaysia.
The plant is expected to produce alcohol-based paints and vinyl products.
INTERNATIONAL FOREST PRODUCTS LTD., Vancouver, British Columbia, announced it planned to spend $110 million to upgrade its manufacturing operations in British Columbia.


Delphi Financial Group (DLFI,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Presidential Life Corp. reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Hanoi Joins a Club Created to Blackball It
Vietnam was admitted today to the Association of Southeast Asian Nations, the first Communist nation granted membership since it was founded 28 years ago, in part as a bulwark against Communism.
The admission of Vietnam is a critical step in Hanoi's integration into a region that includes most of Asia's fastest-growing economies.
Its membership was formalized at a ceremony in which the Vietnamese flag was raised at the association's annual ministerial meeting, in Brunei.


Rose in Cooperstown, Only on Business
PETE ROSE went to Cooperstown, N.Y., yesterday not quite in the role he had once hoped and expected.
Rose, baseball's career hit leader, was participating in an autograph-signing session yesterday and today at a baseball memorabilia store on Main Street.
"It's an honor to come here," said Rose, whose gambling problems led to his being taken off the Hall of Fame ballot before electors could vote on him.
"And I'm happy for Mike and Richie."


HOUSE COALITION SETS G.O.P. BACK ON ENVIRONMENT
In environmentalists' first major victory in the House this year, Democrats and moderate Republicans joined today to narrowly reject a Republican leadership proposal that would have dramatically limited the Environmental Protection Agency's enforcement of pollution laws.
The proposal was part of a spending bill that remains unacceptable to the Clinton Administration and the Administration's environmental allies because it would cut the agency's budget by a third.


Rise in Consumer Optimism Sends Bond Prices Lower
The prices of Treasury securities, after holding steady yesterday on the release of weak data on second-quarter economic growth, fell when a report showed consumer sentiment was stronger than had been expected.
The University of Michigan's final consumer sentiment index for July rose to 94.4, from 92.7 in June.
The Michigan index is a component of the Government's leading economic indicators, and is seen as a sign of future consumer spending for homes and durable goods.


Teck Corp. reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Use Real Trains for New York Airport Rail Link
To the Editor:
For the $600 million the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey is pouring into its Newark International Airport monorail (news article, July 23), the terminal will still be left with a second-rate transportation link.


North American Mortgage Co.(NAC,X) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Bally Gaming International Corp.(BGII,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


A Celebrity Upstages The Music
A slice of Los Angeles came to New York on Wednesday night at Irving Plaza.
On the bandstand was Dog Star, featuring Keanu Reeves.
Yes, that Keanu Reeves.
When Hollywood stars like River Phoenix, Johnny Depp and Lou Diamond Phillips have dabbled in rock-and-roll, their bands haven't performed much outside of the nurturing environment of Los Angeles clubs with velvet ropes.
But Dog Star has taken itself seriously enough to embark on a small tour of the country and to start looking for record labels to make a deal.
Mr.
Reeves's role in Dog Star is an expendable one.
He played simple but competent basslines as the band thrashed out punk- and grunge-friendly pop songs.
Since Mr.
Reeves is a celebrity who values versatility -- he is an action hero; he is a romantic lead; he plays hockey; he rides motorcycles; he even recently took the title role in a production of "Hamlet" -- it's doubtful he could give the band the commitment they would need if they signed a recording contract.
Musically, Dog Star wouldn't be any worse without him.
But visually, that's another story.


New England Business Service Inc.(NEB,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Jun 30


Naples Journal; Seeing Only a Landscape's Beauty, Not Its Notoriety or Violent Past
It is quiet now on the five acres that Rodger and Pam Havens own below the piney bluff known as Ruby Ridge.
The only sounds are the calls of birds and wind rustling through the purple sage and tall grass.
"It's green, it's fertile, it's beautiful," Mr.
Havens said of this isolated northern reach of the Idaho Panhandle.
"It's why we moved here."


Bosnia Uncertainty Dims Top U.S. General's Image
John Shalikashvili was picked to fill the formidable shoes of Colin L. Powell two years ago largely because he is what his predecessor was not: low-key, self-effacing and apolitical.
This is a man whose ambition after he retires from the Army is to own a country hardware store.
As Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff and President Clinton's senior military adviser, General Shalikashvili has brought his own strengths to the job.
A meticulous military planner, he has won accolades for American-led missions to fight starvation among Rwandan refugees, to restore democracy in Haiti and to stare down Iraq's Saddam Hussein on the Kuwaiti border in 1994.


Ballet Aide to Leave
Gary Dunning has resigned as executive director of American Ballet Theater, effective in October.
Mr.
Dunning, who is widely credited with stabilizing the ballet troupe financially in his three years as director, will remain with the company as a consultant.
He will be succeeded by Michael M. Kaiser, who served as executive director of the Alvin Ailey Dance Theater Foundation from 1991 to 1993.


Repap Enterp reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Protective Life Corp.(PL,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Sentenced in Death of Teen-Ager
Robert K. Hyer, an unlicensed driver with five drunken-driving arrests in the last 11 years, was sentenced to five years in prison yesterday in the death of Matthew P. Hammell, 17.
The Tuckerton teen-ager was struck and killed last April while skating along Route 9 in Little Egg Harbor.


National Steel Corp.(NS,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Balkan Strife Broadens
Croatian forces were reported in Serb-held areas, to aid Bosnia but possibly also to regain Croatian land.
Page 4.


Syncor Intl. Corp. reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Heller Financial Inc. reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Miklos Rozsa, 88, Composer of Film Music
Miklos Rozsa, whose opulent scores for some of Hollywood's most lavish epics earned him three Academy Awards, died at Good Samaritan Hospital in Los Angeles on Thursday.
He was 88.
He had suffered a stroke about three weeks ago and been put on life support, family members told the Associated Press.


Thousands of Trees? Millions?; Volunteers Begin Count of New York's Street Trees
The Giuliani administration does not know how many trees there are on New York City's streets, but it means to find out.
At 9 A.M. today, 200 volunteers will fan out across the five boroughs to start counting and classifying every Norway maple, honey locust and Callery pear -- some 70 species in all -- in what the Department of Parks and Recreation is billing as the first Street Tree Census of its scope in the world.


Walking Off With Ammunition
Armed with what officials said was forged documents, a man wearing a New Jersey National Guard uniform managed to walk off with 450,000 small-arms cartridges from the supply department of the Army's Picatinny Arsenal over the past two and a half years, a base spokesman said yesterday.
The man -- whom authorities did not identify -- presented letters on Federal Drug Enforcement Administration stationery authorizing him to pick up surplus ammunition, said the arsenal spokesman, Peter J. Rowland.


METRO DIGEST
Many residents object to the idea of depicting Hyde Park's most famous son engaging in such a vile habit.  [ 1. ] NEW YORK CITY  BRATTON DISPARAGES CRITICAL REPORT In his latest slap at the independent Civilian Complaint Review Board, Police Commissioner William J. Bratton said he would not even look at a report that criticized two detectives in the fatal shooting of two robbery suspects until Federal prosecutors finished investigating the case.  [ 23. ] SWEATY NEW YORKERS TURN TO THE A.C.


Armor All Products (ARMR,NNM) reports earnings for 1st qtr to Jun 30


Cilcorp Inc.(CER,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


State Finances Part of Study For Orchestra
Gov.
George E. Pataki announced a $25,000 grant today to study the feasibility of creating a summer home for the New York Philharmonic at the Purchase campus of the State University of New York.
The Philharmonic is one of the few major orchestras in the nation that do not have permanent summer homes.


Integrated Health Services Inc.(IHS,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Coca-Cola Bottling Consolidated Co.(COKE,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Yankees Get Cone; Mets Trade Bonilla
It was a day of blockbuster deals for New York's baseball teams yesterday as the Yankees braced for a pennant race and the Mets prepared for the future.
The Yankees acquired last season's American League Cy Young Award winner, David Cone, from Toronto for three minor league pitchers, then sent the disgruntled slugger Danny Tartabull to Oakland for Ruben Sierra.
The Mets traded Bobby Bonilla to Baltimore for Alex Ochoa, a talented outfield prospect.


RESULTS PLUS
GOLF
Birdies Give Iverson a 63 and the Lead
Maybe Becky Iverson thought she almost couldn't miss.
Even after shooting a nine-under-par 63 yesterday to take the second-round lead in the L.P.G.A.
Friendly's Classic in Agawam, Mass., Iverson was talking about the ones that slipped away.
Not much to speak of, though, after nine birdies.
"Actually, I had a couple lip out on me," Iverson said.
"You think they're just going to go in; they just die."


3 Get Maximum Terms in Assault on Officer
Three young men convicted of severely beating an off-duty police sergeant in front of his apartment building in Bay Ridge, Brooklyn, were each sentenced yesterday to 5 to 15 years in prison, the maximum penalty.
The defendants, Ralph Alio, 17; Jason Sellitti, 19, and Michael Schollin, 20, all of Bay Ridge, had been found guilty of first-degree assault on July 13, after a six-week trial in which they had also faced attempted-murder charges.
A fourth defendant was found not guilty of all charges, and five other young men are awaiting trial.


Corrections
The table of dividends in Business Day on Thursday omitted listings of the regular dividends declared by a number of companies on Wednesday.
The omitted listings appear today in the Dividends Declared table on page 41.


Rising Doubts Over Export Plan Cause Coffee Prices to Fall Again
Coffee prices fell for a second consecutive session yesterday as traders grew increasingly skeptical of a plan by international producers to reduce exports.
Coffee's decline on the commodity markets also comes after announcements by two leading American marketers that they would cut the retail prices of ground and instant coffees.


Alabama to Make Prisoners Break Rocks
The once-common sight of felons in chains breaking rocks under a searing sun is about to be a reality again here in Alabama, the state whose get-tough policy on convicts led to the resurrection of chain gangs in May.
The Commissioner of State Prisons, Ronald D. Jones, is preparing to have rocks trucked to at least three state penitentiaries so that chained inmates can break the stones into pea-sized pellets.
The only goal of the program is to increase the level of punishment for prisoners, since state highway officials say they have no use for the crushed rock.


Pacific Forest reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Too Hot Not to Cool Down
When the crisis handlers at 911 call for relief, then you know it is hot.
Ten of New York City's dispatchers called ambulances for themselves this week as the temperature sat uncomfortably over 90, day after day, and the humidity made it feel like it was over 100.
From Connecticut to Washington, D.C., to Chicago and through the Midwest, people are wilting.
Hundreds have died.
The heat is not as scorching as it was at mid-month, when it actually was over 100, but the earlier wave came and went, as waves customarily do.
The new one seems to be staying, at least into next week, according to the weather forecasters no one believes but everyone quotes.
It could even set a record for longevity.


NGC Corp.(NGL,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Gordon Is Hospitalized After Crash
The driver ROBBY GORDON was knocked unconscious yesterday in a high-speed crash during practice for tomorrow's Marlboro 500 race.
Gordon, 26, had to be cut out of his car after the crash.
Dr.
STEVE OLVEY, Indy Car's director of medical affairs, said Gordon awoke in the ambulance on the way to the infield medical center.
Gordon was in stable condition in W. A. Foote Memorial Hospital in Jackson, Mich., where he was being kept overnight for observation.
Indy Car officials said a CAT scan and X-rays were negative. (AP)


Computer Associates Reaches Accord With U.S. on Legent
After weeks of intense talks, Computer Associates International reached an accord with the antitrust division of the Justice Department yesterday that clears the way for the company to complete its $1.74 billion acquisition of the Legent Corporation without sacrificing some of Legent's more valuable product lines.
Under the terms of the agreement, Computer Associates agreed to license the software for four relatively obscure mainframe computer utility programs to outside vendors that will then compete for customers against the new Computer Associates-Legent combination.


Lawter International Inc.(LAW,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Networks Are Cleared to Sell Programs for 7-to-8 P.M. Slot
The Federal Communications Commission struck down a 25-year-old rule yesterday that prevented the broadcast networks from supplying programs for one hour in the evening and thus helped create a boom in syndicated game shows and tabloid magazine shows.
The end of the so-called prime-time access rule will give all television stations in the country the choice of broadcasting programs syndicated by CBS, NBC, ABC or independent companies in the evening hour that precedes prime time.
In the East, this access hour is 7 to 8 P.M. weeknights.


A Brooklyn Hospital Needs the Parking More Than the Park; Place for Solace
To the Editor:
I was deeply disappointed to read ("A Park Dies in Brooklyn," Op-Ed, July 22) about the impending destruction of Upper Van Voorhees Park at the end of Atlantic Avenue.
Right across the street from a hospital, it's a place that held great solace for me as I went to it just moments after squeezing hands with my grandmother for the last time.


Corrections
An obituary of the poet May Sarton on July 18 misstated her birth year.
It was 1912, not 1914.


Idaho Power Co.(IDA,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


NEWS SUMMARY
International 2-4  SHALIKASHVILI'S BOSNIA CRISIS
He won praise for the American-led missions in Rwanda and Haiti, but the Balkan conflict has proven a frustrating challenge for Gen.
John Shalikashvili, Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff. 1  CROATIAN TROOPS ADVANCE
Croatian forces were reported to be pressing forward through Serbian-held territory in a possible campaign to regain their own land. 4  AMID WAR, ORDINARY LIFE
A Croatian town near the front between Government forces and Serbian rebels tries to maintain a semblance of normalcy. 4  HUNGARIAN PARTY ASCENDANT
By expressing nationalist yearnings in an uncertain post-Communist world, a small, century-old political party is making a comeback. 2  U.S.
OVERTURES TO CHINA
Hoping to halt the deterioration in its relations with China, the Clinton Administration has offered two positive gestures but ruled out the one concession Beijing wants. 3  VIETNAM ENTERS ASEAN
Vietnam was admitted to the Association of Southeast Asian Nations, the first Communist nation granted membership since it was founded 28 years ago. 3  ISRAEL TARGETS HAMAS LEADER
Israel would like to see the extradition from the United States of a man identified as a leader of the militant Islamic movement Hamas. 3  Moscow Journal: Infertility clinics seek a few, very good men. 2  National 5-8  JURY REJECTS EXECUTION
A jury in Union, S.C., quickly rejected the death penalty for Susan Smith, who was convicted of drowning her two young sons.
She was sentenced to life in prison and will be eligible for parole in 30 years. 1  GOODBYE TO FREE LUNCH
The Senate voted to prohibit its members from getting unlimited lunches and trips from lobbyists.
In a unanimous vote, the new rules were adopted to set a $50 maximum for any single gift or meal. 1  ENVIRONMENTALIST VICTORY
Environmentalists won their first big victory in the House this year as lawmakers narrowly rejected a Republican proposal to limit enforcement of pollution laws. 1  WHAT CLINTON KNEW ABOUT RAID
Webster L. Hubbell, the former Justice Department official, testified at a Congressional hearing that the President never pushed officials to use tear gas in the assault on the Branch Davidians in 1993. 6  SHUTTLE FLIGHT DELAYED
The next flight of a space shuttle, scheduled for Aug. 5, has been postponed indefinitely because of scorching of critical seals in the booster nozzles.  8  CHICAGO PREPARES FOR HEAT
Chicago's Mayor is ready to declare a heat emergency if temperatures soar, as expected, into the upper 90's this weekend.  5  ANOTHER FAMILY MANIFESTO
President Clinton outlined a 14-point "American Family Values Agenda" including a higher minimum wage and a national crusade against teen-age pregnancy. 6  HITTING THE ROCK PILE
Felons in chains will again be breaking rocks under a searing sun in Alabama as part of the state's get-tough policy on convicts. 5  Metro Digest 21  DISNEY'S 42d STREET DEAL
Officials, development experts and real estate executives shed light on how the Walt Disney Company was able to get government subsidies to renovate the New Amsterdam theater and also influence other projects planned for 42d Street. 1  HYDE PARK TO F.D.R.: NO SMOKING
Residents are objecting to a plan to adopt the famous silhouette of Franklin D. Roosevelt with a cigarette holder clenched between his teeth as Hyde Park's symbol. 1  Business Digest 34  Arts/Entertainment 9-15
Too hot to cool down.
Fear in the sky.
Megan's law, rewritten.
Letters  Frank Rich: Bob Dole's bod.
Russell Baker: If not Vegas, L.A. maybe?
Shirley D. Peterson: Death to the tax code.
Robert V. Levine: Rude?
Yeah, you are.
Chris Stern Hyman: New York protects bad doctors.
Chronicle 20  Bridge 15  Crossword 12


Carolina Jury Rejects Execution For Woman Who Drowned Sons
A jury today decided that Susan Smith should not be put to death for the drowning of her two young sons, and instead should spend the rest of her life in prison, to remember.
It took the jury two and one-half hours to reject the prosecution's request for the death penalty and settle on the life sentence.
The jury's unanimous decision saved Mrs.
Smith, 23, from death row, but left her alone in a tiny cell with the ghosts of her dead children, for at least the next 30 years, her lawyer said.


A Day of Deals Bolsters Yankees' Pennant Hopes
Suddenly and sensationally, the Yankees, who had already crept back into the pennant race after a disappointing three months, may have resurfaced today as the favorites to grab the American League East title.
They improved themselves handsomely after heisting David Cone from the Toronto Blue Jays for three minor league pitchers while also unloading Danny Tartabull to the Oakland Athletics for Ruben Sierra and a minor league pitcher.
Obtaining the 1994 American League Cy Young Award winner from Toronto for an inexpensive price was a tremendous coup and boost to the Yankees in their pursuit of the first-place Red Sox and their scrap with the Orioles, who obtained Bobby Bonilla from the Mets today.
While the Jays wanted premier prospects for Cone, they received players who were only familiar to minor league experts.


Rude? Yeah, You Are.
Thomas Wolfe once wrote that city people "have no manners, no courtesy, no consideration for the rights of others and no humanity." American urbanites would deny that they see more than their share of nastiness.
But when I was growing up in Brooklyn, I was taught that big cities simply have more of everything -- the good and the bad.
Over the last several years, my students and I have conducted a series of experiments in different cities to test the likelihood that a stranger in need will be offered help.


SkyWest Inc.(SKYW,NNM) reports earnings for 1st qtr to Jun 30


To Keep National Land For Future Generations
To the Editor:
Re Brad Wetzler's article "The New Extremists" (Op-Ed, July 16):


North American Mortgage Co.(NAC,X) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Stone Consolidated reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


SPS Technologies Inc.(ST,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Matlack Systems (MLK,N) reports earnings for 3d qtr to Jun 30


Commissioner Brushing Off Criticism of Police by Board
In his latest slap at the independent Civilian Complaint Review Board, Police Commissioner William J. Bratton said yesterday that he would not even look at an agency report that criticized two detectives in the fatal shooting of two robbery suspects until Federal prosecutors finished investigating the case.
Mr.
Bratton criticized the board's actions in the case, saying the agency ignored a request from the United States Attorney's office to stop its investigation until Federal investigators completed their own inquiry into the case.
The board has sent a report to Mr.
Bratton concluding that the detectives used excessive force.


CHRONICLE
It may be wise to think hard before taking on a name already appropriated by ROBERT DE NIRO and his associates.
Or so Moving Image Restaurants, a group of restaurant developers in London, has come to realize.
In June, the group issued a prospectus seeking to raise $:750,000, about $1.2 million, for a restaurant near St.
James's Palace that they intended to call Tribeca.
DREW NIEPORENT, managing partner with Mr.
De Niro in the TriBeCa Grill, on Greenwich Street, happened to be in London and received the prospectus.


Terra Industries(TRA,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Quaker Chemical Corp.(QCHM,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


CHRONICLE
PAUL TAYLOR, the choreographer, turns 65 today and like it or not, he's having a birthday party.
Some 70 present and former members of his dance company and its board, friends and neighbors, will descend on him at his home in Mattituck, L.I.
"If I had my druthers, I would just let it go by and ignore it," Mr.
Taylor said.
"But the manager of my company, Ross Kranberg, decided to get even with me for giving him a surprise birthday party several months ago. He decided to give me one too, and then George Wilson, my friend, spilled the beans and let me know that 70 people would arrive on Saturday."


Singer Co.(SEW,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Dentsply International (XRAY,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Corrections
An article and a picture caption yesterday about the planned merger of three labor unions misstated the given name of the United Automobile Workers' president.
He is Stephen P. Yokich, not Samuel.


Legent Corp.(LGNT,NNM) reports earnings for 3d qtr to Jun 30


Carolina Power &amp; Light Co.(CPL,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Pacific Scientific (PSX,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


C-Mac Industries reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jul 1


A Remake Of the 1943 'Sahara'
Television remakes of Hollywood classics are usually disastrous.
A stunning exception can be found tomorrow in Showtime's "Sahara," a new version of the 1943 World War II movie that starred Humphrey Bogart as a tough tank commander in North Africa leading a British-American unit that included youngsters like Lloyd Bridges, Bruce Bennett and Dan Duryea.
Now the Bogart character, Sgt.
Joe Gunn, is played by James Belushi, who, less Bogey than Gene Hackman, delivers a terrific performance with stunning authority.
Like most war movies at the time, the original "Sahara," with a script by John Howard Lawson and Zoltan Korda, the director, amounted to skillful propaganda.
The messages were as schematic as any medieval morality play.
There was no mistaking who were the saints, who the sinners.
Gunn, or Sarge, is pure no-nonsense American, getting the job done no matter how many feelings might be bruised.
His was the face peering out from war-bond posters.


Writers Make War Come Alive
"Well, Chamberlain must be looking on the bright sunshine this morning with a good deal of relief," Virginia Woolf wrote in a beautiful, tight script in her diary on Sept. 30, 1938.
Neville Chamberlain, the British Prime Minister, had just reached a peace agreement with Hitler in Munich.
"Now suddenly we can travel &amp; move &amp; use our normal faculties," Woolf wrote.
"No slaughter of the young beneath us." A year later, full-scale war broke out in Europe, and by 1940, Virginia and her Jewish husband, Leonard Woolf, were discussing the possibility of joint suicide should Hitler invade England.
Woolf's diary entries and the letters, manuscripts and memorabilia of other writers from the World War II period are on view this summer in the exhibit "Writers in Wartime: Looking at World War II From the Berg Collection." The show is at the Berg Exhibition Room, a cool, out-of-the-way space on the third floor of the New York Public Library, through Oct. 7.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Environmental Groups Prevail in the House
Environmentalists won a big victory in the House, where Democrats and moderate Republicans joined together to reject a proposal by the Republican leadership to limit the E.P.A.'s ability to enforce pollution laws.


Tucson Electric Power Co.(TEP,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Presidential Life Corp. reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Career in Bodegas Ends in Death of Man and Son
Across three decades, Perceo Melo had operated bodegas in Brooklyn: one on Rockaway Avenue, another on Franklin Avenue.
In each place, he had made a living and a name for himself among the people he served, extending informal lines of credit, talking about religion and baseball, making sandwiches early each morning for the neighborhood's schoolchildren.
Just a few months ago, his son Julio Antonio had arrived from the Dominican Republic to work with Mr.
Melo at his latest store, Junior's Grocery on Madison Street in Bedford-Stuyvesant.
"He had a very paternal image," Rosemarie Moore, a mother from Madison Street, said of the 54-year-old Mr.
Melo.
"He had the eyes of a father."


Phycor Inc.(PHYC,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.75
8.75
7.25
DISCOUNT RATE
5.25
5.25
3.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
5.75
5.78
4.29
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.41
5.38
4.26
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.36
5.34
4.67
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.46
6.42
7.10
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.90
6.84
7.39
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.77
7.72
8.19
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.18
6.17
6.33
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Players Intl.(PLAY,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


4 Officers Are Suspended, One Is Charged in Accident
Four New York City police officers were suspended yesterday and one was charged with driving while impaired by alcohol after a pedestrian was struck and seriously injured in the Flatbush section of Brooklyn.
The accident occurred about 3:30 A.M. at Flatbush Avenue and Avenue R. A pedestrian stepped from between two parked vehicles and was struck by a private car driven by Officer Brian Sharkey, said Wilbur L. Chapman, the Police Department's chief of patrol.


Anthony Industries(ANT,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Chauvco Resources reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


New Jersey Loses Fight on Flight Paths
New Jersey lost and New York City won in a battle over aircraft noise, with an all-but-final decision by the Federal Aviation Administration on flight patterns from the region's three major airports.
The F.A.A. rejected a New Jersey proposal to reroute air traffic away from northern New Jersey's suburbs and out over the ocean instead.


U S West Inc. (USW,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Observer; If Not Vegas, L.A. Maybe?
History is written by winners, then rewritten by their children.
The winners rarely come off well when the rewrite is done.
Or as somebody must have said, "It is a rare child who thinks his parents may have been almost as smart as he is."


Calgon Carbon Corp.(CCC,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Frozen Food Express Industries(FFEX,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


A Town Waits, but Not Nervously
At the offices of the local weekly newspaper, a junior reporter in T-shirt and jeans, Darko Lisac, displayed the latest front page, hot off the presses today.
"Train Rams Truck," the headline read, over a photograph of an overturned locomotive.
Around the corner at the Karlovacka Banka, Danko Seiter, head of the legal affairs division, proffered the glossy annual report that will reinforce a privatization bid, even though, the report acknowledged, "the bank continued to operate in very complex economic and political conditions."


FirstFed Financial Corp. reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Sun Energy Partners L.P.(SLP,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


New England Business Service Inc.(NEB,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Jun 30


Hungarians Rally to Cry Of Old Party
As Hungarians grumble that life isn't as rosy as the former Communists they elected had promised, they are turning to a man in a white suit, shirt and shoes who expounds on the greatness of Hungary as the 1,000-year defender of Europe against the barbarians.
To Hungarians, the bravado sounds vaguely familiar.
Jozsef Torgyan, a 62-year-old lawyer, is the leader of the Smallholders, a 100-year-old party that had its heyday in the 1930's, won the first free elections after World War II, then went underground during Communist rule.


NGC Corp.(NGL,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Oshkosh B'Gosh Inc.(GOSHA,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


BMC Software Inc.(BMCS,NNM) reports earnings for 1st qtr to Jun 30


Pacific Forest reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Global Services Pact Concluded: Good News and Bad for the U.S.
The global pact covering financial services was concluded here today.
And even though the Clinton Administration has declined to join the new agreement that liberalizes trade in financial services, American banks, insurance companies and brokerage houses still have a chance to obtain new business in fast-growing developing countries because of the pact.
At the same time, however, American money managers may now face increased competition in seeking to manage Japanese public and private pension funds, officials at the World Trade Organization said today.
The funds have a total value of about $1 trillion.


OHM Corp.(OHM,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Hi-Lo Automotive (HLO,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Players Intl.(PLAY,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Driver Charged in Child's Death
Seven-year-old Michael Amador was riding in the back seat of his stepbrother's new Honda Wednesday night, headed home for dinner, when the car was broadsided by an automobile that ran a stop sign.
The boy, who had been thrown from the car by the impact, was declared dead yesterday at Hackensack Medical Center.
Aggravated manslaughter and drunken-driving charges were filed against the driver of the other vehicle, Alvaro A. Ramirez, 29.


Viacom Inc.(VIA.B,A) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Barter System Is Familiar A.L. East Ploy
Back in April, when the American League East was thought to be the strongest, most competitive division in the major leagues (that was before the strike-delayed season started), the would-be contenders engaged in a flurry of player moves that resembled a game of one-upsmanship.
The day after the Yankees signed John Wetteland, Toronto traded for David Cone.
Two days later, Baltimore signed three free-agent pitchers -- starter Kevin Brown and relievers Doug Jones and Jesse Orosco -- and Boston added catcher Mike Macfarlane, outfielder Mark Whiten and pitcher Rheal Cormier.
In the next 10 days, the Red Sox signed the free-agent pitchers Erik Hanson and Zane Smith.
A few more days passed, and the Orioles signed center fielder Andy Van Slyke.


Spotted Fever Alert
Alerted by a jump in cases of Rocky Mountain Spotted Fever in Atlantic County, officials are asking physicians to watch for symptoms of the disease, which is carried by common ticks.
In the last four months, there have been four confirmed and three suspected cases of the disease in the county -- compared with an average of eight a year for the entire state.
Symptoms include high fever, severe headache, muscle pain, chills and, in about half of all cases, a rash on the palms or feet.


Gibson Greetings Inc.(GIBG,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Jets Wait for Experienced Receiver
Once again, Coach Rich Kotite criticized his young, inexperienced wide receivers today for running wrong routes and for not escaping the grasps of defenders.
Kotite's frustration will not diminish until the Jets acquire an experienced wide receiver in the next few weeks.


Patrick Industries(PATX,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


The Mets Get Their Man For Bonilla
The deal for Bobby Bonilla was in the works with Baltimore for a month, but Joe McIlvaine was holding out for Alex Ochoa.
Last night, just like that, he got him, apparently with a big assist from the Yankees.
On a day when the New York baseball teams stole the trading spotlight from the New York Stock Exchange, the Mets shipped Bonilla, their best player and lone All-Star representative, to the Orioles for two blue-chip outfield prospects: the 23-year-old Ochoa and Damon Buford, 25.
The Mets also submitted a list of six players for the Orioles to choose from to complete the deal.


Express Scripts Inc.(ESRX,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Tultex Corp.(TTX,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jul 1


Hyde Park Ponders Symbol Of Its Most Famous Smoker
Dr.
Michael C. Caldwell, the County Health Commissioner, became alarmed as soon as he heard the news.
"Oh, no," he muttered to himself.
The problem?
The Town of Hyde Park was considering adopting as its official seal the famous silhouette of a debonair Franklin Delano Roosevelt with -- of all things -- a cigarette holder clenched between his teeth.


Ted Hook, 65, Dapper Owner Of the Backstage Restaurant
Ted Hook, a perennial chorus dancer who turned into an impromptu impresario at his restaurant, Backstage, died on July 19 at his apartment in Manhattan.
He was 65.
A friend, Lee Doyle, said the cause was pneumonia.


Mayor Tries to Beat Heat, Political and Otherwise
In a city where bad weather can turn into a political storm, Mayor Richard M. Daley, who was accused of being caught flat-footed during the deadly heat wave here earlier this month, is poised to declare a "heat emergency" if the temperatures soar, as expected, into the upper 90's this weekend.
The city is already opening air-conditioned centers, delivering ice to shut-ins, setting up telephone banks to check on the elderly and broadcasting warnings on television and radio.
Today, the department of Streets and Sanitation delivered more than 1,000 electric fans to elderly people who live alone.
And the city produced a "Keeping Cool," brochure, which was being circulated in Spanish, Korean, Chinese, Polish, Vietnamese and English.


Children's Books
PINOCCHIO'S SISTER  By Jan Slepian. 122 pp.
New York: Philomel Books. $14.95. (Ages 8 to 12)


A Death In the Family
MADE for television, the movie "A MOTHER'S PRAYER" is based on a true story about one of the five million children who will be orphaned by AIDS by the turn of century.
The film highlights the tragic dilemmas -- and options -- that families and the system face in trying to provide for children left behind by the disease.
Rosemary Holmstrom (Linda Hamilton), the mother of 8-year-old T.J. (Noah Fleiss, in photo with Hamilton), discovers to her horror that she has AIDS.
Rosemary, a 36-year-old secretary from Brooklyn, has no idea how she contracted the virus, although a doctor surmises she may have been infected by her late husband, who had a blood tranfusion.
When Rosemary tells T.J. the news, he covers his ears and refuses to believe her.


Looking for Mobil? Try Hopewell and Gloucester
To the Editor:
The article about the loss of jobs in Mercer County ("The Day the Jobs Got Up and Moved Away," July 23) was strong in information but wrong in geography.
Mobil's research and development center is in Hopewell Township, not, as you printed, in Hopewell Junction, which is in New York State.
Moreover, Paulsboro, another Mobil site, is not in Sussex County but in Gloucester County, 10 miles south of Camden.
MARY CAPOUYA Princeton


Alternative for Children With Cerebral Palsy
TO the strains of his teacher's softly accented phrases like "I am standing tall" and "I am very glad and proud of you," Zachary Borodkin -- his face a mixture of pride and astonishment -- took a few steps and stood erect for a count of 10.
Such a feat would be unremarkable in any other 6-year-old, but Zachary has cerebral palsy -- and these first steps toward independence represented a milestone for him and other children who are similarly afflicted.


S.E.C. Floats Proposal To Test I.P.O. Demand
THE next time you hear about a potentially hot initial public offering, it may not be while you flip through the pages of a dry prospectus.
It may be while you're in the kitchen listening to the radio.
Under a proposal by the Securities and Exchange Commission, companies thinking about going public could test the waters to see if there's sufficient investor interest to warrant the expense and hassle of an offering.
Companies would be able to advertise on the radio, interrupt your dinner with telephone surveys or hand out fliers to assess your interest.


July 23-29: Carolina Verdict; Life Sentence for Woman Who Drowned Her Sons
Turning aside the death penalty last week, a jury in Union, S.C., decided that Susan Smith must live with her crime.
Mrs.
Smith drowned her children last October, later telling her town and the rest of the country that a black carjacker took them.
The trial peeled back the skin of a small town and the life of a woman betrayed by the men she loved -- from a father who committed suicide, to a stepfather who sexually abused her, to a husband who left her, to a boyfriend who did not want her or her children in his life.
Like a small-town Medea, Mrs.
Smith acted out inexplicably, killing her sons, Michael, 3, and Alex, 14 months.
Her lawyer, David Bruck, argued that she meant to take her own life instead..


Diverse Visions, Common Ground
PAINTERS in the 19th century, portraitists especially, were wont to haul their talents and canvases from town to town.
Today, evidently, it is curators who hit the road.
Robert Costa is just such an itinerant.
In the last year here, he has gone from the sublime to the modest.
Having produced the group show "Garden Fresh" at the Trans Hudson Gallery, Mr.
Costa now presents a smaller anthology at Art Builders Inc.
The show's title, "Polyglot," is a bit misleading, since all but two of the eight participants speak the language of abstraction and neither of the exceptions, Holly Zausner and Orlando Cuevas, could be called a Realist.


The Fast-Track Treadmill
To the Editor:
Your article contains a glaring omission.
In the discussion of balancing the demands of work and family, there is no mention of nonfamily avocations and interests.
Art, music, theater, sports, writing and volunteer work can sharpen minds, enrich lives, relieve stress and stimulate the economy; and in the process, make the practitioner a better employee and family member.
MARY RICHMOND MAIER Dobbs Ferry, N.Y., July 4  The writer is a retired librarian.


Bugs? Often Enough, the Hose Is the Answer
THE recent hot weather plus a prolonged drought have left an ugly mark on the green world.
Lawns are browned off, trees are dropping leaves prematurely and mildew is rampant.
Certain specimen plants are dwarfs of their usual selves.
In many cases, flowering is either off schedule or not what it should be.
Many annuals are setting seed prematurely.
Hopefully the return of cooler weather and adequate rainfall will set things right again.
Meanwhile, hoses and watering cans have been put into yeoman service.


Sitting In With the New Second Banana
EVERYBODY loves an underdog, which may explain the national glee as Jay Leno, in tortoise-and-hare fashion, narrows the once mighty lead between his show and "Late Night With David Letterman."
But lost in the commotion surrounding Mr.
Leno's resurgence in the late-night talk-show wars is an important variable: the Second Banana Factor.
Helping fuel the comeback of the "Tonight" show has been the jazz guitarist Kevin Eurbanks, Mr.
Leno's new sidekick, who has transformed the "Tonight" show band (last led by Branford Marsalis) into the hippest ensemble on late-night television.


Did We Need to Drop It?
THE DECISION TO USE THE ATOMIC BOMB  And the Architecture of an American Myth.
By Gar Alperovitz.
With the assistance of Sanho Tree, Edward Rouse Winstead, Kathryn C. Morris, David J. Williams, Leo C. Maley 3d, Thad Williamson and Miranda Grieder. 847 pp.
New York: Alfred A. Knopf. $32.50.
CODE-NAME DOWNFALL  The Secret Plan to Invade Japan --  And Why Truman Dropped the Bomb.
By Thomas B. Allen and Norman Polmar.
Illustrated. 352 pp.
New York: Simon &amp; Schuster. $25.


For Men of Fashion, Anything (Comfortable) Goes
The sultry weather last week called for an eclectic style of dress, a variety seen in the audience attending the New York Men's Shows -- buyers, stylists, designers, fashion groupies and the press.
Left, a threesome of Texas buyers from Neiman Marcus held a business meeting under the shade of trees in Bryant Park, across the street from the Seventh on Sixth Gallery, one of three sites of the designer shows.
The three removed their black suit jackets and used fans given away at the shows, but they never loosened their ties.
The spectrum of dress included traditional lightweight summer business suits and classic seersucker suits.
For others, cotton suits with bold, awning-stripe colors were a relief from the solid color suits that predominated.
Dressing for the shows meant employing the dress-down look that included active sportswear, shirts worn open over tank tops, or dress trousers with suspenders worn over T-shirts.
Black T-shirts were worn under chalk-white linen jackets with pleat-front trousers and sneakers.
The fashionable male refused to be corraled by a single style of dress.


'None Ever Wished It Longer': How to Stamp Out Book Inflation
THE most heartfelt complaint ever put to paper by an overworked literary critic can be found in Samuel Johnson's "Life of Milton": " 'Paradise Lost' is one of the books which the reader admires and lays down, and forgets to take up again. None ever wished it longer than it is." As a practicing book reviewer who spends far too much time wrestling with tombstone-sized slabs of underdone prose, I'm thinking of having that second sentence put on a rubber stamp.
The problem of bloated books -- bibliobesity, as it were -- has always been with us.
The list of classics no one ever wished longer is . . . well, long. (Anybody else care to confess to never having finished "Das Kapital"?) But most of the really fat classics were triple-decker novels.
The novel is a genre in which length can be a virtue; my copy of "The Way We Live Now" is 972 pages, and I wouldn't willingly part with a single paragraph of Trollope.
Therein lies the current crisis: what works in the hands of a master storyteller is anesthetic (or worse) in the hands of a garrulous biographer hellbent on telling everything he knows.


Liberties; Diary of A Mad House
I am missing the doorknob gene, the one that helps you identify tacky doorknobs that need replacing.
It's the same DNA strand that provides insight into window treatments, light fixtures and trompe l'oeil.
Maybe that's why I always found Martha Stewart so scary, like Big Nurse with a pastry bag.
I could never fathom why she wanted to make new flower pots look old by smearing yogurt and dirt on them and letting mold grow.
And do your lamb chops really need to wear gold-leaf leggings?


IN SHORT: FICTION
DOSTOEVSKY'S LAST NIGHT  By Christina Peri Rossi. Picador USA, $20.
The tormented gambler in Christina Peri Rossi's novel is a bingo aficionado who haunts not the church halls of American bingo but the casinos of Europe, where this simple game is played with jungle ferocity.
In "Dostoevsky's Last Night," Ms.
Peri Rossi follows a Spanish society-magazine editor named Jorge as he traipses through these smoky establishments in search of a way to reconstruct the shambles of his life.
But Jorge's gambling addiction is more a conversation piece than an actual disease; it's a topic to discuss with his psychoanalyst, his mother, his boss, his ex-wife -- just about anybody.
Ably translated by Laura C. Dail, Ms.
Peri Rossi's novel is really an extended riff on the grand theme of chance.
Unfortunately, Jorge's musings on gambling and the partial descent into madness of his idol, Dostoyevsky, are often eye-catching but rarely wise.
They convey all too accurately the sensation of time and money being frittered away, whether on the foolish dream of pinning down random numbers or on the more modern pursuit of problem-solving through banter.
ERIK BURNS


Making Money: It's a Matter of Time, Not Timing
BUY low.
Sell high.
That's the old saw that guides most successful investors.
So why should anyone buy domestic stocks today, when the market in the United States appears to be gasping for breath after a rapid rise to stratospheric levels?
The answers are just as simple: You should be buying equities for the long term.
And you shouldn't try to time the market.
Time -- not timing -- is the formula for success, most investing experts say.


Silent Tower On 10th Ave. Is Coming Back to Life
Lewis Futterman once said he developed the 31-story Aurora apartment tower at 10th Avenue and 57th Street for "an upscale audience of people who want the convenience of being near their jobs in midtown and who want enough space for a baby grand."
No baby grands arrived, however.
Neither did any residents.
Like other projects that began in an expansive real estate climate but neared completion as the market was convulsing in the late 1980's, the Aurora fell into a limbo from which it is only now emerging.


Other Routes to the Fast Track (With a Few Ifs)
The Kearny Connection is not the only rail project that may soon come to a station near you.
It is part of New Jersey Transit's Urban Core Project, which aims to link and modernize existing lines.
Here are other major proposals:
SECAUCUS TRANSFER This project would allow commuters on the old Erie Lackawanna Lines from Bergen, Passaic and Rockland Counties to get off at a new station in Secaucus and transfer to Amtrak's Northeast Corridor Line, which goes directly into Penn Station in Manhattan.
Those who want to go to midtown will no longer have to get off in Hoboken and take the PATH; their trip should be 20 minutes shorter.
Work has already started on the $448 million station, which is to open in the fall of 2001.
It is being built on land owned by Allied Outdoor Advertising, which granted an easement for the new station on condition that it could build a major new office and retail complex on the site.


Inklings of What Might Have Been
VIRTUOSITY GOES OUT the window in the face of a great sound.
Some people simply have voices an audience wants to hear.
Selena, the 23-year-old Mexican-American singer from Corpus Christi, Tex., who was murdered by a fan on March 31, was just that sort of attraction.
Sometimes her voice quivered.
Sometimes she roughed it up a bit.
At its best, it had a coolness, a type of unadorned passion that can be heard in places on her new album, "Dreaming of You" (EMI Latin/EMI Records).
The album is a posthumous release that in its own scattered way represents the crossover record that she had been planning before her death.
Selena was the queen of tejano music, the music of the Texas-Mexico border, and she was the one who was about to make the style big.
Not only was she selling huge quantities of her own Spanish-language records, but she was poised to release an English-language recording that was uncompleted at her death.


'Disposable Commodity'
To the Editor:
Sarah Bryan Miller's article "Operas in Search of a Second Hearing"  [ July 16 ]  is based on a misconception, namely, that the problem of a new opera sinking from view can be solved by setting up a second production.
In my own experience, this has not been the case.
My opera "Dreyfus," first produced at the Brooklyn Academy of Music in 1985, received a second production in Bielefeld, Germany, in 1993, and a third production in Vienna last year.
So what now?
Same old problem.


Jersey's Vanishing 'New'
IF THERE WERE FIVE STEVE JOBS  [ SIC ]  OR one Bill Gates in Harlem," observes Newt Gingrich in his capacity of Author, not Speaker, "the entire nature of the community would change." The columnist Richard Cohen commented sourly, "Yes, it would have moved to Jersey."
Catch the usage: Jersey, not New Jersey, the full name of the state.
Robert Wallace of Albany alerted me a few weeks ago to the widespread clipping of the Garden State: "How come a guy in Brooklyn can say, 'Hey, Gino, what say we go over to Jersey today?' and it sounds all right? But if the same guy is in Hoboken and says, 'Hey, Gino, what say we go over to York today?' it sounds wrong. Why?"


The World; Trade's Bottom Line: Business Over Politics
EARLIER this month Henry A. Kissinger and a delegation of American business executives and academics paid a visit to Li Peng, China's Prime Minister.
As would be expected at a moment when relations between the two countries has reached a low point -- on human rights, missile proliferation and Taiwan -- the opening minutes were spent with Mr.
Li complaining about Taiwan's President visiting the United States, and with the Americans pressing the case of Harry Wu, the imprisoned human rights activist.
What surprised the visitors, however, was how quickly Mr.
Li dropped those issues and jumped right into business: Power projects that need foreign capital, China's plans for buying and building new passenger aircraft, the giant Three Gorges Dam project.
"He made it very, very clear that he had no intention of letting these huge diplomatic disputes affect the economic relationship," said C. Fred Bergsten, a prominent economist and adviser to the Clinton Administration, who was along on the trip.
"It was as if we were talking about two completely separate relationships."


Modish Culinary Mix With Marina View
THE new waterside scene this summer is Paradise Bar &amp; Grille, facing the Stamford Landing marina and west branch of Stamford harbor.
The large dining area opens directly to the marina, and chairs and tables spill out to the open air.
Inside, a full-width, vibrantly painted mural on the back wall evokes an idyllic tropical paradise of exotic foliage and birds.
The food is more familiar, offering current culinary fads from grilled chicken quesadillas to tomato bruschetta -- a precis of Caribbean, Asian and Italian favorites.
A category called "pizzas from paradise" features five items with names like Gone Native, Four Winds, Margherita and Tobago Trio.
But on inspection, a hibiscus (or rose, if you prefer) by any other name turns out to be the basics, not the tropics -- variations on the old tomato-mozzarella, basil-garlic-mushroom-sausage theme.


Struggling Nude Cabaret Says It Will Reamin Open
After a brief brush with bankruptcy, Wiggles, a cabaret that features naked dancers, has reached a tentative agreement with its landlord, the club's major creditor, and will remain open -- much to the chagrin of its many neighborhood foes.
A lawyer for Wiggles said last week that the club, a target of protests since it opened a year ago, had yet to turn a profit.
But the lawyer, Andrew D. Presberg, said that the bankruptcy filing had been a maneuver to prevent the landlord from seizing the club's assets.


Fire, Ready, Aim
Lost in the commotion about the Senate vote to lift the arms embargo on Bosnia, and President Clinton's threat to veto such a move, is a small fact of some importance: Both the President's policy and the Congress's policy duck the real issue in Bosnia and are formulas for continued war.
What are our real interests in Bosnia?
They are four: halt the killing, prevent the conflict from spreading, prevent the conflict from turning into a Christian-Muslim holy war and insure that it does not end in a way that permanently damages America's ties with its European allies, NATO and Russia.


Q. &amp; A.
A Delay On Title Insurance  Q It is almost 20 months since I closed on my house in New Jersey, and I have not yet received my title insurance policy from the title company.
My lawyer tells me I will get it sooner or later.
Can you tell me what kind of risk I am exposed to in the absence of the policy and what I can do to get the policy soon? . . .
Santhanam Pattabiraman, Tenafly, N.J.
A Stephen M. Flatow, in-house counsel for Vested Title Inc., a title insurance company in Jersey City, N.J., said that the usual reason for a delay in issuing a title insurance policy is that there are one or more title "exceptions" that have not been resolved to the satisfaction of the title insurance company.
An exception, Mr.
Flatow said, is an issue or condition affecting title to the property that must be resolved or cleared before the title company will insure that the purchaser has received clear title.
An example of an exception, Mr.
Flatow said, would be a previous mortgage on the property that has not been properly discharged and canceled or a judgment against a former owner that has not been satisfied.
Another possible reason for a delay in issuing a title policy could be the result of a problem that occurred in the closing process itself, such as an error on one of the closing documents that might require the production and filing of a corrective document.
Mr.
Flatow added that since the purpose of a title policy is to protect the purchaser against claims by others that may affect title to the property, there is a risk when a policy is not issued.
"If a claim is asserted against the property," Mr.
Flatow said, "and it is based on one of the exceptions that await resolution, the purchaser may find that the title insurance company will not protect him."
In any case, Mr.
Flatow said, "20 months is an awfully long time to wait for the title policy, and the purchaser deserves to know more from his attorney than that he will get the policy 'sooner or later.' " At this point, he said, the purchaser should consider contacting the title company directly to determine the reason for the delay.
Unsold Shares In a Co-op Building Q What are unsold shares in a co-op building and why are they not subject to the co-op's subletting rules? . . .
Oscar L. Churn, Bronx.
A Morton H. Rosen, a Manhattan lawyer who specializes in co-op and condominium law, said that unsold shares are shares of stock in a co-op housing corporation allocated to apartments that have never been purchased for residential purposes.
In the most common situation, the original sponsor is the holder of unsold shares for apartments that have not yet been sold.
"Virtually every cooperative offering plan exempts holders of unsold shares from various aspects of board regulation," Mr.
Rosen said.
As a result, he said, holders of unsold shares are typically exempted from subletting fees and policies, admissions policies, payment of flip taxes and transfer fees and board review of some proposed alterations.
In addition, he said, under the terms of some offering plans, the holders of unsold shares are given special voting rights in board elections and veto power over certain board actions.
Mr.
Rosen pointed out that any special rights or powers granted to holders of unsold shares result strictly from provisions in the offering plan.
"If the offering plan does not afford them these privileges, they do not exist," he said.


For a Mortuary Class, a Play Is a Rollicking Slice of Death
For his class trip to the theater, Archie Nieman borrowed Dad's car.
It's a hearse.


Jill Blumenthal, Stephen Donowitz
Jill Blumenthal, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
J.
Robert Blumenthal of Muttontown, L.I., was married last evening to Stephen Craig Donowitz, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Jerold Donowitz of Delray Beach, Fla.
Rabbi Daniel Fogel officiated at Temple Israel in Lawrence, L.I.
The bride, 30, is keeping her name.
She teaches kindergarten at the George Jackson Elementary School in Jericho, L.I.
She graduated from Syracuse University and received a master's degree in education from New York University.


Police Link Algerian Militant Group to Paris Train Bombing
The police said today that there were signs that a group linked to the violent conflict in Algeria was responsible for the bombing of a commuter train in Paris on Tuesday that killed 7 people and injured more than 80.
Although they did not make a formal statement, police officials told reporters that they have a number of indications that the so-called Armed Islamic Group may be to blame.


Where Japan Deifies Its War Dead
ON the northern edge of the Imperial Palace in Tokyo, just beyond the moat, is a vast stone walkway leading to one of Japan's most famous, most fascinating and, for Americans, most infuriating shrines.
The Yasukuni Shrine is the spot where Japanese soldiers who died in battle are worshiped as gods.
A focal point of Japanese nationalism, its extraordinary museum makes heroes of, among others, the young men who attacked Pearl Harbor, flew kamikaze planes and rampaged across Asia.


Timothy Healy, Anna Roglieri
Anna Roglieri, a daughter of Geraldine and Dr.
John L. Roglieri of Tenafly, N.J., was married yesterday to Timothy Greg Healy, a son of Sheila and Herbert Healy of Hebron, Conn., and Stoddard, N.H.
The Rev.
Dr.
F.
Forrester Church, a Unitarian minister, performed the ceremony at the St.
Andrew's Dune Church in Southampton, L.I.
Mrs.
Healy, 27, was until recently a nurse at the New York Fertility Institute in New York.
She graduated from the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill and received a master's degree in nursing from Columbia University.
Her father is an internist in New York and the corporate medical director of Sanus/New York Life, a managed-care organization in Fort Lee, N.J.
Her mother is an adjunct assistant professor of social work at Columbia and is a high-school counselor at the Academy of Mount St.
Ursula in the Bronx.


Why Lose Chance to Debate in Singapore?
To the Editor:
I conveyed through your columns Prime Minister Goh Chok Tong's invitation to William Safire to debate Mr.
Goh at the National University of Singapore (letter, July 20).
Mr.
Safire has declined (column, July 20) and instead wants Mr.
Goh to debate Francis Seow.


Women Say China Stalls On Parley
One month before the Fourth International Conference on Women is due to open in Beijing, thousands of official delegates and representatives of independent organizations say they have been unable to obtain visas and fear that China is effectively barring them from the event by setting up bureaucratic barriers.
The official conference and a parallel forum for nongovernmental organizations have been mired for months in problems with the Chinese Government.
Between them, the two events are expected to draw as many as 50,000 people, the largest international gathering ever held by the United Nations.


If It's This Hot, Can Fall Be Far Behind?
Last chance to fertilize the roses.
Doing it later is a no-no, because the new growth won't have time to harden off before it gets cold.
Sow early-fall vegetable crops like bush beans, Chinese cabbage, endive and Swiss chard.


In the Region/Connecticut;
IN spite of a 15 to 20 percent decline in law school applications and a marked decrease in demand for graduates at downsized law firms and corporations, Connecticut's three law schools are engaged in sizable building projects.
The most ambitious new project is the 130,000-square-foot, $25 million complex at Quinnipiac College in Hamden that is now getting its finishing touches.
Classes for the fall semester are scheduled to begin Aug. 28.


Carla Y. Taylor, Roger M. Brown
Carla Yvonne Taylor, a news reporter for WGGB-TV in Springfield, Mass., was married yesterday in Princeton, N.J., to Roger Marcus Brown, an international tax lawyer in the office of the associate chief counsel of the Internal Revenue Service in Washington.
The Rev.
William Gipson, an African Methodist Episcopal Zion minister who is an associate dean of religious life at Princeton University, performed the ceremony in the university's chapel.
The bride graduated from Yale University and received a master's degree in journalism from Northwestern University.
She is the daughter of Patricia and Howard Taylor of Trenton.
The bride's father is a professor of sociology at Princeton.
Her mother is the assistant general counsel at the Educational Testing Service in Princeton.


Women Who Burn, Run, Jump And Slide For a Living
AS A RULE, LINDA HOWARD likes to be set on fire.
But she is also partial to car crashes, and feels quite comfortable falling out of windows.
As president of the Stuntwomen's Association of Motion Pictures in Los Angeles, she shares this passion with 26 other women who double for Whoopi Goldberg, Kathleen Turner, Betty White and hundreds of other actresses in everything from frightening car crashes to simple hair pulling.
Sometimes, they need only do a quick fall before picking up their checks and heading home.
But other times, a film is full of perilous action.


Casillas to Undergo Surgery
After enduring sciatic pain in his leg since last season, left tackle Tony Casillas decided today to have surgery for a herniated disk that he hoped would allow him to return in two months.
If he returns by then, he would miss four regular-season Jets games.
Casillas was to be a cornerstone of a revamped defensive line.
He has been one of the league's most powerful inside players in creating a surge -- a tactic that could have had a tremendous impact with the addition of the Jets' first-round rookie pass rusher, Hugh Douglas.


Jane S. Allen, Bradley C. Bowton
Jane Scarlett Allen, the daughter of Barbara S. Allen of Aurora, Ohio, and Milton N. Allen of Old Lyme, Conn., was married yesterday to Bradley Craig Bowton, a son of Mildred and James R. Bowton of Oakbrook, Ill.
The Rev.
James S. Ward performed the ceremony at St.
Columba's Episcopal Church in Inverness, Calif.
Ms.
Allen, 31, is keeping her name.
She was formerly a brand manager in Sydney, Australia, for Procter &amp; Gamble.
She graduated from Smith College and received an M.B.A. from Harvard University.
Her father, a business consultant in Old Lyme, is a founder and the former chairman of Manufacturing Decision Support Systems, a computer software manufacturer in Cleveland.
Her mother, now retired, was a tennis umpire and a former ranking amateur tennis player.


Quietness Argument For Sub Won't Wash
To the Editor:
I have a lot of respect for Secretary of the Navy John Dalton; I hate to see him fall prey to the sharks who are trying to justify the spending of $1.5 billion for the third Seawolf submarine (letter, July 24).


TRACK AND FIELD
Hours after Ivan Pedroso of Cuba set a world record of 29 feet 4 3/4 inches in the long jump in Sestriere, Italy, Carl Lewis strained his left hamstring today while winning the event at the United States Olympic Festival.
Lewis said he did not know if the injury would let him compete against Pedroso in the world track and field championships, which begin Friday in Goteborg, Sweden.
His only event there is the long jump on Aug. 11, meaning he has almost two weeks to become sound.


Eva Peron's Corpse Continues to Haunt Argentina
A new novel about Eva Duarte de Peron, which deals with the struggle over her remains after she died more than 40 years ago, has added to the fascination about her in a country with a long history of preoccupation with the dead.
Wife of the strongman Juan Domingo Peron, she was a champion of the poor until her death from cancer in 1952 at the age of 33.
Her life was celebrated in the Broadway musical "Evita."


In Sluggish Thrall of Summer, Nightclubs Serve Up Froth
Perched tentatively at the top of the stairs, Girly -- her nom de guerre in club land -- dipped her ankles into a vat of suds and debated whether to take the next step down.
Her outfit, resilient black vinyl, was tailor-made for the plunge.
Her braids, held in place by pastel barrettes, were drawn tightly enough to stay plastered in place.
Her mascara would undoubtedly fall victim, but, she concluded, her dignity would not.


Old Master, Old Maid
To the Editor:
Rathbone cites me as the source of the quotation.


Terror Trial Has Defense Calling Foul, Saying Tapes Are Proof of Fabrication
For six months, lawyers for 11 men charged in a terror-bombing conspiracy in New York have told a jury that their clients are the targets of a trumped-up case.
Last week, the lawyers presented what they said was the most important evidence of this: a conversation in which a Federal agent told an informer he was permitted to make unauthorized recordings of the men now charged.
The lawyers also presented statements that the agent made to her supervisors in which, the lawyers said, the agent lied about her knowledge of the informer's taping of the defendants for his private use.


Quiet Foursome, or Animal House?
Marian J. Fallon's colleagues call her the summer rental queen of the Jersey Shore.
She's been doing it since 1984; this summer her agency handled more than 50 group rentals in Spring Lake and Sea Girt.
But she really had to think when she was asked for a horror story.
"I did have six young men, while they were in college," she said.
"I had been renting to them for about three years, and jokingly told them to invite me to their Fourth of July party. Well, they did. And I saw. They had a white Volkswagen full of dirty laundry. That was their laundry hamper! I guess they took it home to their mothers at the end of the summer."


Acrid Bile
To the Editor:
Why on earth did you select John Mortimer to review "The Path to Power," by Margaret Thatcher (July 9)?
Since he is a lifetime socialist commenting on a book whose author declares herself a lifetime Conservative, I suppose he might have been expected to give the case for the opposition.
However, he is a man whose ability to comment on contemporary politics has dissolved in his own acrid bile.


The Experiments of Dr. Oz
JOYCE DONADIO HAD ARRIVED AT THE confluence of paradigms.
She was a 49-year-old, diabetic computer operator from Nutley, N. J., with a lifelong smoking habit and a blood-starved left ventricle.
The extremity of her condition had been driven home a week earlier by a crashing heart attack.
She was wheeled into Operating Room 21 at Columbia-Presbyterian Medical Center at 7:30 A.M.
For the next eight hours her life was in the hands of blue-and-green-gowned nurses, physician-assistants, anesthesiologists and surgeons of various rank and experience who cut veins out of her legs, sawed her sternum in half, spread her ribs and then made way for Dr.
Mehmet Oz, probably the most accomplished 35-year-old cardiothoracic surgeon in the country.
He strode into the arena in his rubber clogs, hands upraised, ready for a sterile towel, latex gloves and the delicate work of securing a future for Donadio's faltering heart.
At the invitation of Oz and his patient, there were two other people on hand in surgical gowns and masks: a second-year medical student named Sally Smith, stationed at Donadio's feet, and a 52-year-old healer named Julie Motz, who was standing at Donadio's head.
As volunteers in Oz's Cardiac Complementary Care Center, they worked for free through the operation, seldom moving except to reposition their hands.
As Oz requested sutures and clamps and units of lidocaine, Motz called softly to Smith to move her hands from the small toe of Donadio's right foot to a point on the sole known as "the bubbling spring."


Baseball Needs Ripken to Take A Day Off
If Cal Ripken Jr. has any class -- and we've been led to believe that Cal is one class act -- he will take a day off between now and Sept. 6 when he is expected to break Lou Gehrig's record of 2,130 consecutive baseball games.
Cal will simply sit one out.


Kiri's Clown Surprises By Holding the Lead
Kiri's Clown, a 6-year-old horse who likes to come busting out of the gate to take the lead and try to hold it, came busting out today and did hold it.
And by the length of his neck, against a late rush by Awad, he scored a resounding upset to win the $250,000 Sword Dancer Invitational on the Saratoga turf.
Not only that, but he broke Fraise's track record of 1992 by two-fifths of a second, running the mile and a half on the inner turf course in 2:252/5 .
He also broke the losing streak of his trainer, Phil Johnson, who hadn't saddled a winner in New York State in 68 races going back to April.
In between, though, Kiri's Clown traveled to New England in June and won the New Hampshire Sweepstakes.


Where the Mississippi Begins
THE mighty river that changed so many lives and landscapes in the summer of 1993 begins un assumingly enough as a bright little stream rushing out of a tranquil lake fringed with wild rice in central Minnesota.
For 150 years the river's humble beginnings -- and the fact that it flows north and east for miles before curving southward -- fooled the region's European and American explorers, who claimed several other lakes as the headwaters before confirming what the Sioux and Ojibway had known for centuries: that the Y-shaped lake later named Itasca (from the Latin words veritas and caput, for truth and head) fed the river that had come to be known as the Great River, Father of Waters -- the Mississippi.
Now enclosed in 32,000 acres of protected land, Itasca State Park remains open to visitors all year, though the food, lodging, and boat and bicycle rental facilities close for the winter.
The park draws more than half a million visitors a year to view the headwaters site and touch the waters that flow 2,552 miles to the Gulf of Mexico.
In a clearing at the northern tip of Lake Itasca, a simple wooden marker identifies the beginning of this historic waterway: a tiny outlet where the lakes and creeks of the Itasca basin merge in what can -- in compliance with historical and geographical precedent -- be deemed a river.


Suzzara Chace, John Durocher
Suzzara Freeborn Chace, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Minturn Verdi Chace of Mount Kisco, N.Y., was married yesterday to John Fitzgerald Durocher, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Arthur Alfred Durocher of Canton, N.Y.
The Rev.
Harry Giroux performed the ceremony at St.
Mary's Roman Catholic Church in Ridgefield, Conn.
Mrs.
Durocher, 24, teaches and coaches at the Brimmer and May School in Brookline, Mass.
She is also a counselor at Riverside Community Care, a residential mental-health program in Dedham, Mass.
She graduated from Brown University.
She is to begin studying for a master's degree in education at Lesley College in the fall.


Medicare, to Survive, Needs an Affluence Test
To the Editor:
"A Bold, Imperfect Medicare Plan" (editorial, July 25) assesses Medicare's near-insolvent condition, as well as the disproportionate cost-cutting burden it faces in the Republican balanced budget plan.


New Face in the Urban Jungle
THOSE funny faces staring back at you in the Central Park Zoo's rain forest exhibit are the city's latest addition to its urban jungle: four black lion tamarin monkeys, among the world's rarest primates.
The adult tamarins, two males and two females, were born in Brazilian zoos and arrived last week at the Central Park Wildlife Center/Zoo, which is the first North American zoological park to join international conservation efforts to save this species.
But the zoo isn't taking all the credit.


THAT 'CERTAIN AGE'
A footnote to William Safire's useful scrutiny of euphemism and aging ("That 'Certain Age,' " July 2).
In France, men are sometimes labeled vieux or age, but in polite circles women never get old.
Once past infancy, a girl remains tout jeune (very young) until adolescence and early 20's when she becomes une jeune fille (a young girl).
In her 30's she is encore jeune (still young); in her 40's jeune toujours (young as ever).
At 80, a woman can relax totally because she is now eternellement jeune.
JOHN BOVEY Cambridge, Mass.


RESULTS PLUS
GOLF  Funk's 3-Round 195 Ties for Best of Year
Fred Funk shot a five-under-par 66 yesterday and matched the lowest three-round score on the PGA Tour this year as he opened a four-stroke lead over Jim McGovern in the $1 million Ideon Classic in Sutton, Mass.


At the Casinos
What's happening on stage at all the Atlantic City casinos this week.
Tickets are available through Ticketmaster, (800) 736-1420.
Bally's Park Place Boardwalk and Park Place. (800) 225-5977.
BALLY BALLROOM Frankie Valli and the Four Seasons.
Tuesday through Thursday at 8:30 P.M., Friday at 10 P.M., Saturday at 9 P.M., and next Sunday at 8:30 P.M.
Tickets: $25-$35.
PARK CABARET "Legends in Concert," impersonations of Neil Diamond, Judy Garland, Whitney Houston, Roy Orbison, Tom Jones, Elvis Presley, Tina Turner, Madonna, Elton John and the Blues Brothers.
Sunday through Thursday at 7:30 and 10 P.M.; Saturday at 8 and 10:30 P.M.
Tickets: $20; $25 on Saturday.
Caesars Atlantic City 2100 Pacific Avenue. (800) 677-7469.
CIRCUS MAXIMUS THEATER Chicago.
Today at 8 P.M.
Tickets: $40.
Dionne Warwick.
Friday at 10 P.M., Saturday at 9 P.M. and next Sunday at 8 P.M.
Tickets: $45.
Claridge Hotel Boardwalk and Park Place. (800) 257-8585.
PALACE THEATER "Magic and Beyond," with Brett Daniels.
Monday and Tuesday at 7:30 P.M.; Wednesday, Thursday, Saturday and Sunday at 7:30 and 10 P.M.
Through Aug. 31.
Tickets: $15; $19 on Saturday.
One-drink minimum.
The Grand Boston at Pacific Avenue. (609) 340-7200.
CAMBRIDGE BALLROOM George Jones.
Friday at 10 P.M. and Saturday at 8 P.M.
Tickets: $35.
COMING UP Kenny Rogers, Aug. 18-19, Tickets: $50.
Harrah's Hotel Casino  Harrah's Boulevard and Huron Avenue. (800) 242-7724.
BROADWAY-BY-THE-BAY "Guys and Dolls." Through Sept. 3.
Tuesday through Sunday, 7 and 10:30 P.M.
Tickets: $20.
Merv Griffin's Resorts Casino Hotel 1133 Boardwalk. (609) 340-6830.
SUPERSTAR THEATER "Hot Cha Cha." Tomorrow at 7:30 P.M.
Tickets: $10-$20.
Tony Danza.
Thursday at 8 P.M. and Friday and Saturday at 9 P.M.
Tickets: $25.
Sands Hotel and Casino Indiana Avenue and Brighton Park. (800) 257-8580.
COPA ROOM "Sophisticated Rhythms." Six singers, a five-piece live band and Walter Freeman, dancer, accompany Clint Holmes as he covers hits by the Mills Brothers, Smokey Robinson, Louis Armstrong, Nat King Cole, the Pointer Sisters and the Supremes.
Sunday through Wednesday at 3:30 and 8:30 P.M.; Saturday at 8 and 11 P.M.
Through Nov. 26.
Tickets: $20.
Showboat Hotel Casino Delaware and Pacific. (609) 343-4000.
MARDI GRAS SHOWROOM "The Basin Street Follies," a revue with song, comedy and magic, with new acts every month.
Featuring Bobby Arvon and Lori Dobson, singers, and the Great Tomsoni &amp; Company, a comedy and magic act, and Dan Wilson, comedian.
Through Aug. 5.
Monday through Saturday at 8 and 10:30 P.M.
Tickets: $10.
Tropworld Boardwalk and Brighton Avenue. (800) 257-6227.
SHOWROOM Dick Fox's "Doo Wop Reunion," featuring the Elegants, Don and Juan, the Duprees and the Chimes.
Today at 7 P.M. and tomorrow at 8 P.M.
Tickets: $20-$25.
Tammy Wynette.
Friday and Saturday at 9 P.M.
Tickets: $35.
Trump's Castle Casino Resort Huron Avenue and Brigantine Boulevard. (800) 777-8477.
KING'S COURT SHOWROOM Dick Clark's "American Bandstand Live: The Beat Goes On." Through Sept. 21.
Monday through Thursday and Saturday at 7:30 and 10:30 P.M.; Sunday at 9 P.M.
Tickets: $12.50 on weekdays and $15 on Saturdays.
One-drink minimum.
VIVA'S LOUNGE Cozy Morley, comedian.
Tuesday through Saturday, 8 P.M.
Free with a one-drink minimum.
Through Sept. 2.
Trump Plaza Boardwalk at Mississippi Avenue. (800) 759-8786.
PLAZA SHOWROOM Pat Cooper.
Tuesday through Thursday at 9 P.M., Friday at 10 P.M., Saturday at 7:30 and 11:30 P.M. and next Sunday at 8 P.M.
Tickets: $30-$35.
Trump Taj Mahal 1000 Boardwalk at Virginia Avenue. (609) 449-1000.
CASBAH "A Tribute to the Platters." Through next Sunday.
Monday through Thursday and Saturday and Sunday at 7:30 and 10:30 P.M.
Tickets: $12.50; $15 on Saturday.


INSIDE
Less Crime, Fewer Guns
Behind New York's 30 percent drop in murders and shootings is a startling development: fewer guns are being carried on the streets.
Page 29.
Raids at 2 Factories
Two New York factories were forced to close as Federal agents seized documents in an inquiry into suspected faulty aircraft parts.
Page 27.


The Garbage Wars: Cracking the Cartel
LIKE armored divisions clashing on the battlefield, two garbage trucks from Browning-Ferris Industries and three from the Pioneer Carting Corporation confronted each other shortly after midnight two months ago in front of the Delmonico Gourmet Food Market in midtown Manhattan.
The trucks jammed Lexington Avenue, blocking traffic.
"You think you guys can control this city?" yelled one of the Pioneer drivers, jumping down from his seat, waving his arms and spouting language that matched the contents of his truck.
"This is our town."


Shootings Fall As More Guns Stay at Home
Behind the 30 percent drop in murders and shootings reported in New York City this year is a startling development: drug dealers and gang members have apparently begun to leave their guns at home.
Police Department and Federal law enforcement officials say that gunplay has decreased from the South Bronx to the Rockaways partly through the tightening of local and Federal gun-control regulations and crackdowns on youth gangs.
But more than anything else, Federal and local officials say, it is the increase in police friskings for such minor violations as loud radio playing and public beer drinking that has discouraged people from carrying unregistered guns.


July 23-29: A Tact for Labor; Three Unions Agree To Merge Into One
Having fallen on hard times, America's labor movement has seen its membership shrink, blue-collar wages fall and both Republicans and Democrats reject every hot item on its agenda -- from the North American Free Trade Agreement to universal health care.
Last week, three unions tried to recoup their power by merging.
Leaders for machinists, automobile workers and steelworkers said the process would take five years, but with 2 million, mostly well-paid members, the new union could be the nation's biggest and richest.


Banishing Allergens
Lots of hotels can never seem to keep the tissue dispensers full, but at least one now has an excuse not to.
The Montcalm Hotel in London has set aside a room for guests with asthma and other allergies.


David in Battle With a Bookstore Goliath
Ever since Barnes &amp; Noble opened a megastore on Broadway at 82d Street in 1993, book lovers have wondered whether the Shakespeare &amp; Company bookstore, just one block south, could survive.
It has, but not without some setbacks, and not without some major changes in its marketing strategy.
Business has stabilized, company officials say, and the store is in the black.
Shakespeare has even taken a leaf from the Barnes &amp; Noble book by creating a mini-chain of its own.
In addition to its branch at 716 Broadway in Greenwich Village, the company plans to open a store this fall at 939 Lexington Avenue near 69th Street.


Miss Whitmore And Mr. Lane
Margaret Penn Whitmore, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John Rogers Whitmore of Greenwich, Conn., was married there yesterday to Jeffrey Griffin Lane, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert M. Lane, also of Greenwich.
The Rev.
Dr.
Walter Wagoner, a minister of the United Church of Christ, performed the ceremony at the Round Hill Community Church.
Mrs.
Lane, 26, is the assistant manager of Portico Kids, a children's design and home furnishings company in Greenwich.
She graduated from Denison University.
Her father is the president and chief executive of the Bessemer Trust Company in New York.


Advice for a Rock Band: Stay Away From the Clubs
To the Editor:
As a rock musician who has been a partner in a record company, I found the July 23 article "The Life and Times of a Young Rock Band" yet another example of how these bands defeat their own goals and objectives at the square one level.
A simple study of rock music's commercial and social traditions reveals the golden rule missing from the "curriculum" accompanying the article: Know thy audience.


Correction
An article on July 9 about steam engines in England referred incorrectly to a power station in Didcot.
The Didcot Power Plant burns coal, not nuclear fuel.


Andrea K. Kuklis, Kevin C. Walker
Andrea Kristina Kuklis, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Miroslav Martin Kuklis of Gales Ferry, Conn., was married there yesterday to Kevin Craig Walker, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Lynn Walker of Williamsburg, Va.
The Rev.
Arthur Montgomery performed the ceremony at the St.
Luke Lutheran Church.
Mrs.
Walker, 30, is an assistant vice president at Chemical Bank in New York.
She graduated from Bucknell University and received a master's degree in finance from Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute.
Her father retired as an engineer in the electric boat division of General Dynamics in Groton, Conn.


Pest Control? Don't Count on It
Bat houses have been touted by some as nature's bug-zappers: put one up in your yard and watch the mosquitoes disappear.
But while experts agree that bats are completely beneficial to humans, they probably will not solve your mosquito problems.
A bat is capable of eating 600 mosquitoes an hour, but only under optimal conditions.


New &amp; Noteworthy Paperbacks
THE COLD WAR: A History By Martin Walker.
John Macrae/Owl/Holt, $14.
The author looks back on the conflict with some nostalgia: it helped maintain global stability, he argues, and encouraged economic growth.
"With lively prose and well-chosen anecdotes, he deftly traverses a half-century," David Callahan said here last year.
THE COLLECTED STORIES By Grace Paley.
Noonday/Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux, $14.
Moments of recognition, love, remembrance and regret fill these 45 stories, which span more than 25 years in the author's career.
The characters, often Jewish New Yorkers, are revealed mostly through dialogue, recorded with an unfailing ear for the vagaries of self-expression.
Ms.
Paley's "distinctive, sure-footed command of the short-story form brings to fictional material a quality that must be called poetry," our reviewer, Robert Pinsky, wrote in 1994.
He added, "By this I mean not mere verbal sauce . . . but the ability of language to dance with playful, lordly authority about the contours of reality."


'Forget Paris' Is Forgotten, as a Theater Goes Indian
The Gramercy Theater is still called the Gramercy Theater.
But the old-fashioned single-screen cinema on 23d, west of Lexington, which lay dormant for a year and a half in an industry gripped by multiplex mania, has a new identity that is making one immigrant community literally applaud.


Sidewalk Cafes Combat The City's Suburbanization
To the Editor:
As the spokeswoman for the Second Avenue Merchants Association, I beg to differ with Kate Walter's indictment of outdoor cafes in the July 2 Soapbox essay "A Pox on Their Sidewalk Tables."


Tales From the Sky
FROM where Frank Kind works, sidewalks look like gray chalk lines, billboards are the size of postcards and Central Park is a tidy mosaic of bonsai trees and bushes.
When he is perched on a scaffold 45 floors above the cement sidewalk, Mr.
Kind, 58, doesn't think about his brother-in-law Harry Heller, who fell from a scaffold and ended up with one leg shorter than the other.
And he never looks down.
"I just pay attention," he said, "to what I'm doing."


Little Russian Affluence
To the Editor:
Re "To Be Young, Russian and Middle Class" (front page, July 23): The entrepreneurs you describe are exceptions.
Most middle-class Russians are struggling to survive.
White-collar workers, as well as professors, physicists, doctors, have less money to spend than an immigrant worker in the United States.


Asking for a Raise, and Finding Enlightenment
When The New York Times asked readers about requesting a raise, many respondents told of deft and funny sidestepping by the boss.
But others talked more seriously -- about the human poignancy of this workplace ritual, the virtues of self-assertion, the hidden benefits of failure.
Here, a selection:
Granted or denied, a request for a raise often results in a valuable insight.


ON THE BORDER OF LIFE
I was born on Nov. 10, 1975, weighing 800 grams (less than 2 pounds), after only 26 weeks.
Fortunately, I lived through the next three and a half months in Babies 12, the newborn intensive care unit of New York City's Columbia Presbyterian Hospital.
When I look at photos, it's still hard for me to believe that the scrawny, brownish-red bundle in the incubator was actually me.


Bloopers Start Off New Yanks With Smiles
The attention was supposed to be on David Cone and Ruben Sierra, the two players who made their Yankee debuts tonight and have been challenged with helping them seize control of the American League East race.
While Cone's awesome pitching snatched a significant portion of the spotlight, some of the focus was reserved for Minnesota's Rich Becker and his losing skirmish with the Metrodome's tricky white ceiling.
If a bewildered Becker had not lost Mike Stanley's towering fly ball to center field with the bases loaded in the fourth inning, Cone's initial start for the Yankees might have been a setback.
But Becker's abominable misplay on his home field allowed three tainted runs to score, and catcher Matt Walbeck's inexplicable failure to cover the plate in the seventh added another tarnished run and enabled the Yankees to toast their new arrivals in a 4-2 victory.


For the Record/The Pork Barrel; Watch Out With That Budget Ax. My District NEEDS Than Dam.
For four decades, the Democrats who ruled Congress larded Federal spending bills with pork.
Locks, dams, people-movers, Federal research centers, passenger rail lines, electric buses, airport control towers, highway "demonstration projects" and Lord knows what else rained from Washington like inflation-adjusted pennies from heaven.
Everybody on Capitol Hill got wet.
But Republicans got damp, while Democrats got soaked.
And the Democrats who dispensed the goodies -- those who sat on Congress's appropriations and authorizing committees -- were so flooded that they needed dams, which, fortunately, they were in a position to finance.


F.Y.I.
The Ear of the Beholder Q.  Where did Aqueduct race track get its name?
Belmont is named for August Belmont, who founded that track, and Saratoga is named after Saratoga Springs, the upstate town where the track is located.
But isn't Aqueduct a strange name?
A.
Actually, Aqueduct got its name the same way Saratoga did.
When it opened, on Sept. 27, 1894, it was in an area known as Aqueduct.
And that was named because there was an aqueduct there.


Pricey, Gas-Guzzling Cars Face Double-Whammy on Taxes
THERE is little doubt that taxes affect everybody.
But for those who come and go in frivolously inefficient automobiles costing upward of $32,000, the Internal Revenue Service exacts two more penalties -- the gas-guzzler and luxury taxes.
The gas-guzzler tax took effect in 1991 in order to penalize those vehicles deemed by the Environmental Protection Agency as not frugal enough at the pump.
The tax rate ranges between $1,000 and $7,700, depending on a vehicle's average fuel economy as calculated by the E.P.A.
The tax is added into the transaction price of a new car.
Strangely, the gas-guzzler tax is not assessed on sport utility vehicles or light trucks, which are typically less miserly than cars.
The tax generated $65.6 million in revenue during the Government's fiscal year that ended Sept. 30, 1994.


Correction
A brief article on July 16 about the restoration of the Kitano Hotel on Park Avenue at 38th Street misspelled the names of the design firm and omitted the name of the architect.
The designer is Chhada, Siembieda &amp; Partners; the architectural firm is FMA.


Upscale And Kosher On East 12th
"See, he just did a double take," said Tamar Elberg, pointing to a man strolling by her brother's seven-month-old restaurant.
"They do that a lot. We're out of our element."
She and her brother, Ruben Elberg, are followers of Rabbi Menachem Mendel Schneerson, the late spiritual leader known as "the Rebbe" to more than 200,000 Lubavitch Hasidim worldwide.
And Ms.
Elberg is right, the Kosher Tea Room, an upscale full-service restaurant at 12th Street and Second Avenue, is a head-turner.


THE SUPPER CLUB
That there are affluent and accomplished women who disguise their healthy appetites for the approval of men filled me with rage and contempt (Style: "The Supper Club," by Holly Brubach, July 9).
And that their "remarkable" (hello?) male friend felt he had to offer a veiled apology for his "plump" partner is as bad or maybe worse.


Make 'em Laugh!
BAH-BOOM!
The drummer in the four-piece band does a rim shot.
Cozy Morley, comedian, straps on a banjo.
"My dear mother got this for me," he tells the 200 or so people packed into Viva's Lounge in Trump's Castle on a Saturday evening.
"I remember us standing outside the window of a pawnshop in South Philadelphia. We were poor, but we were proud. My mother says, 'Are you sure that this is what you want?' I said, 'Yes, Mom, this is what I want.' So she picked up a rock . . ."


Gestation Revelations
THIS is my third time around being a giant pregnant woman in the city.
And even as the weather turns hostile and tempers start to fray, there's a sort of bubble I get to live in for the three or four months when everyone is aware that I'm walking, riding, hailing for two.
I am transformed from a mere face in the crowd to a big stomach in the way, requiring consideration and comment.
I must say I enjoy the drama, as well as the thrill of influencing, however minutely and temporarily, an otherwise obstinate, intractable city.
It sustains me for the time being, even though I know that, once the baby is born, the same people will cease to care.
Cars and trucks will hit the brakes for a pregnant woman crossing the street, but a few months later when the same woman pushes a carriage through the same crosswalk, forget it.


Katharina I. Boser and Bryan A. Booth
Katharina Irene Boser, the daughter of Ruth and Dr.
Otmar Boser of Scarsdale, N.Y., was married yesterday to Bryan Arthur Booth, a son of Wickham and Patricia Booth of Port Orange, Fla.
The Rev.
Michael Mahler, a Roman Catholic priest, performed the ceremony in the Sage Chapel at Cornell University in Ithaca, N.Y.
Ms.
Boser, 26, is keeping her name.
She graduated from Cornell, where she is now a doctoral candidate in developmental psychology.
The bride, who was a Fulbright scholar at the University of Stuttgart in Germany studying how German children learn language, is to become an adjunct professor of language acquisition at Syracuse University in September.


Nude Cabaret Will Stay Open
After a brief brush with bankruptcy, Wiggles, a cabaret that features naked dancers, has reached a tentative agreement with its landlord, the club's major creditor, and will remain open -- much to the chagrin of its many neighborhood foes.
A lawyer for Wiggles said last week that the club, a target of protests since it opened a year ago, had yet to turn a profit.
But the lawyer, Andrew D. Presberg, said that the bankruptcy filing had been a maneuver to prevent the landlord from seizing the club's assets.


Resource for Women Burdened by Infertility
SUE M. is 38 and doesn't feel normal.
The sight of babies and pregnant women makes her cry.
She avoids passing through baby sections in department stores.
She has stopped going to the local pool.
"I would get really depressed," Mrs.
M. said.
"A lot of the people who went there were mothers with children."


On Politics; Bradley a Wallflower? Don't Be Too Sure
Will he or won't he?
Of course he will.
But just because the Republicans are spoiling for a fight, 18 months before the election, doesn't mean that Senator Bill Bradley has to step through the ropes.
This logic has hardly dampened a sly campaign by Washington Republicans to portray New Jersey's senior Senator as a wallflower in the run-up to the November 1996 election for the seat he holds.


July 23-29; The Wobbly Ideal Called Perfection
THE French novelist Emile Zola once declared that he was "little concerned with perfection." American high school students suddenly have the luxury of feeling the same way: it is now possible to miss three or four questions on the Scholastic Aptitude Test and still achieve a perfect score.


Miss Papajohn and Mr. Holm
Christine Marie Papajohn, the daughter of Dolores and Nicholas Papajohn of Ardsley, N.Y., was married there yesterday to Klas S. D. Holm, the son of Hjordis and Sven-Gunnar Holm of Stockholm.
The Rev.
Robert J. Duane performed the ceremony at the Roman Catholic Church of Our Lady of Perpetual Help.
Mrs.
Holm, 25, is an associate at Smith Barney, the securities brokerage in New York.
She graduated from Smith College.
Her father is a senior loan consultant at Home Savings of America in White Plains.
Her mother is the office manager for the director of gynecologic oncology at Columbia Presbyterian Medical Center in New York.


The World; The South American Art of Name-Calling
LATIN America isn't, as it is often portrayed in the United States, just one civilization artificially divided into different countries.
Listen to the chants at soccer stadiums around South America, and you'll hear what Latin Americans really think about each other.
At the recent America Cup tournament in Uruguay, Argentine fans belittled their Chilean counterparts as "sons of Pinochet" (translation: Chile is full of militarists).
The Argentines, who are predominantly white, also urged their team on against the "dirty blacks from Brazil" (the country with the largest black population on the continent).


True Tales From the Night Of the Living Hamptons
SOUTHAMPTON, L.I. -- "I've always felt that a face is a road map of a life," Chuck Close was saying.
"Laugh lines, tears -- the indications are always there."
Mr.
Close was at the opening of "Face Value: American Portraits" at the Parrish Art Museum on July 22.
"It's sad to see how many people in this show are dead," he said as he stopped in front of his portrait of an old woman with glimmering eyes, flyaway hair and a measured smile.


World News Briefs; Spanish Court Is Asked To Investigate Premier
An investigating magistrate has petitioned Spain's Supreme Court to investigate Prime Minister Felipe Gonzalez as "the founder and leader" of the organization behind death squads that carried out a "dirty war" against Basque separatists in the 1980's.
The magistrate, Baltazar Garzon, who has been investigating the death squads since December, argues in a report that he found evidence that Mr.
Gonzalez and three Socialist Party members of Parliament were behind the Anti-Terrorist Liberation Groups, which killed 27 people between 1984 and 1987 in southern France.


The Rainbow That Is Rome
MY appreciation for Roman light started with a night of insomnia shortly after I had moved into an apartment with a view of the Colosseum.
I watched the rising sun color the arena like a cartoon paintbrush plying between the lines of a black-and-white sketch.
The normal grays and dirty whites of the Colosseum's ancient travertine blocks exploded suddenly into a warm flush of pinks and reds as the sun came up behind my back.
It was a fleeting makeover, lasting perhaps 10 minutes, but grand enough that I deliberately stationed myself at the French doors every now and again at sunrise just to see the Colosseum blush.


IN SHORT: FICTION
THE GARLIC BALLADS  By Mo Yan. Viking, $23.95.
Mo Yan's novel "The Garlic Ballads" can make a reader squirm at the frozen soul of totalitarian bureaucracy.
Unfortunately, the peasants struggling here against the system of agricultural collectivization aren't quite as interesting as the system itself.
It is the old story -- as venerated in Chinese Communist propaganda as in secular myth -- of the hardscrabble farming village rising up against its overlords.
The drama, as translated by Howard Goldblatt, is acted by an ensemble cast that includes Zhang Kou, a blind minstrel whose ballads tie together the cleverly disjointed narrative; Gao Ma, a cynical former soldier; Jinju, the young woman he wishes to marry; and Jinju's parents and two brothers, a family that achieves new heights of dysfunction.
Jinju and Gao Ma are so hard-working and headstrong that we know they aren't long for this world; as a result, it's difficult to care about them.
More memorable is Gao Ma's neighbor, Gao Yang, who seethes with hatred for the state yet is so programmed by it that the sound of a firm voice -- be it that of an official or a common criminal -- is all it takes for him to subject himself without complaint to the greatest humiliations.
The psychological grip of Communist indoctrination is a theme the author fails to take very far; instead he needlessly manipulates our sympathies by giving Gao Yang a blind daughter and a pregnant wife.
Mo Yan's strength is in showing the utter hopelessness and subjugation of life under Communism.
This is perhaps best demonstrated by the most humane public official in the book, a doctor at an obstetrical clinic.
"Do you have a heart of stone?" she asks a man who is upset that his wife has borne him a daughter.
"Take your baby home and treat her well. When she's 18 you can get at least 10,000 for her." TOBIN HARSHAW


Elizabeth A. Bitoff, Mark W. Odom
Elizabeth Alice Bitoff, the daughter of Rear Adm. and Mrs.
John William Bitoff of San Francisco, was married yesterday to Capt.
Mark Weld Odom, the son of Lieut.
Gen. and Mrs.
William Eldridge Odom of Washington.
The Rev.
John-Paul Forte performed the ceremony at St.
Dominic's Roman Catholic Church in San Francisco.
Mrs.
Odom, 28, is an account executive in Seattle for Business Wire, a media-relations wire service.
She is a graduate of Colby College.
Her father, who has retired from the Navy, is the director of emergency services for San Francisco.


Frances A. Farley, Darryl J. Snabes
Dr.
Frances Anne Farley, an assistant professor of surgery at the University of Michigan at Ann Arbor, was married yesterday to Darryl John Snabes, a construction engineer at the General Services Administration in Detroit.
The Rev.
Charles Irwin, a Roman Catholic priest, performed the ceremony at the Church of St.
Francis of Assisi in Ann Arbor.
Dr.
Farley, 34, is keeping her name.
She is also a pediatric orthopedic surgeon at the Mott Children's Hospital in Ann Arbor.
She graduated from Duke University and received her medical degree from Cornell University.


Cuban Breaks Long-Jump Record
They have run into each other all summer, at track meets and in hotel lobbies, and though Mike Powell does not speak Spanish and Ivan Pedroso does not speak English, the two long jumpers have built a bond that transcends the unspoken word.
"He's such a nice guy, and that's a problem," Powell said earlier this month after losing to the Cuban in a meet in Lausanne, Switzerland.
"I can't get any energy from him, any rage. I can't go grrrrrrrr."


A Bubble Grows Ever Bigger
So much for that collapse of technology stocks.
Last week the Philadelphia stock exchange index of semiconductor stocks set three record highs.
Even with a dip on Friday, the index is up 103 percent for 1995.
The previous week's plunge of more than 10 percent in a couple of hours is almost forgotten.


Lisa Goldstein Kaminir, Kevin Kelley
Lisa Goldstein Kaminir, the daughter of Samuel Goldstein and Dorothy Kornblith, both of New York, and Kevin R. Kelley, a son of Phyllis and R. J. Kelley of Sioux Center, Iowa, are to be married today at the Rainbow Room in New York.
Rabbi Joel Goor is to perform the interfaith ceremony, in which the Rev.
Dr.
Melvin Hawthorne is to take part.
The bride changed her surname to include the family name used by her paternal grandfather.
She is an actress in Los Angeles.
She graduated from Northwestern University.
Her father retired as the director of purchasing at Queensboro Farm Products in Astoria, Queens.
Her mother is the president and chairwoman of the Twenty First Century Corporation in Englewood, N.J., which operates 18 McDonald's restaurants in the New York metropolitan area.
The bride is the stepdaughter of the late John Kornblith.


Ya-Fei Chuang and Robert Levin
Ya-Fei Chuang, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Chung-Tsai Chuang of Anping, Taiwan, is to be married today to Robert David Levin, the son of the late Beatrice Levin and the late Gerald H. Levin.
Rabbi Benjamin Z. Rudavsky is to officiate in the Faculty Club at Harvard University in Cambridge, Mass.
The bride, 24, graduated from the Freiburg Musikhochschule and the Cologne Musikhochschule in Germany.
She is studying for a graduate diploma in piano at the New England Conservatory of Music.
Her father is the vice chief of police in Anping.
Her mother, Yuh-Chih Chen Chuang, is the director of the Steiner Kindergartens in Tainan, Taiwan.


A Cherished Roadside Symbol of the Region
WHEN chronicling life inside the Big Duck, the chronicler quickly learns a vital fowl fact.
There is no bathroom in the Big Duck.
That could present a challenge to some people, but not to the Duck Lady, as Barbara Bixby of Riverhead likes to call herself.
Ms.
Bixby spends her days inside Suffolk's most unusual landmark, selling "duck-abilia."


QUICK BITES: Morristown; Indulging a Passion for the Finest Cheese
Just back from Paris, my husband yearned for French cheese, and he knew exactly where to go: La Bakerie, the bistro-bakery of Jean Paul Grasmuck, a native of the Lorraine region of France.
Mr.
Grasmuck loves cheeses.
"Cheese is a sensitive chord in my heart," he said.
"Since a little corner in my display case is all the space I have for cheese, it might as well be the best."


An Artist Who Gives Houses a Magic Touch
THE Westchester artist Regi Klein is almost famous.
She is well known locally, but not in the larger world.
This will surprise many Westchester, Fairfield and Berkshire residents who happily stumble on one of her whimsical portraits of private homes or historical buildings and immediately identify the artist.
Local cognoscenti may admire her colorful and clever renderings hung above fireplaces in fashionable homes.
Or they may spot one of her works hanging in the Westchester County Courthouse, in the Putnam Trust Bank in Greenwich or in the Red Lion Inn in Stockbridge, Mass., and feel a spark of recognition.


Curtain Raisers In the West 40's
CAFE UN DEUX TROIS *  (212) 354-4148; 123 West 44th Street; $$; all major credit cards
The atmosphere here is as close as you will get to a fashionably threadbare and lively French brasserie, and the simple bistro cooking remains reliably satisfying.
The short, straightforward menu includes starters of country pate, ravioli Provencal, baked snails in garlic butter and a mixed green salad with a good vinaigrette.
Among the main courses are a nicely done charred steak with pommes frites; steak tartare with a piquant taste of Tabasco, also served with fries; warm roasted chicken; calf's liver served with grilled onions, and your choice of omelets.
For dessert, creme caramel and profiteroles are both good. (Review: 4/5/91; revisited: 6/2/95)  CARMINE'S *  (212) 221-3800; 200 West 44th Street; $; American Express
With its sand-colored walls festooned with publicity photos, whirling fans overhead and neighborly tables, Carmine's dining room looks as if it has been around since vaudeville days.
The kitchen turns out a pleasing mix, essentially Neapolitan, with everything served family style.
Pizettes, or little pizzas, are a good way to begin.
Toppings change daily and might include fennel sausage, tomato, garlic and mozzarella.
Other pleasing starters are the enormous plate of fried calamari served with a tomato dipping sauce, and a mixed salad platter combining greens, mozzarella, tomatoes and roasted peppers.
Popular entrees include rigatoni with sausage and broccoli in a ripe tomato sauce; porterhouse steak topped with an earthy sauce of tomatoes, sweet peppers and onions; grilled swordfish; a grilled pork chop and lobster fra diavolo with shrimp and clams in a spicy sauce over linguine. (Review: 9/25/92)  CHEZ JOSEPHINE **  (212) 594-1925; 414 West 42d Street; $$; all major credit cards
On any given night, this theatrical bistro rivals some of the most entertaining productions on and off Broadway.
You never know when someone will burst into song or hammer out show tunes on the piano.
The earthy bistro fare is prepared with care.
For starters, the Chinese ravioli with goat cheese and toasted pine nuts is always pleasing, as are baked snails in garlic butter, and salad of endive with crumbled Roquefort and walnuts.
This 27-year-old brick-walled tavern has always been known for its buoyant bar scene and simple American fare.
Framed Broadway posters and other theater memorabilia make up the decor, and the dining room is separated from the bar by brick arches.
Salads are a good way to begin, whether the sprightly assembly of grilled portobellos, tender spinach and sweet fennel or the generous plate of endive, watercress, Roquefort and walnuts tossed in a well-balanced vinaigrette.
Other starters include black bean soup, asparagus vinaigrette and fried chicken wings.
For main courses, the kitchen turns out a perfect calf's liver with steamed spinach and buttery whipped potatoes, nicely charred sirloin steak with crispy fries, grilled lamb chops with ratatouille, meatloaf with mashed potatoes and a good house burger. (Review: 8/19/88; revisited: 7/20/95)
LATTANZI *  (212) 315-0980; 361 West 46th Street; $$; American Express
A welcoming family-run restaurant in the heart of Restaurant Row, Lattanzi delivers fresh, tasty pasta and sprightly salads in a low-key setting.
One of the highlights is a menu featuring the cuisine from the ancient Jewish ghetto in Rome.
The best-known dish from that tradition is carciofi alla giudea, or tender artichokes sauteed with garlic and parsley.
Other good starters include a tasty shrimp and arugula salad vinaigrette and a combination plate of eggplant that is first fried then marinated in a sweet combination of vinegar, sugar, olive oil and tomatoes.
The plate also includes fresh mozzarella and suppli al telefono, a Roman specialty that is essentially a ball of mozzarella coated with a risottolike mixture, then rolled in bread crumbs and fried.
Recommended pastas include porcini ravioli, and herby linguine with white clam sauce.
Among the entrees are grilled lamb chops with rosemary and braised shanks of beef with polenta. (Review: 6/23/89; revisited: 7/17/95)  LE MADELEINE


July 23-29; Spa'am, a Boar (And a Boor) Riles Hormel
It's easy to laugh at Spam, that veritable bulwark of canned meat, but its maker, Hormel Food Corporation, was not amused when a wild boar named Spa'am appeared in a new Muppet film.
Last week Hormel slapped a trademark suit on the puppet's creator, Jim Henson Productions.
Hormel executives say it isn't just the identically pronounced name that upsets them.
The lawsuit describes the puppet as "a grotesque and noxious appearing wild boar" and accuses the puppeteers of "portraying the Spa'am character as evil in porcine form." The movie, "Muppet Treasure Island," which comes out in February, features the fearsome Spa'am, who leads a savage tribe of boars that worship Miss Piggy and terrify the hero Kermit.


Captain Learns the Subtleties of the Moon and Mahantswami
Driving past crates full of cuttlefish, water spinach and stringy gourds in downtown Flushing last December, when he became the commander of the 109th Precinct, Capt.
John McManus barely recognized the bustling area from his childhood memory of rundown streets and abandoned warehouses.
At age 42, after a brief stint as second-in-command at the 88th Precinct in Brooklyn, he was now in charge of one of the largest precincts in the city, and certainly its most culturally diverse -- a district sweeping over northeast Queens populated on the one hand by wealthy, predominantly white residents who demand prompt response, and on the other by new immigrants, many suspicious of the police.


On Sunday; One Customer Wrecks a Life Of Hard Work
SIX mornings a week, Hilal Mohammad beat sunrise to his Brooklyn garage.
He rolled up the gates, and then his sleeves.
This was America, and so anything was possible.
Nothing, though, was sweeter than a workload of seized engines, overheated radiators, cracked transmissions.
For the mechanic from Amman, there was magic to the monotony.
"I had no idea about America before I came," said Mr.
Mohammad, a 34-year-old native of Jordan.
"But my brother had told me it was good for mechanics."


'Vice Versa'
To the Editor:
What a baffling position Frank Kermode has taken on Marjorie Garber's learned and delectably readable "Vice Versa"!
He complains that her Harvard predecessor George Lyman Kittredge "couldn't even have imagined" the books she has devoured in researching her subject.
But Kittredge, who died around the time Ms.
Garber was born, couldn't even have imagined a female Harvard professor, let alone the way Shakespeare studies have become in the past two decades a forum for the exploration of every development in the field of literary theory.


Raise High the Roof Beam, City Dweller
THE HOME-IMPROVEMENT shows that tap into something deep in me begin at 9:30 every Saturday morning, then plod on earnestly for a couple of hours until, I imagine, homeowners across America are almost ready to take a lunch break from the real thing.
By that I mean the lawn mowing, roof fixing, shed building and other tasks that the home-improvement shows would have me doing if I had a lawn to mow, a roof to fix or a place to put a shed.
After lunch the shows retire for a while (nap time?), only to re-emerge in late afternoon, ready to go head to head with their cousin in exquisite suburban calm, golf.
That I know this programming schedule at all is what drives my theory about these how-to shows.
My theory is that among their biggest fans are city dwellers like me, people who live in brick and stone hives, who may pick up a hammer only when a picture frame falls off the wall but who nonetheless -- and maybe because of their urban constraints -- harbor a profound desire to add on a sun deck.


Streetscapes/Trees; In New York City, It's Not That Easy Being Green
WHY does a city of million-dollar apartments have dime-size street trees?
Take a walk on the shady side of the street and contemplate how carelessly we treat our struggling trees and how even those that receive the best of care face daunting prospects in a city where new tree plantings have a life expectancy of only 7 to 12 years.
"We've always had street trees in New York" is the universally accepted wisdom, but except for boulevards or streets adjacent to parks there was almost no street tree planting in the built-up sections from the mid-19th century until the 1930's.


False Tears Over Bosnia
When the Bosnian Serbs "cleansed" the "safe area" of Srebrenica of its Muslim inhabitants, cable TV viewers of the world set a standard of tolerance that will be hard to match.
With at most a 12-hour delay, Europeans again bore witness to an expulsion, the horrors of which can only be termed biblical.
Before or after a trip to the refrigerator, or even to the beach, we heard mothers tell of how their daughters were pulled off buses by Serb soldiers and never seen again; we heard stories of heads on stakes, dismembered children, mass suicides.


Beth Anderson, Rusty Harold
Beth Anderson, a composer, and Elliotte Harold 3d, a computer specialist and author, were married on Friday at the Municipal Building in New York.
Mrs.
Harold is a piano instructor at the Greenwich House Music School and manager for Second Wind Inc., an outpatient substance-abuse and psychotherapy clinic, both in New York.
A recording of her composition "Minnesota Swale," an orchestral work, is to be released in September by Opus One.


Sheila Lawson, Donald d'Entremont
Sheila Ann Lawson, a lawyer at the Department of Veterans Affairs, was married yesterday to Donald Emmett d'Entremont, a lawyer for the Federal Trade Commission.
Both work in Washington.
The Rev.
Elliot Shaw performed the ceremony at St.
Mary's Roman Catholic Church in Ticonderoga, N.Y.
Ms.
Lawson, 35, is keeping her name.
She graduated magna cum laude from St.
Michael's College and received a master's degree in history from Northeastern University.
She and her husband received their law degrees from Suffolk University.
Mr. d'Entremont, 34, is a graduate of Boston College.


POSTINGS: Cost of Environmental Cleanup Is Cited; N.Y.U. Ends Plan For Jersey Field
New York University has canceled plans to build a $4 million, 10-acre athletic complex in Weehawken, N.J.
One of the main factors the university cited was environmental costs.
The site is contaminated with chromium, but the levels are not so high that the clean-up costs would be borne by the Federal Government, as N.Y.U. officials had hoped.
Costs were also rising for the project, officials said, and the university's priorities have changed over the last three years.
"It was going to be much more expensive than we thought, and we are very disappointed," said Virgil Renzulli, N.Y.U.'s director of public affairs.
N.Y.U's decision not to go ahead with the project was first reported in The Weehawken Reporter, a weekly newspaper, last week.


Gestation Revelations
THIS is my third time around being a giant pregnant woman in the city.
And even as the weather turns hostile and tempers start to fray, there's a sort of bubble I get to live in for the three or four months when everyone is aware that I'm walking, riding, hailing for two.
I am transformed from a mere face in the crowd to a big stomach in the way, requiring consideration and comment.
I must say I enjoy the drama, as well as the thrill of influencing, however minutely and temporarily, an otherwise obstinate, intractable city.
It sustains me for the time being, even though I know that, once the baby is born, the same people will cease to care.
Cars and trucks will hit the brakes for a pregnant woman crossing the street, but a few months later when the same woman pushes a carriage through the same crosswalk, forget it.


Mia R. Costanza, Edwin M. Wiggers
Mia Regina Costanza, a daughter of Aurelia and Joseph E. Costanza of Ogden Dunes, Ind., was married yesterday to Edwin Matthew Wiggers, a son of Elaine and Edwin Wiggers Jr. of Potomac, Md.
The Rev.
Hugh Flesher, an Episcopal minister, performed the ceremony in the Helen Hills Hills Chapel at Smith College in Northampton, Mass.
Mrs.
Costanza Wiggers, 27, graduated from Smith College and received a master's degree in art history from the University of Chicago.
She teaches kindergarten at St.
Ann's School in Brooklyn.


Heat Relief for Elderly
To the Editor:
A large number of deaths attributable to the heat wave in various cities are seemingly avoidable if a relief program could be developed.


History On and Off The Field In Canton
Only 180 men have been named among the greatest ambassadors of pro football.
The 180 are those enshrined in the Pro Football Hall of Fame.
In most cases, each inductee has given as much to the game as he has received.
The five men inducted on the Hall's steps under sparkling sunshine this afternoon strengthened that tradition.


Seles Returns a Winner


Worst Blight Since Ireland's Is Chilling Potato Farmers
A perverse sort of historical symmetry is at work in Murray Mahany's potato fields.
Almost 150 years after the potato blight drove his great-great-grandfather out of Ireland, a virulent new cousin of the same disease is threatening to drive him out of the only business he has ever known.


Corrections
A picture of the developer Steven J. Pozycki in New Jersey copies on July 9 with an article about his joint venture in Pennsylvania carried an erroneous credit.
The photographer was Bruce Goldsmith, not Price Goldsmith.


Croatia Presses Offensive Against Serbs
Pressing a new offensive, Croatian forces that have been on the march inside Bosnia shelled territory in Croatia held by rebel Serbs overnight and showed no inclination to heed United Nations appeals for restraint, United Nations officials here said today.
The Croatian advance northward from an area along Bosnia's western border with Croatia has broadened the Balkan strife and raised speculation that Croatian forces may be on the brink of a major drive to regain territory occupied by Serbs in Croatia during the 1991 civil war here.
The Serbs call the area Krajina.


Alissa Wall, Marc Berger
Alissa Gabrielle Wall, the daughter of Carol L. Bassin of New York and Stephen J. Wall of Norwalk, Conn., was married last evening to Marc Stuart Berger, a son of Rochelle and Michael Berger of West Nyack, N.Y.
Rabbi Harvey Tattelbaum performed the ceremony at the Water's Edge, a restaurant in Long Island City, Queens.
Mrs.
Berger, 24, graduated from Boston University.
Until recently, she was a window display artist at Bloomingdale's in New York.
Her father is the president of Manus Associates, a management consulting company in Stamford, Conn.


On Columbia's Brick Walkways, Safety vs. History
Is great architecture in the details?
Preservationists who are angry at Columbia University for rebuilding some brick walkways think so.
Charles McKim of McKim, Mead &amp; White planned Columbia University in the 1890's, he designed walkways of hand-made brick to connect classrooms, laboratories and offices.
But Columbia is currently repaving the now uneven walkways, using bricks that are shorter, narrower, rougher and a brighter red.


New England Dairy Compact Benefits Farmers and Consumers
To the Editor:
"Milking Consumers" (editorial, July 22) creates the illusion that passage of an interstate dairy compact will hurt consumers, "fattening the bank accounts of a few nearby farmers," and that the compact itself is unconstitutional.


Portraits for Pay: A New Battleground


Votes in Congress
Tally Last Week in Connecticut, New Jersey and New York  Senate
1.
Bosnia: Vote on a bill that calls for the end of United States participation in the arms embargo on Bosnia after a withdrawal of United Nations troops from Bosnia or 12 weeks from the date of a request by the Bosnian Government for a pullout of forces.
Approved 69 to 29, July 26.
2.
Gift Ban: Vote on an amendment to a bill that would sharply limit gifts from lobbyists and others.
Under the amendment, all gifts or meals less than $50 would be allowed and not counted toward an annual aggregate limit of $100.
Approved 54 to 46, July 28. (On a subsequent voice vote, the Senate revised part of the amendment and made all gifts over $10 count toward the $100 limit.)  Connecticut  Dodd (D) . . .
N Y  Lieberman (D) . . .
Y N  New Jersey  Bradley (D) . . .
Y N  Lautenberg (D) . . .
Y N  New York  D'Amato (R) . . .
Y Y  Moynihan (D) . . .
Y N  KEY: Y Yea; N Nay; (A) Absent or did not vote; (P) Present.
House
1.
Environmental Protection Agency: Vote on an amendment to an appropriation bill for the Department of Veterans Affairs, the Department of Housing and Urban Development and various agencies that would remove 17 provisions that limit the Environmental Protection Agency's ability to enforce laws like the Clean Water Act and Clean Air Act.
Approved 212 to 206, July 28.
Connecticut  1.
Kennelly (D) . . .
Y  2.
Gejdenson (D) . . .
Y  3.
DeLauro (D) . . .
Y  4.
Shays (R) . . .
Y  5.
Franks (R) . . .
Y  6.
Johnson (R) . . .
Y  New Jersey  1.
Andrews (D) . . .
Y  2.
LoBiondo (R) . . .
Y  3.
Saxton (R) . . .
Y  4.
Smith (R) . . .
Y  5.
Roukema (R) . . .
Y  6.
Pallone (D) . . .
Y  7.
Franks (R) . . .
Y  8.
Martini (R) . . .
Y  9.
Torricelli (D) . . .
Y  10.
Payne (D) . . .
Y  11.
Frelinghuysen (R) . . .
N  12.
Zimmer (R) . . .
Y  13.
Menendez (D) . . .
Y  New York  1.
Forbes (R) . . .
Y  2.
Lazio (R) . . .
Y  3.
King (R) . . .
N  4.
Frisa (R) . . .
N  5.
Ackerman (D) . . .
Y  6.
Flake (D) . . .
Y  7.
Manton (D) . . .
Y  8.
Nadler (D) . . .
Y  9.
Schumer (D) . . .
Y  10.
Towns (D) . . .
Y  11.
Owens (D) . . .
Y  12.
Velazquez (D) . . .
Y  13.
Molinari (R) . . .
N  14.
Maloney (D) . . .
Y  15.
Rangel (D) . . .
Y  16.
Serrano (D) . . .
Y  17.
Engel (D) . . .
Y  18.
Lowey (D) . . .
Y  19.
Kelly (R) . . .
Y  20.
Gilman (R) . . .
Y  21.
McNulty (D) . . .
Y  22.
Solomon (R) . . .
N  23.
Boehlert (R) . . .
Y  24.
McHugh (R) . . .
N  25.
Walsh (R) . . .
N  26.
Hinchey (D) . . .
Y  27.
Paxon (R) . . .
N  28.
Slaughter (D) . . .
Y  29.
LaFalce (D) . . .
Y  30.
Quinn (R) . . .
Y  31.
Houghton (R) . . .
Y  KEY: Y Yea; N Nay; (A) Absent or did not vote; (P) Present.


At the End of Their Rope
Two great social movements have come together in San Dimas, Calif., with the confluence of bungee jumping and the water theme park.
Raging Waters, about 15 miles east of Pasadena off I-210, has installed a bungee-jumping tower, 138 feet high, over its million-gallon wave pool, and for $30 a jump, visitors can bob to within 10 feet of the water, like lures at the ends of giant fishing poles.
For information, call (909) 592-6453.


Jennifer L. Sachs, Paul A. Slager
Jennifer Lynn Sachs, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Frederick Lee Sachs of Woodbridge, Conn., was married yesterday to Paul Alan Slager, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Lawrence A. Slager of Grand Rapids, Mich.
The Rev.
Richard Doeden, a minister of the Reform Church of America, performed the ceremony with Rabbi Charles Lippman at the Battell Chapel in New Haven.
The bride, 29, is a law clerk to Judge Walter J. Cummings of the United States Court of Appeals for the Seventh Circuit in Chicago.
She graduated summa cum laude from Yale University and received her law degree from Stanford University.
Her father is the associate chief of staff and chief of the department of internal medicine at Yale-New Haven Hospital in New Haven.
Her mother, Ruth Rosen Sachs, is the advertising manager of the Yale University Press, also in New Haven.


Tour Fugitive
To the Editor:
After reading about Linda Wolfe's miserable experiences with her tour to Turkey, we'd like to recommend the truly wonderful tour group with whom we recently traveled.
We, too, normally don't go on tours, but Cultural Folk Tours of San Diego (800) 935-8875, is a special company.
Our guide was fascinating, informative and friendly; the food was delicious and the settings were quite pleasant, if not lovely.
Our group was terrific and we had ample time at each site.
SUSAN LEVINSON  STEPHEN LEVINSON  Rochester


More From Labor in New York
Every time Mayor Rudolph Giuliani leaps over a budget hurdle in his effort to get New York City's expenses under control, another obstacle seems to rise up.
A month ago, the Mayor and the city unions focused their energies on the budget, reaching an accord yielding hundreds of millions of dollars in savings.
Now they face a new round of negotiations, this time for new contracts involving wages and benefits.
These talks are likely to be the most important yet.
They will help determine whether Mr.
Giuliani can successfully manage government services in an era of diminished resources.


Habitats/Guilford, Conn.; Cottage of Her Dreams
IN 1973, when the rows of beige-stained condominiums with vertical siding were built around it, the tiny white cottage with the black shutters had been standing for decades; no one seems to know exactly how long.
When they were put up, the condominiums must have looked chic, a bit of California seaside architecture in this antique town; the cottage must have seemed unrelievedly dated and undoubtedly out of place.


Two Cranes and Deep Water Help Put Hum Back in a Troubles Port
The Brooklyn waterfront once hummed with activity as hundreds of longshoremen hauled freight each day from dozens of ships onto trains and trucks.
But in the last 30 years, most of that business fled to newer, more spacious piers in New Jersey.
In the last year the city's Economic Development Corporation moved two refurbished, 120-foot cranes from the South Brooklyn Marine Terminal in Sunset Park to the struggling Red Hook Marine Terminal, the only port in the city where cargo containers are unloaded from ships.
The agency also met with shipping companies to help Red Hook snare new contracts.


Sports of The Times; It Sounds As If Seles Is Back
NOT a grunt was heard from Monica Seles, not until eight games had passed.
That's when Seles was serving for the first set, and suddenly she began to emit a toned-down version of that glorious punctuation -- Uh hah -- to her two-fisted ground strokes.
Heavier around the waist, thicker in the thighs, out of tennis for 27 months, Seles looked understandably slow for a time yesterday against Martina Navratilova.
Then Seles broke serve and smelled blood.
As if on cue, she was right in step and back in tune.
Now 5 feet 11 inches tall, able to win more points outright on her first serve, Seles proceeded to storm through Navratilova, 6-3, 6-2.
Uh hah.
That's a champion with a killer instinct for you.


Behind Bars, a Girl Scout Troop Brings Mothers and Daughters Together
The bus ride from Newark was long and steamy, and when the girls reached their destination, they had to turn their pockets inside out and pass through a metal detector.
But by now, the Edna Mahan Correctional Facility is too familiar to frighten them.
It is the place their mothers call home.
Once a month, a group visits the prison, in Hunterdon County, for glimpses of parents they rarely see.
The reunions take the form of Girl Scout meetings, where mothers and daughters can savor each other's company and forget, however briefly, the prison walls that separate them.
Between games and songs, they trade gossip and emotional details of their lives.


2 Factories Raided in Federal Inquiry Into Defective Aircraft Parts
Two factories in western New York that make critical engine bearings for many of the nation's military aircraft were forced to shut down on Friday and yesterday as Federal agents moved in and seized thousands of documents in an investigation of charges that defective parts had been sold to the Government.
The company, MRC Bearings, also makes engine bearings for commercial aircraft.
But late yesterday, an official of the Federal Aviation Administration said in Washington that commercial airlines did not have parts with the bearings in question.


Q and A
Seeing Shaw in Canada
Q.
I want to go to the George Bernard Shaw Festival in Ontario, Canada this fall.
Could you tell me when it is on, how to get there without a car and how to get accommodations? -- Helen W. Shapiro, New York, N.Y.


Commercial Property/Fifth Avenue in the 50's; As Troubles Ebb, It's Becoming The Avenue Again
OUTSIDE of New York, few people realized there had been a change.
Out there, a Fifth Avenue address still conjured up an image of an elegant street where an uninterrupted line of expensive stores like Tiffany blended with tourist-pleasers like St.
Patrick's Cathedral.
But recent reality has been far less pretty.
Over the last decade even Fifth Avenue in the 50's, the avenue's "best" -- translation: priciest -- section, has been splotched by electronics and rug stores.
High-fashion windows were eclipsed by seemingly permanent "going out of business" signs, and the ubiquitous street peddlers were turning the avenue into an obstacle course.


MARKET TIMING
Monday The Commerce Department reports personal income and spending for June: Forecast: income up 0.6 percent, after falling 0.2 percent in May.
Spending is expected to climb 0.4 percent.
It rose 0.7 percent in May.


Ellen Goodman, Steven M. Ross
Ellen Beth Goodman, a daughter of Paula and Dr.
Robert L. Goodman of Bryn Mawr, Pa., was married last evening to Steven Michael Ross, a son of Helen and Dr.
Ronald J. Ross of Gates Mills, Ohio.
Rabbi Max Hausen officiated at the Four Seasons Hotel in Philadelphia.
Mrs.
Ross, 28, teaches preschool at the Shaaray Tefila Nursery school in Manhattan.
She graduated from George Washington University and received a master's degree in early childhood education from the Bank Street College of Education.
Her father is the president of Universal Radiation Oncology Centers in King of Prussia, Pa.
Her mother is an artist in Philadelphia.


The World; In Japan, Chicken Little Lays the Golden Egg
" . . . and then in the fall of 1995, to cap an atrocious year for Japan, Mount Fuji erupted, covering Tokyo with lava and triggering a giant earthquake that sent the country's major islands sinking noislessly beneath the sea. . . ."
WELL, that hasn't happened yet.
But it would be a fitting follow-up in an Annus Horribilis that is deflating Japan in its own eyes and those of the world.


Doing the Tango
To the Editor:
On April 16 you presented "What's Doing in Buenos Aires" with a picture of a couple dancing a tango.
Since I knew I would be going there in June, I saved the article for my visit.


INSIDE
INVESTING IT /Page 3  The mysterious rise, and rise, of Turbochef, one of the hottest stocks on Wall Street.
Street Smarts, by Kurt Eichenwald.
MUTUAL FUNDS /Page 6  Cashing in on the boom in mergers and acquisitions.
By Timothy Middleton.
EARNING IT /Page 10  At AT&amp;T, a campaign to wean workers from dependency on the office appears to be paying off.
By Barbara Presley Noble.
EARNING IT /Page 10  The painful ritual of asking for a raise.
On the Job, by Lawrence van Gelder.


World Leaguer May Add Depth to Jets' Kicking Game
This is no summer-in-the-country camp for Jets kickers these days.
And Don Silvestri is no wide-eyed, just-happy-to-be-here place-kicker who wouldn't dream of trying to horn in on a legend.
Indeed, the Jets have brought in the left-footed graduate of the World League's London Monarchs because they hope to augment the exquisitely accurate kicking game of Nick Lowery, Hall-of-Famer-in-waiting, with someone who has more pop in his leg.


IN SHORT: FICTION
LIVING OTHER LIVES  By Caroline Leavitt. Warner, $21.95.
Caroline Leavitt's sixth novel showcases her ability to create believable characters who can behave badly without forfeiting the reader's sympathy.
When Lilly's fiance, Matt, is killed in a freak accident, she is too grief-stricken to pay proper attention to the sullen bids for attention of Matt's now-orphaned daughter, Dinah.
She does, however, reluctantly assume responsibility for taking the teen-ager to Matt's mother, Dell, in Pittsburgh.
Dell, who had held herself aloof from her son, determines to make up for it with Dinah, but the girl is too angry to be very responsive.
The straightforward, old-fashioned narration of "Living Other Lives" dips in and out of its characters' thoughts to reveal confused but basically good people who desperately want to be loved, without having much idea how to go about it.
The novel modestly aims to reward these appealing individuals with happiness after an appropriate number of trials, and it succeeds, although the story might have more staying power if it had a bit more edge.
Still, "Living Other Lives" is warmhearted without being saccharine, a delicate balancing act that Ms.
Leavitt pulls off with aplomb.
WENDY SMITH


Good Girl, Bad Girl
SMITHEREENS  By Susan Taylor Chehak. 313 pp. New York: Doubleday. $21.95.


Credit Cards And Rental Cars
IT'S time for auto renters to take a fresh look at the small type describing collision-damage waivers or the credit-card benefit that circumvents them.
There haven't been major changes since a raft of them went through in 1993, but there have been enough small ones to cause confusion.
One area of confusion has resulted from the popularity of four-wheel-drives, vans and sporty cars.
My friend Rita rented a four-wheel-drive Suzuki Sidekick from an independent agency in New Jersey for a trip to the Adirondacks in February.
She told the agent she did not want the collision-damage waiver, which relieves the renter of repair costs to the car in the event of an accident, because she was charging the rental to her American Express card, which provides this coverage as a benefit.
The agent said that American Express would not cover the Sidekick, and insisted that Rita buy the waiver, with a $1,500 deductible, at $15 a day, or $105 for a week's rental.
Unsure and concerned about conditions in the mountains, she complied.
She had to sign a pledge not to drive the car off the road.


Vanguard? Visionary? Neither, Nor
AT THE HEART OF JOHN ADAMS'S NEW musical theater work "I Was Looking at the Ceiling and Then I Saw the Sky," which received its first New York performances as part of the Lincoln Center Serious Fun festival recently, a young black man is brought to trial.
Lest there be any confusion about how this event is to be regarded, a piece of authentic Los Angeles graffiti art is on display, showing a grotesque white judge with an enormous swastika above his head, looming over an American flag with more swastikas instead of stars.
The audience is meant to nod approvingly.
A radical Vietnamese-American lawyer pleads for his client in this supposedly Nazi court.
"As you probably know," he says, "it's always open season on a young black man set up to fail." The defendant has already been imprisoned twice as the leader of a Los Angeles gang.
The earlier crimes are not explained, but now he has stolen two bottles of malt liquor from a convenience store, an act defended as a "cultural thing." After all, his girlfriend's baby had just been "stolen" by immigration officials; when she called him on his beeper, he didn't have time to wait in line to pay for the brew.


PHOTOGRAPHER'S JOURNAL


The Fast-Track Treadmill
To the Editor:
Your report on the Wharton study on the relationship between family priorities and income was misleading.
The study found that respondents, especially men, who had attached high importance to a good family life when they were high school seniors had higher earnings 14 years later than those for whom family had not been a priority.
From this, you concluded that the conventional wisdom about work-family conflicts and the need to work long hours to succeed may be incorrect.


Bugs? Often Enough, the Hose Is the Answer
THE recent hot weather plus a prolonged drought have left an ugly mark on the green world.
Lawns are browned off, trees are dropping leaves prematurely and mildew is rampant.
Certain specimen plants are dwarfs of their usual selves.
In many cases, flowering is either off schedule or not what it should be.
Many annuals are setting seed prematurely.
Hopefully the return of cooler weather and adequate rainfall will set things right again.
Meanwhile, hoses and watering cans have been put into yeoman service.


Asian Nations Putting Pressure on France Over Nuclear Tests
With France only weeks away from resuming nuclear tests in the Pacific, governments across Asia and the South Pacific are demanding that the French reconsider, and there are warnings of an economic boycott that could damage the French economy.
The most potent threat may come from Japan, where the Government has bitterly criticized the decision by President Jacques Chirac to resume nuclear testing in French Polynesia this fall after a three-year moratorium.
Mr.
Chirac says his decision is irrevocable.


Victorian Heroine
CHRISTINA ROSSETTI A Writer's Life.
By Jan Marsh.
Illustrated. 634 pp.
New York:  Viking. $29.95.


A Longshot Wins Diners' Top Zagat Rating
A LONGSHOT has run away with top food ratings in the first stand-alone Zagat survey of Long Island.
Piccolo, a popular Northern Italian spot in Huntington, received the highest ranking in a survey of more than 2,000 diners who filled out questionnaires after they had visited a total of 530 restaurants.
They rated Mirabelle of St.
James second and the Mill River Inn of Oyster Bay third.
Piccolo, which received a rating of "24" for its food in the 1995 Zagat Tri-State survey, jumped to 27 out of a possible 30.
The storefront restaurant in the Southdown shopping center was the front-runner in the Italian and Continental categories, as well as No. 1 among Suffolk restaurants.


High-Fashion Frolic
STANLEY Donen's FUNNY FACE (1957) is summer caviar, sprinkled with golden Gershwin and stardust: Audrey Hepburn as a bookshop mouse transformed into a glamorous model, Fred Astaire as a magazine photographer and Kay Thompson (in photo, left, with Astaire and Hepburn) as the magazine's madcap editor.
Musical numbers like Thompson's opening "Think Pink" and the trio's "Bonjour, Paris!" from Roger Edens and Leonard Gershe also sparkle.
SUNDAY at 8:30 P.M. and SUNDAY/EARLY MONDAY at 2 A.M. on AMC.
Howard Thompson


The Man Who Made Jurors Feel Like Legal Eagles
Louis J. Ruggiero of Bogota, who died on July 22 at 75, put a human face on public service.
It was the face of a television comic from the early 1950's, or maybe the guy behind the deli counter who served every sandwich with a flourish and a cornball joke.
For the last two decades Mr.
Ruggiero was the petit jury clerk in the Bergen County Courthouse -- the official greeter, herdsman and advocate for the 200 or so citizens who showed up in his cavernous waiting room every Monday morning, having been summoned to serve as jurors -- and he is probably the one person every single juror will remember.
Jury service can be interesting and even (very rarely) exciting, but mostly it's tedious and bewildering, with long, unexplained delays, interminable whispered conferences at the bench, stern and patronizing injunctions from judges, ridiculously low pay ($5 a day, 2 cents a mile) and abrupt dismissals for no apparent reason.
Lou Ruggiero instinctively understood all this and, knowing that 9 out of 10 jurors would rather be elsewhere, set out to demystify and humanize the experience.


DIARY
Banking A Lid for Every Pot?
Not Yet It's about at this point that your elderly aunt leans across the dinner table and asks, "So how come you're not married yet?" So, Bank of Boston, how come?
The venerable Boston bank lost two suitors last week when Corestates Financial called off a $4.2 billion merger.
Then Banc One halted its bid, admitting that it really wasn't that interested in the Bank of Boston in the first place.
This kind of treatment is getting all too familiar to the Boston bank.
Earlier this year, Fleet Financial showed interest, but instead bought Shawmut National.
Then First Fidelity came to the door, but left with First Union.
So on Thursday, Ira Stepanian, the Bank of Boston's chairman and chief executive, left, a move than analysts interpreted as a "We're for sale announcement." Maybe it would help if there were a Sadie Hawkins Day for banks.


It's 1995, and They'd Rather Be in Little Rock
IT can almost seem cruel these days to remember how Arkansas gloried in Bill Clinton's rise to the Presidency: tens of thousands streaming into Little Rock on Election Day, inaugural guests triumphantly wearing small pewter replicas of the Arkansas razorback hog, and Little Rock's prestigious Rose Law Firm headily planning to open a Washington branch office.
Now, two and a half years and yet a political lifetime later, the Senate Whitewater hearings provide a daily, cautionary reminder of just how shattering the scrutiny and pressure of Washington turned out to be for so many members of the Arkansas elite who followed Mr.
Clinton into prestige and power.


Transgender Community Must Cope With Bigotry
To the Editor:
I found the July 16 article "The Shantytown of the He-She's" disturbing.
Members of the transgender community do not wish to be referred to as "he-she's," and those who identify as female do not refer to themselves as "he."


The War Was Ending. Times Square Exploded. Change Was Coming.
FOR millions of New Yorkers waiting anxiously in Times Square, World War II ended at 7:03 P.M.
Aug. 14, 1945.
At that moment, the 15,000 light bulbs on the Times Tower's zipper sign spelled out five words that touched off a tumultuous celebration: "Official -- Truman announces Japanese surrender."
After surviving years of scarcity and sacrifice, with London bombed, Paris humbled and Rome, Berlin and Tokyo occupied by foreign troops, New York had suddenly been elevated from the nation's major metropolis to the unrivaled world capital.


Deep Water And 2 Cranes Revive a Port
The Brooklyn waterfront once hummed with activity as hundreds of longshoremen hauled freight each day from dozens of ships onto trains and trucks.
But in the last 30 years, most of that business fled to newer, more spacious piers in New Jersey.
In the last year the city's Economic Development Corporation moved two refurbished, 120-foot cranes from the South Brooklyn Marine Terminal in Sunset Park to the struggling Red Hook Marine Terminal, the only port in the city where cargo containers are unloaded from ships.
The agency also met with shipping companies to help Red Hook snare new contracts.


Sasquatchology
WHERE BIGFOOT WALKS  Crossing the Dark Divide.
By Robert Michael Pyle.
Illustrated. 338 pp.
Boston: Houghton Mifflin Company. $21.95.


Dressed to Kill
Americans not only think of business as warfare, borrowing from Sun-tzu, Musashi and Attila the Hun, they also dress for it.
Take your average foot soldier barreling out of Grand Central at rush hour: from his head to his toes, his uniform has been modeled by war.
Consider the tie he wears.
Four hundred years ago, it was called a cravat, after the 17th-century Croatian mercenaries who wore them on the battlefields of France.
Chances are good our man's tie is a regimental stripe, whose colors originally connoted an officer's regiment, though now they could mean membership in anything from a country club to a bowling league.
A typical man's shoe is called a blucher, from the Prussian General Gebhard Leberecht von Blucher, who battled Napoleon.
Though defeated at Lubeck in 1806, Blucher survived to wear his namesakes to the battle of Waterloo.
Modern outerwear and warfare is an even closer fit.
Our commuter's trench coat has broad pockets, a removable lining and shoulder flaps, which made the coat highly practical for the British officers who wore them in Flanders during World War I. Those vestigial brass loops on the belt are actually grenade hooks.
And that wristwatch our commuter anxiously consults is another military improvement (circa 1914) over the vest pocket watch then in popular use.


Donald Sung and Samantha Kim
Suyeon Samantha Kim, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Yoon Hee Kim of Seoul, South Korea, was married yesterday to Donald Dong-Whan Sung, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Seong Yeong Sung of San Francisco.
Bishop Hae-Jong Kim of the United Methodist Church performed the ceremony at the Union League Club in New York.
Mrs.
Sung, 24, is known as Samantha.
She graduated from Seoul National University and is studying fashion design at the Parsons School of Design.
Her father is the president of Kofec, a management consulting firm in Seoul.


Load or No-Load? The Gap Narrows
AS the line between load and no-load funds grows fuzzier, the debate about their relative merits grows louder.
Which fund type is more expensive?
Riskier?
Better performing?
Morningstar Inc., the fund tracking group in Chicago, tackled these questions in a recent report.
For their analysis, the Morningstar researchers selected two groups of diversified equity funds: load funds and no-load funds.


Diana McBaine, Courtney Cook
Diana Denny McBaine, the daughter of Alison Denny Harris and the adoptive daughter of Michael F. O. Harris of Seattle, was married yesterday to Courtney Stafford Cook, a son of Valda Jones Beeney of Bournemouth, England, and the late Robert M. Cook.
The Rev.
Allan C. Parker Jr. performed the ceremony at Trinity Parish Church in Seattle.
The bride is a clerk to Judge Thomas C. Platt of the United States District Court for the Eastern District of New York, in Uniondale, L.I.
She graduated from Yale University and received a master's degree in European history and political theory from Oxford University and her law degree from Columbia University.
She is the daughter also of John Neylan McBaine of New York, a Manhattan lawyer.
The bride's stepmother, Ariel Bybee McBaine, is a mezzo-soprano with the Metropolitan Opera.


Rifle Group Takes A Bold New Stance Against the A.T.F.
The National Rifle Association, encouraged by the Republican ascendancy on Capitol Hill, has entered an aggressive new phase in its long and contentious relationship with the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms.
At a hearing on the deadly confrontation between Federal agents and a sect near Waco, Tex., a lawyer for the rifle association sits in a seat reserved for Congressional staff members.
In pursuit of information embarrassing to the firearms agency, critics of the rifle group say, people associated with the organization have misrepresented themselves and were behind the disclosures about agents attending an annual event that has at times been marred by racist behavior.


In Small-Cap Land, Emotion Is a Bad Compass
EVEN the most astute portfolio managers make blunders.
In hindsight, though, they can see that they overlooked or neglected a critical element of the investment decision.
For small investors eager to learn from the masters, six mutual fund managers who have outdone most of their peers over the years agreed to share some of their more humbling experiences and the lessons learned.
While few were quick to laugh about their errors (one confessed to blocking out the details), they spoke with some candor about their oversights -- if not their losses -- in the hope of sparing others similar pains.


Susan Gluck, Gregory Pappajohn
Susan Mary Gluck, a daughter of Frederick W. Gluck of New York and Mary Ellen Gluck of New Rochelle, N.Y., was married yesterday to Gregory Ernest Pappajohn, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Ernest Pappajohn of Washington.
The Rev.
Kenneth J. Gavin, a Roman Catholic priest, officiated at the Blessed Sacrament Church in New York.
The Rev.
Anthony Ugolnik, a Greek Orthodox minister, took part in the ceremony.
Ms.
Gluck, who is keeping her name, is the producer of CD-ROM computer software at Time-Warner Electronic Publishing in New York.
She was formerly a ballerina with the New York City Ballet.
The bride graduated cum laude from Harvard University and received an M.B.A. from the University of Pennsylvania.


Nudging Workers From Comfy Nests
ALTHOUGH he is a salesman, used to a peripatetic and independent life, John W. Coughlin always had an attachment to a desk.
When he did go to the central AT&amp;T office in Los Angeles, he always got in early.
"I would grab one of the rare cubicles," said Mr.
Coughlin, who sells long-distance services for the company in Southern California.


Doreen J. Muldoon, James W. Keever
Doreen Jean Muldoon, the daughter of Dolores and Philip J. Muldoon of Farmingdale, L.I., was married there yesterday to James Weller Keever, the son of Joan Bulley and H. Weller Keever of New Canaan, Conn.
Msgr.
Charles W. Swiger performed the ceremony at St.
Kilian's Church.
Mrs.
Keever, 32, is the director of advertiser sales management at Worldvision Enterprises Inc., a television distribution company in New York.
She graduated from the State University at Binghamton, N.Y.
Her father owns the Summit Claim Service, an insurance-claim investigator in Farmingdale.


Together, 2 Magazines See Brighter Future
IT was a marriage of convenience between two little-known magazines, both aimed at international business managers.
Separately, each was losing money.
Together, they hoped to share staff in several departments and settle down to a long and happy -- and profitable -- life together.
Few Westchester residents were aware that one of the magazines, International Business, with a circulation of 62,000, had been published in Westchester for seven years and had been based for the last three in a shimmering glass box at 500 Mamaroneck Avenue in Harrison.
Fewer still knew that the other magazine, Foreign Trade, was in McLean, Va.


Young Performers in Recital
FOR the last six weeks, more than 100 youngsters have been steeped in the Hartford Conservatory's fifth annual summer program, singing in chorus, dancing, playing in a string ensemble or one of the three concert bands, improvising with a jazz group.
The results of these intensive coaching sessions and rehearsals will be on display this week in several free concerts.
Three short ones are on the Trinity Episcopal Church agenda at 5, 6 and 7 P.M.
Thursday, A longer program begins 7 P.M.
Friday in West Hartford's Masonic Hall, and the grand "Jazz and Roses" finale is set for next Sunday afternoon at 2 in Elizabeth Park.
Along with the student ensembles, the jazz outing also features Dick Oatts, as guest saxophonist, and members of the Conservatory artist faculty.
For more details, call 246-2588.


Unhappy in Its Own Way
THE WORLD I LEFT BEHIND  Pieces of a Past.
By Luba Brezhneva.
Translated by Geoffrey Polk.
Illustrated. 392 pp.
New York: Random House. $25.


Katherine Zipser and Hew Crooks
KATHERINE ERNEST ZIPSER, 25, and Hew Dalrymple Crawford Crooks, 26, first discussed marriage only two months ago, while sitting in a field of yellow and white daffodils in Litchfield, Conn.
"I hate long engagements," Ms.
Zipser said.
"I have friends whose engagements have been like a Wagnerian opera -- they go on forever. I think fast and furious is better."


Avis Takes a Chance On Eastern Europe
Avis Germany has broken the rental-car barrier that replaced the Berlin wall, allowing renters of cars in Germany to drive into eastern Europe.
Auto Europe, a broker that uses Avis, among other companies, is also offering this option, as well as others for Eastern Europe.
Avis allows its cars to go into any Eastern European country except those with unstable political situations.
Auto Europe is renting cars in Austria, Germany, the Netherlands, Hungary, Italy and Switzerland that may be driven into Bulgaria, Poland, Romania, the Czech Republic, Slovakia, Slovenia, Croatia, Russia, Byelarus, Estonia, Lithuania and Ukraine.


A Designer Puts on a Show, A Friend Puts on a New Hat
WHEN THE Documentary "Unzipped," about the fashion designer Isaac Mizrahi and his fall 1994 collection, appeared at the Cannes Film Festival in May, Mr.
Mizrahi got the kind of response Winston Churchill couldn't have expected from, say, documentaries like "The World at War."
People kept telling him he was "good" in the film.


Bookshelf
GROWN-UPS GET TO DO ALL THE DRIVING.
Written and illustrated by William Steig.
Michael di Capua/ HarperCollins. $15. (All ages) We hold these truths -- or aphorisms -- to be self-evident, but they come to life brilliantly in the master's illustrations of, say, "Grown-ups snore" or "have aches and pains" or "hog the telephone" or "get headaches."  FROM PICTURES TO WORDS: A Book About Making a Book.
Written and illustrated by Janet Stevens.
Holiday House. $15.95. (Ages 5 to 9) An author and illustrator who has many imaginary friends selects a few and, using them as characters, describes in text and pictures how she develops a storybook.
ANSWER MY PRAYER.
By Sid Hite.
Holt. $15.95. (Ages 10 and up) Here's a fine romantic novel set in a mythic kingdom by the sea, involving a 16-year-old heroine, a lazy but earnest angel and political derring-do -- mostly involving the rare and beautiful jeefwood tree.
SPLASH!
Written and illustrated by Ann Jonas.
Greenwillow. $15. (Ages 3 and up) What looks like an amusing summer storybook is, in truth, addition and subtraction for preschoolers disguised as pure entertainment.
The narrator has a backyard pond with turtle, catfish, frogs and goldfish.
Her cat and dog squabble and various creatures fall in and jump out.
Everyone gets wet.
Keep counting.
SYDNEY, INVINCIBLE.
By Colby Rodowsky.
Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux. $14. (Ages 12 and up) In junior year everything should be dandy for Sydney Downie, the heroine of "Sydney, Herself." Her mom's remarried, school is good, baby-sitting is fine -- but of course everything starts to go wrong.
It's righted in the end.
BIGGEST, STRONGEST, FASTEST.
Written and illustrated by Steve Jenkins.
Ticknor &amp; Fields. $14.95. (Ages 4 to 7) Here are 14 creatures of distinction, including elephants, ants, jellyfish, cheetahs and fleas.
The collage illustrations show them at work, and silhouette graphics with captions provide scientific information about comparative achievement.


Valerie Levitt, Mark Schmaier
Valerie Susan Levitt, a daughter of Edythe and V. David Levitt of Harrison, N.Y., was married last evening to Mark Joseph Schmaier, a son of Dr.
Maurice D. Schmaier of Emeryville, Calif., and the late Betty Steele Schmaier.
Rabbi Jon Haddon officiated at the Plaza in New York.
Mrs.
Schmaier, 30, graduated magna cum laude from the University of Pennsylvania and received an M.B.A. from Columbia University.
She was formerly a vice president of Chemical Bank in New York.
Her father is the president of Levitt-Fuirst Associates, an insurance agency in Yonkers, and a partner in Levitt &amp; Levy, a law firm in Mount Vernon, N.Y.


Now, Gifts to the House
The Senate majority leader, Bob Dole, did everything he could to stop it.
So did Trent Lott, the Senate majority whip.
So did Mitch McConnell, who in a perverse twist of fate is Senate Ethics Committee chairman even though he has made a career of fighting clean politics.
But, in a rejection of this cynical leadership, the Senate, after some wavering, voted overwhelmingly last week to impose a strict ban on the free meals, vacations and other gifts that lobbyists now routinely bestow on lawmakers to gain a legislative advantage.
Several key Senators deserve credit for shaming their colleagues into relinquishing these corrupting perks.
Four Democrats -- Paul Wellstone of Minnesota, Carl Levin of Michigan, Russell Feingold of Wisconsin and Frank Lautenberg of New Jersey -- and one Republican, William Cohen of Maine, forced the issue onto the legislative calendar.
Without them reform would have been buried.
But the entire effort might have failed had Senator John McCain, Republican of Arizona, not intervened to negotiate the modest revisions that pulled in freshman Republican votes.


THE THING WITH FEATHERS
It is surprising that the White House press office said that even if it had a photo of President Clinton wearing ceremonial American Indian headgear, it wouldn't release it (Sunday, July 9).
Surprising because Clinton has Cherokee Indians among his ancestors.
It would appear to be an honor for him to be shown in traditional dress.
KARYN SIUTA Brooklyn


If You're Thinking of Living In: Edgewater; Factory Town Is Now Bedroom Community
SANDWICHED between the Palisades cliffs and the Hudson River, the tiny Borough of Edgewater, in Bergen County, N.J., is just three blocks wide and three-and-a-half miles long.
The one major artery, River Road, bisects the borough, accentuating the transition that has been in progress for 30 years, from factory town to an increasingly upscale bedroom community for executives working in Manhattan.
The western, Palisades side of the borough is tightly packed with small colonials and rowhouses that were once homes to some of the more than 10,000 people who worked in its heavy industries.
In contrast, the eastern, Hudson River side is filling up with luxury condominium apartments and town houses that are replacing the factories that used to depend on the waterway.


The Democrat Who Delivers the G.O.P. Message
Jeff Wiesenfeld's life is a tale of two parties, a parable of dual allegiances.
Born in the Bronx but loyal to Queens, his home since he was a teen-ager, Mr.
Wiesenfeld is a life-long registered Democrat.
But he works in the city as an attache of Gov.
George E. Pataki, the state's top Republican.


Broadway's Real Hits Are Its Antique Theaters
NOBODY GOES TO THE THEATER FOR the theater.
It's "Sunset Boulevard," not the Minskoff, that people are shelling out bucks to see.
The theater building is just the frame around the picture, the cover of the book.
But let's look at some frames anyhow.
Let's judge some covers.
For those frames, those covers, have a drama, a pictorial content, of their own.
They affect the total experience of playgoing -- and not always for the better.
And they can add or detract from the spectacle that is the theater district itself.


David Fighting Bookstore Goliath
Ever since Barnes &amp; Noble opened a megastore on Broadway at 82d Street in 1993, book lovers have wondered whether the Shakespeare &amp; Company bookstore, just one block south, could survive.
It has, but not without some setbacks, and not without some major changes in its marketing strategy.
Business has stabilized, company officials say, and the store is in the black.
Shakespeare has even taken a leaf from the Barnes &amp; Noble book by creating a mini-chain of its own.
In addition to its branch at 716 Broadway in Greenwich Village, the company plans to open a store this fall at 939 Lexington Avenue near 69th Street.


Transgender Community Must Cope With Bigotry
To the Editor:
I found the July 16 article "The Shantytown of the He-She's" disturbing.
Members of the transgender community do not wish to be referred to as "he-she's," and those who identify as female do not refer to themselves as "he."


BEHIND THE WHEEL/Rolls-Royce Silver Spur; Expensive Behemoth Is Surprisingly Nimble
I HAD done this before, I thought -- driven a car to the ooh-oohs of the crowd.
I had preened at the wheel in parades, and I had driven in races, although the ahhs then were more like gasps as I demonstrated true ineptitude in the turns.
But this was no race.
This was a v-e-r-y slow crawl through New York's Central Park, leading a $1.5 million line of fancy metal, and the appreciation from the multitude of skaters, joggers and muggers ranged from waves to stared befuddlement.
One woman whistled.


FRONTIERS OF MARKETING: The Imperial West
Life is always imitating advertising.
That's the point.
And Marlboro men are found on billboards all over the globe -- in Europe, Russia, China, Southeast Asia -- spreading a gospel that's in trouble at home but resonant elsewhere.
Of course, the imitators usually restrict themselves to smoking, since men on horseback are hard to find in downtown Hong Kong or Moscow.
They do, however, pop up in the oddest places.
The bit of semiotic serendipity above (rich enough to give a French philosopher a headache) came not from some remnant prairie in the Old West but from the Middle East.
The cowboy smoking a cigarette above was photographed, in a Marlboro moment, in Beirut.


July 23-29; E-Mail
The Week in Review's electronic mail address is review@nytimes.com


Self-Portraits on Stage: Perspective Is Crucial
YOU NEED A CANNY -- NO, YOU NEED AN uncanny balance of self-love, self-loathing, self-respect and self-mockery to draw your own self-portrait, put it up on a stage and ask others to study it, savor it and pay for it.
You need technique too, for everybody does have a story to tell but only a small portion of those everybodies can tell it (talk it, sing it or dance it) in a way that interests most anybody for more than a few phrases at a time.
The three solo performances I saw this week (two in theaters, one adapted for television after a successful theater run) got me thinking about all of this.
One was pert and diminutive: parody in a New England doll's house.
One was all brazen, angry comedy and rueful intimacy: satire and self-exposure on the mean streets of New York City.
And the third was a quiet inquiry into the mysterious business of how we see ourselves and what limits we can or can't place on how others see us.  'The Springhill Singing Disaster'
Little girls who wanted to be pretty and sensitive and very special -- artistically gifted yet modest, spiritually virtuous yet adventurous -- may have wanted to be Greer Garson as Mrs.
Miniver in the 1940's and Deborah Kerr in "The King and I" or Audrey Hepburn in "The Nun's Story" in the 1950's.
But by the 1960's, they usually wanted to be Joan Baez, Judy Collins or Joni Mitchell, on stage alone with a guitar, face shielded by long, flowing hair, body covered by long, flowing garments, singing raptly to hushed, reverent millions.


ON THE TOWNS
MUSIC ART CENTER OF NORTHERN NEW JERSEY The B Natural Trio, with Bill Wilkinson, flute, Helaine Pfeiffer, cello, and Audrey Tysen, violin and viola, performs an evening of classical music.
Friday at 8 P.M.
Tickets: $10.
The Marcella Geltman Gallery. 250 Center Street, New Milford. (201) 599-2992.
BRIDGETON'S RIVERFRONT In a series of free Sunday night concerts, Country Blue performs today at 7 P.M.
Routes 49 and 77 in Bridgeton. (609) 451-9208.


For the Record/The Pork Barrel; Watch Out With That Budget Ax. My District NEEDS Than Dam.
For four decades, the Democrats who ruled Congress larded Federal spending bills with pork.
Locks, dams, people-movers, Federal research centers, passenger rail lines, electric buses, airport control towers, highway "demonstration projects" and Lord knows what else rained from Washington like inflation-adjusted pennies from heaven.
Everybody on Capitol Hill got wet.
But Republicans got damp, while Democrats got soaked.
And the Democrats who dispensed the goodies -- those who sat on Congress's appropriations and authorizing committees -- were so flooded that they needed dams, which, fortunately, they were in a position to finance.


Molly O'Rourke, Alexander Baldwin
Molly Katherine O'Rourke, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas O'Rourke of Summit, N.J., was married there yesterday to Alexander Denniston Baldwin, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Henry deForest Baldwin of New York.
The Rev.
Dr.
Charles T. Rush, a Roman Catholic priest, performed the ceremony at Christ Church.
Ms.
O'Rourke, who is 26 and is keeping her name, is a Ph.D. candidate in American politics and applied statistical analysis at the University of Michigan at Ann Arbor.
She graduated magna cum laude from Brown University, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa.
She was formerly an aide to Senator Frank R. Lautenberg, Democrat of New Jersey.


In Search of the C.I.A.'s Bad Apples
Fred Hitz, the mild-mannered Ivy League lawyer who serves as the inspector general of the Central Intelligence Agency, says he has spent the past five years "looking at the dark side of the moon."
When things go wrong inside the agency, from espionage to expense-account fudging, Mr.
Hitz takes the case.
If an officer loses his grip or his moral bearings, Mr.
Hitz's job is to see to it that the employee is sacked or shunted aside -- to "shoot the wounded," as he put it.


Mexican Connection Grows As Cocaine Supplier to U.S.
The bodies of police informants still turn up around this sprawling border city, their mouths sometimes stuffed with one of the fingers they might have pointed at drug traffickers.
Mostly, though, the stronghold of the man thought to be Mexico's most powerful cocaine smuggler, Amado Carillo Fuentes, is almost peaceful compared with other drug capitals.
Gun battles are rare, car bombings unheard of.
The police chief cannot remember the last time armed thugs took over one of the discotheques for a party.


A Visitor From Germany Studies Faces in the Subway
To the Editor:
I am a visitor from Germany, and I have come here for the fourth time because I like the people in New York.
The subway is one of my favored places here, where I can watch people's faces, so different at different times -- tired faces in rush hour, funny faces on weekends.
Your July 16 article "Behind the Subway Trance" opened the faces and gave us a great view of the life and people of the city.
BERND HENDRICKS  Manhattan


Inventors Hall of Fame Opens in Akron, Ohio
Inventure Place, Home of the National Inventors Hall of Fame, which opened in Akron, Ohio, this month, aspires to be more than a science museum and library.
It hopes to serve as an inventor's workshop and a national resource center for creativity.
It will also house the National Inventors Hall of Fame, which, since its formation in 1973, has inducted Americans whose inventions -- like the pacemaker and the camera, for instance -- have had more than a passing influence on the nation's quality of life.
The money for the project, $38 million, came from city and state agencies as well as from private corporations.
The centerpiece of the new 77,000-square-foot facility, designed by the New York architect James Stewart Polshek, is a stainless-steel sail-shaped building housing five tiers of exhibits related to the best-known inventors in the United States and their inventions.
Highlights include an exhibit that allows visitors to use computer programs to make animations and a "mechanically controlled laser light show," in which they use mirrors to create and project laser patterns on a screen.


Twig Gallemore, Melissa D. Kingman
Melissa D. Kingman, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Dong Kingman Jr. of New York, was married yesterday to Thomas Wilson Ira Gallemore, a son of Dr.
Gail Hurd Gallemore of Johnson City, Tenn., and Dr.
Johnnie L. Gallemore Jr. of Norfolk, Va.
The Rev.
Blaine Ellsworth, a Presbyterian minister, officiated at Auberge du Soleil in Rutherford, Calif.
The bride, 25, and bridegroom, 26, graduated from Carnegie Mellon University.


Curtain Going Up on a Rescued Summer Theater
ADARK THEATER IN A SMALL town is like a corpse in the living room.
It's dead and it's there.
For many of its 40 years, the Sharon Playhouse in the northwest corner of Connecticut limped along, cherished but in debt, a primer for How Not to Run a Summer Theater.
Five years ago, gasping for air, the big barn finally went belly up.
"It was your typical summer theater experience," says the actress Jane Curtin, who lives in Sharon.
"You know, holes in the roof. They would do 'Godspell.' When it closed, you'd drive by and it was very sad."


A Curio From Broadway's Golden 1960's
EVEN in the time of Broadway musical constancy, "High Spirits" (1964-65) was something of a curio.
Neither hit nor miss, the show was propelled by idiosyncratic stars, Beatrice Lillie and Tammy Grimes, and the glitter of Noel Coward, who gave the musical its source ("Blithe Spirit") and its nominal direction.
Off the record, it was Gower Champion, the director and choreographer of that season's prize-winner, "Hello, Dolly!" who spruced up the musical's staging while Coward was not allowed the credit that was rightfully his.
That was because the musical's book, attributed to Hugh Martin and Timothy Gray, was merely a condensed rendering of the popular comedy that the English master of wit and dispatch was said to have dashed off in six days in 1941.


Fresh Fruit, With Coupons
On Thursday, 14 wriggly 2- and 3-year-olds from a day care center peeped over the top of a table and waited for free fruit salad at the fenced-in paved lot on Lexington Avenue and 97th Street.
It was opening day for the East Harlem Community Farmer's Market, and the nutrition educators were out in force, as they plan be every Thursday.
"The next time your mommy gives you a cookie," Katherine Chen, a volunteer, told the toddlers, "say, no, no, no, I want fruit and vegetables."


Making History Sound as Good as It Looks
THE THIRD COURTYARD MAY be the most beautiful of all.
We have just walked over the castle moat, gazed down at two bears ambling below and passed through the wooden-floored tunnel, taking the same path the Eggenbergs' golden coach did in 1683.
As we mill around, the windows open high above, burnished trombones catch the sun, and a brass ensemble plays Gabrieli fanfares.
We are enmeshed in an event called "Wandering Through Time," part of a chamber-music festival here.
Instead of the usual sit-down-and-sit-still concert, the program offers a walking tour through the rooms of the castle.
And happily for this castlephobe, the usual leg-cramping trek is animated by musicians, some in historic costumes, serenading the pilgrims with music more or less related to the historical periods of particular rooms.


New Lottery Prize: Permit to Paint
During years of police crackdowns that drove sidewalk artists from Greenwich Village, Times Square and Soho, many of them found refuge in Central Park.
There they set up easels to make quick portraits for pay.
But they lost that sanctuary a couple of weeks ago as the park became their latest battleground.
The police ordered the artists out and hauled one away in handcuffs on a charge of vending without a license.


BUSINESS NTOES
Louis Vuitton's Itinerary Sends Laura Ashley Packing Laura Ashley closed its New York flagship store, at 21 East 57th Street, on Wednesday after its landlord failed to renew the lease.
The landlord, Starre Realty, hopes to use the site, between Fifth and Madison Avenues, for an office tower of 15 to 25 stories, with retail space on the ground floor.
It has also bought up the two buildings next door, 17 and 19 East 57th Street, to use as part of the high-rise parcel.
Starre is a new partnership formed by Robert Siegel, president of Metropole Realty Advisors (which had owned 21 East 57th Street), and Michael Burke, the president of Louis Vuitton, N.A.
Plans call for Louis Vuitton, the luggage maker, to close its only Manhattan store, on 57th between Madison and Park Avenues, and move into 4,600 square feet in the new building.


The Path to Screenwriter of 'Prizzi's Honor'
ALTHOUGH "Prizzi's Honor" was her first screenplay, Janet Roach, who won an Academy Award nomination for it, was by no means a stranger to the camera.
"I decided when I was in third grade," Ms.
Roach recounted in her home on Shelter Island, "that I was going to make documentaries for CBS News." Eventually she did.


The Battling Borogh Presidents
Under zoning changes proposed by Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani, sex-related businesses would be prohibited from operating withing 500 feet of residences, schools and houses of worship, and within 500 feet of each other.
Ruth W. Messinger, the Manhattan Borough President, and Claire Shulman, the Queens Borough President, spoke about the issue last week.
CLAIRE SHULMAN
"The zoning as proposed works for us. Of course, we'd like the 500 feet to be 1,000. But in essence, the bottom line is that what has been proposed will protect us more than we are currently being protected and we suport it and I believe it will withstand constitutional challenges.


A Fight for Life Is Waged in an Angry Courtroom
Darkness still gripped the City of Brotherly Love in the early morning hours of Dec. 9, 1981, when Daniel Faulkner, a white police officer, was shot to death after making a routine traffic stop.
A few months later, Mumia Abu-Jamal, a well-known black radio journalist who was also active in political causes here, was convicted of the officer's murder and condemned to die, a sentence that is scheduled to be carried out on Aug. 17.


Tour Fugitive
To the Editor:
My husband and I and friends have just returned from a 17-day tour of Turkey, organized by Tursem.
Our experiences were above our expectations -- every day filled with exciting tours and adventures.
We had time for ourselves to explore and go to places of our special interest.
The 30 people in our group were most compatible.
We would highly recommend the tour we took.  MILDRED LEWIS  Great Neck, L.I.


A Storyteller With a Sensitive Wit
ONE OF THE MORE Interesting -- and certainly one of the most amusing -- music videos in recent memory is Jill Sobule's "I Kissed a Girl." In it, two women who are bored with their boyfriends escape their doldrums by having a fling not with each other's mates but with each other.
With a fanciful Pee-wee's-Playhouse look and the beyond-hip casting coup of the supermodel Fabio playing Ms.
Sobule's unsuspecting hunk, this clever video to a clever song manages to tackle a controversial topic with disarming wit and style.
And the video makes one curious to find out what else this seemingly offbeat singer and songwriter might have up her sleeve.
The answer, as shown by "Jill Sobule" (Lava/Atlantic), her wonderfully entertaining new album, is plenty.
A relatively unknown performer who released an album on MCA Records in 1990 and had a second one rejected by that label in 1992, Ms.
Sobule successfully presents herself here as a thoughtful, sensitive and often riotously funny songwriter.
She has a penchant for richly detailed vignettes about colorful characters weaving their way through all types of physical, emotional and moral landscapes.


Seles Conquers a Pair of Foes: Nervousness and Navratilova
Her fall from the pinnacle of tennis in April 1993 was as perverse as it was unprecedented: She was stabbed in the back by a fanatical supporter of the very woman she had supplanted as the world's No. 1 player.
So it seemed only fitting today that Monica Seles's comeback -- after a two-year physical and emotional blackout -- to the sport she dominated as a teen-ager would be unprecedented, and a bit perverse as well.


July 23-29: Hope for the Obese?; A Hormone Is Found That Helps Reduce Fat
It seemed almost too good to be true -- a hormone thatmakes animals, and maybe people, eat less and exercise more.
But researchers say that is exactly what they have found.
The hormone, called leptin, is secreted by fat cells and appears to tell the brain how much fat is present in the body.
Too much leptin and an animal loses weight by eating less, increasing its metabolic rate, and moving about more.
Too little and it gains weight.


Corrections
A brief article last Sunday about tax fraud charges against two former baseball stars misstated their playing records in some copies.
Duke Snider hit 407 home runs in 18 seasons in the major leagues and Willie McCovey hit 521 in 22 seasons in the major leagues.


Laura C. Hoover, Scott D. Shapley
Laura Cochran Hoover, the daughter of Mrs.
Derby F. Anderson of Fairfield, Conn., and F. Herbert Hoover of San Francisco, was married yesterday to Scott Davis Shapley, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Fredrick Shapley of Del Rey Oaks, Calif.
The Rev.
Paul Danielson, assisted by the bride's uncle the Rev.
Everett M. Caes, performed the Protestant ceremony at the Swedenborgian Church in San Francisco.
Mrs.
Shapley, 25, is the commercial counselor in Yekaterinburg, Russia, for the International Executive Service Corps, a business consulting organization.
She and her husband graduated from the University of California at San Diego, she summa cum laude.
Her father is the president of the Hoover Capital Corporation, a venture capital concern in San Francisco.
Her mother, Margaret P. Anderson, is an art consultant in Fairfield.


Grand National Bridge Team Final Begins
Teams representing Las Vegas and Chicago faced each other here this afternoon in the final of the Grand National Team Championship at the American Contract Bridge League's Summer Nationals.
After 16 deals of a scheduled 64, Chicago led by 16 imps.
On Friday night, the Las Vegas foursome of Peter Nagy, Marc Jacobus, Billy Cohen and Harold Lilie won their semifinal match against New York by 49 imps after gaining 71 in the first quarter.


On Fire Island, Naked Came the Burglar
First he was wearing a flowered skirt and not much else.
By the time the sun was high, the burglary suspect had shed even the skirt.
Finally, modesty demanded a towel, artfully draped.
Weather and locale require adjustments in all professions, which may explain why the suspect's victims on Fire Island, L.I., found him in various stages of undress last Thursday.
Still, this was one burglary suspect whose tastes were anything but casual, his approach to dress notwithstanding.
When the police finally found him, it was with a $90 bottle of Dom Perignon Champagne, and $90 worth of Beluga caviar.


Photographers Putting Their Eggs in Technology's Basket
AN exhibition called "Content and Discontent in Today's Photography" -- a joint effort by Independent Curators Inc. in Manhattan and Friends of Photography/Ansel Adams Center in San Francisco -- is at the Bruce Museum in Greenwich.
The title seems like a warning and maybe should be taken as such for, depending on the viewer, the show reflects an impasse or its solution.
In his brochure essay, the curator, Andy Grundberg, proposes that abstraction, once regarded as an "escape from representation" now strikes many artists as "another kind of representation -- albeit one culturally coded to suggest universality, spirituality, freedom and artistic authenticity."


Spies &amp; Thrillers
In Robert Byrne's aptly titled novel THRILL (Carroll &amp; Graf, $19.95), a young California woman is thrown out of an amusement park's old roller coaster and killed.
The roller coaster is named (what else?) Thrill, and now it has to be rebuilt to be made safer -- over the ob jections of the original designer, a man who contemplates his works much as Rembrandt might have contemplated a finished canvas.
And why not?
He is the Rembrandt of roller-coaster designers.
Jack McKenzie, an engineer, is hired to oversee the project, but it soon becomes clear that an assassin is out to sabotage it.
McKenzie, though, can see no flaw in the redesign and even plans to go on the inaugural ride of the new Thrill, although he hates roller coasters.
He will not be alone, of course.
The mayors of nearby cities and other notables will also go along.


Melissa Langlois and Michael Halow
Melissa Mayson Langlois, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
David P. Langlois of Madison, N.J., was married yesterday to Michael Joseph Halow, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph Halow of Potomac, Md.
The Rev.
Stephen Rozzelle performed the ceremony at St.
Mark's Episcopal Church in Basking Ridge, N.J.
The bride, 24, graduated from Princeton University and is a candidate for a Ph.D. in political sociology at the University of Chicago.
Her father is a partner in Piper &amp; Marbury, a law firm in New York.
Her mother, Catherine M. Langlois, is a judge of the New Jersey Superior Court in Morristown.


Catherine Van Cook, John Parsons
Catherine Victoria Van Cook, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
William M. Van Cook of Shrub Oak, N.Y., was married Friday to John Gary Parsons, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Charles T. Parsons of Yorktown Heights, N.Y.
The Rev.
Donald Hendricks, a Roman Catholic priest, performed the ceremony at St.
Christopher's Church in Buchanan, N.Y.


Shared Quarters Leads To Shared Faith Study
THE landlord-tenant relationship is rarely one in which friendship flourishes, but the experience of a church and a synagogue here offer an encouraging exception to the rule.
When the Greenburgh Hebrew Center sought space for its worship service and nursery school a few years ago because its own synagogue was being renovated, the Zion Episcopal Church here offered the Jewish congregation the use of its parish hall.


Red Harvest
Since the 16th century, when the Spanish brought them back to Europe from Mexico, tomatoes have been a palimpsest upon which societies scribbled their fears and fantasies.
First considered poisonous, then an aphrodisiac, tomatoes were finally deemed pitiful, an assessment from which, even today, only the rare specimen escapes.
A full two centuries after Italy had embraced them, England and America were still suspicious, according the tomato (and probably the Italians) the kind of disapprobation usually reserved for the common.
As late as 1860, Godey's Lady's Book admonished proper American housewives that their tomatoes should be cooked for three hours.
A necessity that would sanitize and presumably redeem this lowly comestible.


MOVIES THIS WEEK
SOME treasured old friends return to the television roster this week.
A STREETCARE NAMED DESIRE (1951), with its haunting impact and two great performances, has a suprise if you look sharp.
It's still a photographed play, via Tennessee Williams.
But close up, again under Elia Kazan's direction, it vibrates even more than on stage, with Vivien Leigh as the doomed Southern belle and Marlon Brando (in photograph with Kim Hunter) as her brutal brother-in-law, in a superb cast.
The cumulative wallop is so strong that a softened ending gets by.
And was there ever such a lingering title? -- Saturday at 5 P.M. and 11 P.M. on American Movie Classics.
Few romantic fantasies rate the word enchanting.
Joseph L. Mankiewicz's GHOST AND MRS.
MUIR (1947) is one.
It's the story of a lonely widow (Gene Tierney) and the hovering spirit of a caustic skipper (Rex Harrison).
Their cozy interchange is wry, wistful and sweet-edged.
There are three show-stealers: that cliffside Cornwall house, Edna Best's quiet servant and Bernard Herrmann's music, evocative as sea mist -- Monday at 9 P.M. and Monday/Early Tuesday at 3:45 A.M. on Disney.


Christina Stafford and Jason Chapin
Christina Elizabeth Stafford, a daughter of John and Dr.
Inge Stafford of Essex Fells, N.J., was married last evening to Jason Campbell Chapin, a son of Sandra Chapin of Huntington, L.I., and the late Harry F. Chapin, the singer and songwriter.
The Rev.
John Worthington performed the ceremony at the First Presbyterian Church at Caldwell, N.J.
Mrs.
Chapin, 28, is a graduate of Colgate University, as is her husband.
She received a master's degree in teaching from Columbia University.
Until recently she taught English and was the assistant director of the Upper School of the Brooklyn Friends School.
In September, she is to attend the master's degree program at the Shirley M. Ehrenkranz School of Social Work, at New York University.


Zoning Goal: Remake Long Island City
Since the 1920's, city planners have dreamed of transforming Long Island City into a major urban center just five minutes by subway from midtown Manhattan on the Queens bank of the East River.
In September, the City Planning Commission will vote on proposed zoning changes that would make the dream possible.
The changes would restrict heavy manufacturing, like paint factories, steel plants or businesses that require a lot of open storage or use noxious materials, in favor of light manufacturing, like contracting companies, apparel factories and printing plants.
They would also restrict construction of new parking facilities and encourage some housing development in Hunters Point, which is classified as a special mixed-use district with a blend of industrial and residential life.


A Message to the Bats of Brielle: Don't Look for Lodging Here
As dusk falls, the bats of Monmouth County leave their nests in attics and steeples and old factory chimneys and wheel into the sky in search of breakfast.
They hover around electric lights and in marshes, swooping down on tasty, thick-bodied moths, fireflies and the odd swarm of mosquitoes.
And when the night is through, if they know what's good for them, they will steer clear of the borough of Brielle, where a long-simmering housing debate has now been decided against the bats.


'Forget Paris' Indeed, as Theater Goes Indian
The Gramercy Theater is still called the Gramercy Theater.
But the old-fashioned single-screen cinema on 23d, west of Lexington, which lay dormant for a year and a half in an industry gripped by multiplex mania, has a new identity that is making one immigrant community literally applaud.


July 23-29: Terror in Paris; A Bomb Kills Seven In French Subway Yet Leaves Few Clues
The bomb blast in a Paris subway station that left seven dead and some 80 injured last week was a new reminder of the vulnerability of mass transportation systems to terrorism.
The Irish Republican Army used to target London's railroad stations.
Tokyo's commuters have been terrorized by poisonous gas.
The bomb went off on a crowded underground train at the height of the evening rush-hour.
The difficulty of preventing such attacks explains the French Government's scramble to discover who was behind the explosion.
It has tried to reassure the public by tightening security at train and metro stations, airports and even on the streets of Paris.
But police are still unsure who the culprits are.


Sweltering Minds Devise Creative Ways to Beat Heat
With the New York region slogging through its 12th day in tropical inferno mode, minus the side benefits of coconut palms, efforts to beat the heat yesterday inspired varied prescriptions:
Running a few miles, then jumping into the sauna.


SURVEYS: Sex and Weight
There is no escaping sex surveys.
The latest comes from Weight Watchers Magazine.
This survey of 6,000 magazine readers found that 38 percent had sex once or twice a week and 18 percent three to six times a week.
A 1994 study of the general population showed that less than 8 percent of the women surveyed had sex four or more times a week.
Also 70 percent usually have orgasms.
Of course, a closer look shows that 75 percent of married women in the general survey usually have orgasms, calling into dispute the sexiness of fat.
But the editor of Weight Watchers Magazine, Nancy Gagliardi, says her readers have good sex because "their appetite for life is big and lustful."


ON THE BORDER OF LIFE
I was pleased to note that, in the 1990's, the response of medical staff toward bereaved parents is so much more enlightened than it was in the 1960's.
The only advice anyone seemed capable of offering us was to forget what had happened as quickly as possible.
How we would love to have in our possession a box such as that presented to the DeCostas, containing tangible evidence of our son's short life.
FROMA T. WILLEN Lutherville, Md.


Bigger Signs Would Aid Adopt-a-Highway Program
To the Editor:
I was delighted to read of the successes of the New Jersey Adopt-a-Highway program ("Loving Parents for Highways," July 16), and I have one suggestion that would make it work even better.


Next Up for Angels, Yet Another .300 Hitter
The Cleveland Indians, Sparky Anderson said, "we saw coming; this one jumped up on us."
"This one" is the California Angels, the most surprising team in the American League.
From a three-year run of finishing with records 18 games under .500 or worse (21 last year), the Angels entered last night's game in Milwaukee 19 games over .500 and menacing their opponents with an offense at least as awesome as that of the Indians.


F.Y.I.
The Ear of the Beholder Q.  Where did Aqueduct race track get its name?
Belmont is named for August Belmont, who founded that track, and Saratoga is named after Saratoga Springs, the upstate town where the track is located.
But isn't Aqueduct a strange name?
A.
Actually, Aqueduct got its name the same way Saratoga did.
When it opened, on Sept. 27, 1894, it was in an area known as Aqueduct.
And that was named because there was an aqueduct there.


Medicare, to Survive, Needs an Affluence Test; Doctor Fees
To the Editor:
"Medicare, Turning 30, Won't Be What It Was" (front page, July 23) includes a graph showing spending over the life of the entitlement.


Rani George, Gregory Clarkin
Rani Mary Ann George, the daughter of Shanta George of Vineland, N.J., and the late Dr.
N.
J.
George, was married yesterday to Gregory Francis Clarkin, a son of Rosemary and Vincent Clarkin of Peekskill, N.Y.
The Rev.
Thomas Devery performed the ceremony at Sacred Heart Roman Catholic Church in Vineland.
Mrs.
Clarkin, 28, is an associate at Periconi &amp; Rothberg, a New York law firm.
She graduated from Rutgers University and received her law degree from Pace University.
Her father was a psychiatrist in Vineland.


Transactions
Baseball  American League
BALTIMORE ORIOLES -- Optioned outfielder Mark Smith, outfielder, to Rochester of the International League.
Sent Joe Borowski, pitcher, to Rochester.
Recalled Rick Krivda, pitcher, from Rochester.
National League
SAN FRANCISCO GIANTS -- Placed Luis Aquino, pitcher, on the 15-day disabled list.
Recalled Chris Hook, pitcher, from Phoenix of Pacific Coast League.
Northern League
ST.
PAUL SAINTS -- Activated Steve Curry, pitcher.
Waived Scott Centala, pitcher.
Football  National Football League
NEW YORK GIANTS -- Agreed to terms with Jessie Armstead, linebacker.
OAKLAND RAIDERS -- Signed Russell Freeman, offensive tackle.
Released Willie Stubbins, offensive tackle.
Canadian Football League
BALTIMORE STALLIONS -- Placed Nick Subis, center, on the injurd list.
MEMPHIS MAD DOGS -- Placed Gary Anderson, running back, and Donald Smith, cornerback, to the injured list.
SAN ANTONIO TEXANS -- Activated Jeff Sawyer, defensive end, and Kitrick Taylor, wide receiver, from the injured list.
Released Ephesiana Bartley, linebacker; Tony Jackson, running back; and Daryle Smith, offensive lineman.
Placed Jimmy Lee, running back, and Kitrick Taylor, wide receiver, to injured list.
SASKATCHEWAN ROUGHRIDERS -- Activated Scott Hendrickson, guard, and Elbert Turner, wide receiver, from the injured list.
Released Timothy Broady, linebacker.
Placed Wayne Drinkwalter, defensive tackle, on the injured list.


L. I. VINES
Windmill Red. Nonvintage.
Duck Walk Vineyards. About $7.
The peppermint-stripe beach chair beckons.
The shade cast by an oversize canvas market umbrella offers the deep coolness of the elms in Fairfield Porter's Southampton paintings.
A picnic lunch with duck leftovers and chicken sandwiches lies at hand.
Is this the time to open Stendhal's "Le Rouge et Le Noir?" No, but it's the moment to open a rouge -- Windmill Red, a summertime-paperback kind of wine.


Appeals End At High Court On Rent Control
The United States Supreme Court has refused to hear an appeal to safeguard the rent of nine tenants who live at Federally owned apartment building on East 57th Street.
Tenant advocates say the decision is significant because it is the first time that a Federal agency has been allowed to suspend state-established rent control.


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
A Backyard Beach Game
SUMMERTIME means "Beach Blanket Bingo" at the Corrazoni house in Greenport.
Every weekend friends flock there to swim and play beach volleyball.
"I love playing volleyball in the sand," P. J. Corrazoni said.
"We're getting older, and the sand is more forgiving on the ankles and knees."
It doesn't matter that Mr.
Corrazoni and his wife, Ruthanne, don't live near any water or sand.
They had a swimming pool installed.
And a beach.
Forty-two yards of sand was transported to their backyard, where it was molded into a regulation beach volleyball court.


Lee Baldwin, Daniel Hafner
Lee Avatar Baldwin, a daughter of Wilson L. McKane and an adoptive daughter of David B. McKane of Westport, Conn., was married yesterday to Daniel Stephen Hafner, a son of Joseph A. Hafner Jr. of Houston and Inga Grunden of Lysekil, Sweden.
The Rev.
Kathleen Liles performed the ceremony at Trinity Episcopal Church in Southport, Conn.
Ms.
Baldwin, who is 25 and is keeping her name, was until recently a client services assistant at Sotheby's in New York.
She graduated from Simmons College.
Mr.
McKane is the chairman of McKane Robbins &amp; Company, an investment concern in Westport.
Her mother is a vice president at Sedgwick James of Connecticut, insurance brokers in Stamford, Conn.
The bride is a daughter also of the late Stephen L. Baldwin.


ON THE BORDER OF LIFE
Thank you on behalf of those of us who care for premature infants and their families.
I would like to add that although our attempts to replace placental function have a long way to go, there is hope.
Physicians have gone beyond experimenting with rats under water, and pioneers in Philadelphia have actually ventilated infants with liquid.
Studies are being financed at the National Institutes of Health, and there may be a day when doctors do report for work in scuba suits.
MICHAEL N. MUSCI JR., D.O.
Voorhees, N.J.


July 23-29; 115 Years Late, He Won His Bars
When Johnson Chesnut Whittaker, a former slave, became one of the first black cadets to enter West Point in 1876, his brass ring was the brass bars of a second lieutenant's commission.
Last week, his family finally got them -- nearly 115 years after the Army falsely accused him of staging a racist attack on himself and expelled him.
In a White House ceremony, President Clinton told Whittaker's descendants that he was "a pathfinder -- a man who, through courage, example and perseverance, paved the way for future generations of African-American military leaders."


Laura J. Goldberg, Steven C. Kuller
Laura Jan Goldberg, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Morton D. Goldberg of Chappaqua, N.Y., is to be married today to Steven Charles Kuller, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Lewis H. Kuller of Pittsburgh.
Rabbi Chaim Stern is to perform the ceremony at Tappan Hill in Tarrytown, N.Y.
The bride, 32, is the deputy counsel to H. William DeWeese, the Democratic leader of the Pennsylvania House of Representatives in Harrisburg.
She graduated from Hamilton College and received a law degree from American University.
Her father is a senior partner in Schwab, Goldberg, Price &amp; Dannay, a New York law firm, and is a former chairman of the American Bar Association's section on intellectual property law.


Rediscovered Cornrows
CORNROWING, the art of braiding hair into rows, is increasingly the style of choice for young male rhythm-and-blues singers like D'Angelo and rappers like Redman, Method Man and ODB of the Wu-Tang Clan.
Heather B., a rapper who owns the Nubian Nail and Hair Salon in Jersey City, says her shop has a large number of men as clients who want a variety of cornrowed styles.


SHH!
IF YOU SPEND SUMMER NIGHTS listening to car alarms and contemplating violence, you should know that there's a better way to stop the wailing.
You can become a law-abiding vigilante.
You can join the dedicated private volunteers -- think of them as a thousand points of order -- not afraid to stand up for silence.
New York's public officials love to worry about hypothetical dangers from minuscule traces of chemical pollutants, but they're strangely indifferent to noise pollution and its demonstrated effects: loss of sleep, surges in blood pressure, poor academic performance, not to mention the injuries that can be sustained while kicking out a set of headlights.
New Yorkers are forbidden to smoke in private offices and restaurants, even if it bothers no one else, but they're free to pollute a public street with a false alarm that wakes hundreds.
It's been calculated, using economists' standard assumptions about the value of people's time, that in a densely populated New York neighborhood the social costs imposed by a car alarm are greater than the value of the car itself.
So even if the alarms deterred thieves -- which they don't -- they still deserve to be outlawed here.


Bugs? Often Enough, the Hose Is the Answer
THE recent hot weather plus a prolonged drought have left an ugly mark on the green world.
Lawns are browned off, trees are dropping leaves prematurely and mildew is rampant.
Certain specimen plants are dwarfs of their usual selves.
In many cases, flowering is either off schedule or not what it should be.
Many annuals are setting seed prematurely.
Hopefully the return of cooler weather and adequate rainfall will set things right again.
Meanwhile, hoses and watering cans have been put into yeoman service.


Retirement's Worried Face
LIKE so many of his generation, Ronald McPherson switched careers in his 40's, going from social work to computers.
But the job switching and then illness shrank his once-generous pensions.
And now at age 56, Mr.
McPherson finds himself scrambling in part-time work to save enough for retirement.
"I never thought this would happen to me," he said.
Or take Fern Marx, who is 59.
She quit college to marry and raise children, but at 40 found herself divorced.
Like so many women her age in the same fix, Ms.
Marx managed to build a late-in-life career, earning $60,000 as a researcher in Wellesley, Mass.
In retirement, that will shrink to $20,000.
"I have no choice but to work into my 70's," she said.


Pigstock


Advice for a Rock Band: Stay Away From the Clubs
To the Editor:
As a rock musician who has been a partner in a record company, I found the July 23 article "The Life and Times of a Young Rock Band" yet another example of how these bands defeat their own goals and objectives at the square one level.
A simple study of rock music's commercial and social traditions reveals the golden rule missing from the "curriculum" accompanying the article: Know thy audience.


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
SLAPSTICK AND MUSIC
"Music and Merriment" is the title of an entertainment featuring Julian Sperry, flutist, and Graham Lea-Cox, pianist, composer and director of the English Performing Arts Ensemble.
They will appear at the Klein Memorial Auditorium in Bridgeport on Saturday at 8 P.M.


The Long, Shared Summer
TERRY McGUCKIN was one of the originals in the big, boxy cedar-shake Colonial house a few hundred feet from the shore in Sea Girt.
That was summer 1990.
Mary Bridget Schmid knew Terry from Bayonne High School and got into the house three or four summers ago.
Patty Hardina knew Mary Bridget from the University of Dayton, a Marianist Catholic school in Ohio.


Has Anyone Examined Artificial Reefs?
In "On Fire I., Beach Erosion Takes Heavy Toll"  [ June 25 ] , Marsha Hunter, Commissioner of the Kismet Beach Erosion Control District, is noted as remarking that a dune area which a (sand) bar protected was untouched.
It is the sandbars that protect Long Island's beaches and, especially, its dunes formed just after the Ice Age and which, once eroded, do not restore themselves, as does the lower beach with tidal sand.
Long Island's beach and dunes, the only seashore area possessed by New York State, is important to the Federal Government, as well, since it is part of the national coastline.
If the beaches and dunes are destroyed completely, as is happening on Fire Island, Long Island will no longer be able to contribute millions of dollars in taxes from recreation revenues to state and Federal Governments, as it has been doing, ever increasingly, since the 19th century.


Thrill Ride Malfunctions And Hurts 12
More than a dozen people were injured last night, including one woman whose leg was severed, when a popular centrifugal-force ride at Coney Island broke down as it was spinning, tossing at least two riders into the air and sending those inside smashing into the walls.
The ride, called the Hell Hole, employs a large wooden barrel that rotates rapidly.
When the force has pinned riders to the inside of the wall, the floor beneath them drops out.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
THE HERO'S APPRENTICE  Essays.
By Laurence Gonzales.
University of Arkansas, cloth, $24; paper, $14.
Laurence Gonzales says that by seeking out and mastering extreme situations, we transcend the instinct of fear that cloaks our true nature.
In this collection of previously published essays, Mr.
Gonzales, a magazine journalist and the author of the novel "One Zero Charlie," describes losing control of his airplane while practicing inverted flat spins, yet he writes that once he had learned to handle a flat spin, he came, somehow, to like the danger.
The author's curiosity about danger manifests itself in every piece in "The Hero's Apprentice." He straps on a helmet and a heat-reflecting jacket and steps through a wall of fire into an escalating inferno; a woman with a sprained ankle teaches him to walk a tightrope without a net; he clings, 900 feet up, to the steel skeleton of an unfinished building, as a helicopter nearly blows him over the edge; he witnesses Navy pilots attempting their first night landings on an aircraft carrier.
"The Hero's Apprentice" contains many moments of great danger, and Mr.
Gonzales searches for a lesson in each of them, making his book a surprising mix of adventure and intellect.
KEITH DIXON


Alexandra M. Sykes, Andrew S. Mills
Alexandra Mary Sykes, the daughter of Mrs.
W.
Hartwell Perry Jr. of North Stonington, Conn., and Richard M. Sykes of Mill Neck, L.I., was married yesterday to Andrew Swanson Mills, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Paul Mills of Southbridge, Mass.
The Rev.
Andrew Foster performed the ceremony at St.
Paul's Episcopal Church on Nantucket, Mass.
Mrs.
Mills graduated from Northeastern University and received a master's degree in education from Wheelock College.
Her father is the chief financial officer of the Daniel Gale Agency, realtors in Huntington, L.I.
Her stepfather retired as the director of rowing at the Kent School in Kent, Conn.


IN PERSON


PHOTOGRAPHER'S JOURNAL


The Market Is Strong for Hired Guns
Have Gun, Will Travel. Wire . . . David Cone.
Peace in the Wild West, peace in the Transvaal may have made the gun-toting mercenary passe.
But the ball-throwing variety is gaining in stature as never before.


Corrections
An article in the Connecticut Weekly last Sunday about the reaction of Greenwich residents to national news media attention misstated the town's median household income.
According to the 1990 census, it was $65,072, not $500,000, which is the median price of owner-occupied houses.


Hiroshima Films: Always a Political Fallout
CREATIVE ARTISTS OF EVERY variety have made incisive, satiric or powerful statements about nuclear threat.
They have offered cautionary works that depict the horror of the bomb or its meaning in our society.
What these artistic statements share, however, with rare exceptions, is an avoidance of the specific subject of Hiroshima.
Since September 1945, when "First Yank in Tokyo" brought the mushroom cloud to the screen, hundreds if not thousands of "nuclear" movies have appeared.
Americans have been exposed to several foreign films on the subject, most notably Akira Kurosawa's "Rhapsody in August," Shohei Imamura's "Black Rain" and, of course, Alain Resnais's classic 1959 drama "Hiroshima, Mon Amour." These films are original or highly imaginative and contain striking images.


INSIDE
MAKING IT WORK 2 The pregnant life in New York.
INSIDE QUEENS 3 The high-wire act of the 109th.
MOVIE CLOCK 15 PLAYING IN THE NEIGHBORHOOD 9 GOOD EATING 16 A tour of the West 40's SOAPBOX 17 A librarian's view of Queens.


Crime's Down, but Why? Two Views on a Pleasant Surprise
Evidence of that most unlikely of national trends, the plummeting crime rate, arrived in New Jersey last week.
The state's Uniform Crime Report for 1994, released on Thursday, contained numbers that should have every police chief from Wyckoff to Wildwood smiling.
Crime fell less in New Jersey than in the Northeast as a whole in 1994, according to the report, which is issued anually by the State Police.
But there were solid, across-the-board decreases in every major category of crime, in every type of community -- urban, suburban and rural.


Shield Against Welfare Cheats
WESTCHESTER took another step forward this month in its get-tough policy toward welfare clients.
As part of the county's ongoing effort to shake out welfare cheats, the Department of Social Services initiated a state-of-the-art electronic fingerprinting program at its district office here.
The antifraud system is being tested here on single adults and childless couples seeking home relief and is also beginning in Yonkers.
It will be expanded to other district offices in coming weeks.
The office here was chosen for the program because it receives about 15 percent of the county's applications for Home Relief, the state welfare program for single adults, Mary E. Glass, Social Services Commissioner, said.


MOVIES THIS WEEK
SOME treasured old friends return to the television roster this week.
A STREETCARE NAMED DESIRE (1951), with its haunting impact and two great performances, has a suprise if you look sharp.
It's still a photographed play, via Tennessee Williams.
But close up, again under Elia Kazan's direction, it vibrates even more than on stage, with Vivien Leigh as the doomed Southern belle and Marlon Brando (in photograph with Kim Hunter) as her brutal brother-in-law, in a superb cast.
The cumulative wallop is so strong that a softened ending gets by.
And was there ever such a lingering title? -- Saturday at 5 P.M. and 11 P.M. on American Movie Classics.
Few romantic fantasies rate the word enchanting.
Joseph L. Mankiewicz's GHOST AND MRS.
MUIR (1947) is one.
It's the story of a lonely widow (Gene Tierney) and the hovering spirit of a caustic skipper (Rex Harrison).
Their cozy interchange is wry, wistful and sweet-edged.
There are three show-stealers: that cliffside Cornwall house, Edna Best's quiet servant and Bernard Herrmann's music, evocative as sea mist -- Monday at 9 P.M. and Monday/Early Tuesday at 3:45 A.M. on Disney.


Communism in Laos: Poverty and a Thriving Elite
As Laos, a vital but virtually forgotten battleground of the Vietnam War, prepares to celebrate the 20th anniversary of its Communist "people's democracy," it remains a place of harsh inequalities.
It is a country of 4.5 million people where a small class of entrepreneurs and members of the Communist establishment has attained a level of prosperity reminiscent of the privileged life of those who benefited from French colonialism and the years of American dominance that ended with the Communist victory.


The War Was Ending. Times Square Exploded. Change Was Coming.
FOR millions of New Yorkers waiting anxiously in Times Square, World War II ended at 7:03 P.M.
Aug. 14, 1945.
At that moment, the 15,000 light bulbs on the Times Tower's zipper sign spelled out five words that touched off a tumultuous celebration: "Official -- Truman announces Japanese surrender."
After surviving years of scarcity and sacrifice, with London bombed, Paris humbled and Rome, Berlin and Tokyo occupied by foreign troops, New York had suddenly been elevated from the nation's major metropolis to the unrivaled world capital.


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: July 30, 1995
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
5
DEBT OF HONOR, by Tom Clancy. (Berkley, $7.50.) Jack Ryan and the C.I.A. vs. a Japanese plot to strike America's territory and economy.
2
6
THE ALIENIST, by Caleb Carr. (Bantam, $6.99.) A journalist and a psychologist track down a murderer in turn-of-the-century Manhattan.
3
18
THE CHAMBER, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $7.50.) A lawyer represents a racist who is on death row for his part in a 1967 bombing.
4
12
THE STONE DIARIES, by Carol Shields. (Penguin, $10.95.) The journey of a woman from childhood to motherhood through old age.
5
1
BORN IN ICE, by Nora Roberts. (Jove, $5.99.) An Irishwoman who owns a bed-and-breakfast plays host to a mystery writer from America.
6
12
REMEMBER ME, by Mary Higgins Clark. (Pocket, $6.99.) After an estranged couple reunite, they are haunted by a mysterious force.
7
40
CONGO, by Michael Crichton. (Ballantine, $6.99.) An American team seeks to discover why a group of archeologists died among ruins.
8
4
FIRST OFFENSE, by Nancy Taylor Rosenberg. (Signet, $6.99.) A probation officer whose husband is missing finds her life threatened.
9
1
REMEMBRANCE, by Jude Deveraux. (Pocket, $6.99.) A writer who was jilted finds consolation when she travels back to Edwardian England.
10
2
WHITE SHARK, by Peter Benchley. (St. Martin's, $6.50.) A marine biologist battles a mysterious underwater monster.
11
29
CIRCLE OF FRIENDS, by Maeve Binchy. (Dell, $6.50.) The coming of age of women in an Irish village and in Dublin's academia.
12
3
DOWNTOWN, by Anne Rivers Siddons. (Harper Paperbacks, $6.99.) In Atlanta during the 1960's, a woman learns about life and men.
13
1
EVERYTHING TO GAIN, by Barbara Taylor Bradford. (Harper Paperbacks, $6.99.) An act of violence destroys a woman's family life.
14
7
CHARADE, by Sandra Brown. (Warner Vision, $6.99.) Following a heart transplant, a television host finds her life enriched -- and endangered.
15
1
THE FIST OF GOD, by Frederick Forsyth. (Bantam, $6.99.) Spies, traitors and brave warriors at work during the Persian Gulf war.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
NonFiction
1
2
THE HOT ZONE, by Richard Preston. (Anchor/Doubleday, $6.99.) The discovery of the deadly Ebola virus in Virginia and the efforts to keep it from spreading.
2
5
APOLLO 13, by Jim Lovell and Jeffrey Kluger. (Pocket, $6.50.) The 1970 moon mission during which an oxygen tank exploded.
3
45
EMBRACED BY THE LIGHT, by Betty J. Eadie with Curtis Taylor. (Bantam, $5.99.) A woman's near-death experience.
4
18
REVIVING OPHELIA, by Mary Pipher. (Ballantine, $12.50.) The dangers that beset teen-age girls.
5
81
CARE OF THE SOUL, by Thomas Moore. (Harper Perennial, $12.) A psychotherapist discusses spirituality and everyday life.
6
46
MAMA MAKES UP HER MIND, by Bailey White. (Vintage, $10.) Life in a tiny Georgia town, as seen by a first-grade teacher.
7
12
MOTHERLESS DAUGHTERS, by Hope Edelman. (Delta, $12.95.) The experiences of women after the deaths of their mothers.
8*
612
THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott
Peck. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $10.95.) Inspiration.
9
124
I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS, by Maya Angelou. (Bantam, $4.99.) The poet's depiction of her childhood and adolescence.
10
33
SOUL MATES, by Thomas Moore. (Harper Perennial, $13.) Love and relationships.
11
44
HAVING OUR SAY, by Sarah L. Delany and A. Elizabeth Delany with Amy Hill Hearth. (Dell, $5.99.) Two black sisters, both of them over 100, reflect on their lives.
12*
3
THE CATCHER WAS A SPY, by Nicholas Dawidoff. (Vintage, $13.) The life of Moe Berg, big-league catcher, O.S.S. agent and lady's man.
13
6
THE KENNEDY WOMEN, by Laurence Leamer. (Ivy, $7.99.) Five generations of an American family.
14
23
MAKES ME WANNA HOLLER, by Nathan McCall. (Vintage, $12.) The life of a young black man in America.
15*
11
CREATING A NEW CIVILIZATION, by Alvin Toffler and Heidi Toffler. (Turner Publishing, $7.95.) A proposal for reshaping society.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Advice, How-To and Miscellaneous
1
44
CHICKEN SOUP FOR THE SOUL, compiled by Jack Canfield and Mark Victor Hansen. (Health Communications, $12.95.) Stories meant to "open the heart and rekindle the spirit."
2
5
TEN STUPID THINGS WOMEN DO TO MESS UP THEIR LIVES, by Laura C. Schlessinger. (Harper Perennial, $10.) Counsel by a therapist.
3
13
A 2ND HELPING OF CHICKEN SOUP FOR THE SOUL, compiled by Jack Canfield and Mark Victor Hansen. (Health Communications, $12.95.) One hundred more stories.
4
222
THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE, by Stephen R. Covey. (Fireside/S&amp;S, $12.) Principles for success.
Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending July 15, at 3,050 bookstores plus wholesalers serving 38,000 other retailers, statistically weighted to represent sales in all such outlets nationwide.
An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.


On the Civic Side of the Profit Motive
THE metal No Turns sign dangling from an overhead chain at 14th Street and Park Avenue South often flips in the wind and becomes invisible to drivers, who make the turn and get picked off by cops waiting in ambush.
Watching the sign sway, Rob Walsh said, "Sometimes I get so mad they don't fix that sign, I think I should hang out here and offer my services to drivers who get tickets."
Then came the Rob Walsh smile, that big, engaging, boyish, political smile that crinkles his tanned, handsome, puggy face.
It includes us in the absurdity of the "Mayor of Union Square" abandoning the high rollers of the current hot neighborhood to champion little people cruising in from the boroughs to buy bargains at Bradlees.


PHOTOGRAPHER'S JOURNAL


Correction
A brief article on July 16 about the restoration of the Kitano Hotel on Park Avenue at 38th Street misspelled the names of the design firm and omitted the name of the architect.
The designer is Chhada, Siembieda &amp; Partners; the architectural firm is FMA.


The Fast-Track Treadmill
To the Editor:
"Should I Have Left an Hour Earlier?" (June 18) reconfirmed my disappointment in executives who have done nothing to make the workplace more family friendly.
Sadly, baby boomers who espoused a more family-centered life have chosen accommodation with the status quo.


Remnant From a Golden Age on Broadway
EVEN in the time of Broadway musical constancy, "High Spirits" (1964-65) was something of a curio.
Neither hit nor miss, the show was propelled by idiosyncratic stars, Beatrice Lillie and Tammy Grimes, and the glitter of Noel Coward who gave the musical its source ("Blithe Spirit") and its nominal direction.
Off the record, it was Gower Champion, the director and choreographer of that season's prize-winner, "Hello, Dolly!" who spruced up the musical's staging while Coward was not allowed the credit that was rightfully his.


Philharmonic Paying Its 15th Visit to County
MUSIC under the stars -- or sun, as the case may be -- continues to be a summer attraction.
On Friday, for instance, the New York Philharmonic makes its 15th yearly pilgrimage to Westchester Community College in Valhalla.
Bobby McFerrin, the singer whose recently discovered conducting skills have brought him to the podiums of major orchestras nationwide, is the guest maestro, leading works by Faure, Bizet, Strauss, Dukas and Gershwin.


MEASURES: How to Clean The Kilogram?
The meter, based on the speed of light, is unchanging, as is the second, which is based on the oscillation of a cesium atom.
But when it comes to the kilogram, plus ca change plus ce n'est pas la meme chose.
The international standard for the kilogram is a platinum-iridium cylinder, left, kept in Paris.
Every few years (1910, 1946, 1989), the Bureau International des Poids et Mesures assembles the national standards -- similar cylinders kept in different countries -- to calibrate them against the international standard.
There is inevitable variation, in the accumulation of minute amounts of water vapor, carbon, mercury and other contaminants because the various cylinders are cleaned by hand -- by different hands, to be precise.


On Radio Show, Clinton Warns of Dangers of Cuts in Medicare
Surrounded by an invited audience of senior citizens, including his mother-in-law, President Clinton warned today that Republican plans to slow the growth of Medicare spending could push half a million elderly people into poverty by the turn of the century to finance tax cuts for the wealthy.
"We do need to protect Medicare from going bankrupt, but we don't have to bankrupt older Americans to do it," Mr.
Clinton said in his weekly radio address from the Oval Office.
"Medicare is too important to all families to become a piggy bank for just a few."


Flavor and Texture in Vietnamese Salads
SALADS are very much part of the cooking of Vietnam, much more so than in other countries of Southeast Asia.
Even their spring rolls are salad-like, made with large leaves of lettuce rolled around a filling and served cold instead of deep-fried in dough.
At Le Colonial, a Vietnamese restaurant at 149 East 57th Street in Manhattan, the salads are among the most popular dishes on the menu, even in winter, because they are so refreshing.
They are light but highly spiced, combining interesting contrasts of texture and flavor.
The chef, Viet Tran, who is from Saigon -- he worked at Indochine before going to Le Colonial -- uses traditional ingredients like fresh mint, coriander, cucumber, bean sprouts and iceberg lettuce, which adds crunch.
The salads can be prepared ahead of time and put together at the last minute, which makes them great for summer entertaining.


Nostalgia on Display, and for Sale
In this jewel of a village, dedicated to the beauty and memory of an American romance -- baseball and its Hall of Fame -- the harsh realities of modern times and the eternal frailties of man and ballplayer were evident here this induction weekend in a way they rarely were before.
Along Main Street, amid the maple and linden trees and the red geraniums hanging from flower pots on lampposts, were photographs and memorabilia in shop after shop.
Here was Babe Ruth in full, portly swing; there was gentle Christy Mathewson in that funny old Giants warm-up sweater, and here were bats, balls, hats and uniforms worn and used by Reggie and Sandy, Aaron and Seaver, Mantle and Mays, as well as three of this year's inductees, Mike Schmidt and Richie Ashburn of the Phillies and Leon Day, a Negro leagues pitcher.


MUSIC: Even Rabbis Sing the Blues
"We're just four guys getting together, praising God and playing some tunes." It's a comment that's very familiar in this country from the vast world of Christian music -- from rock to reggae.
But this time it comes from Benzion Elya Lehrer, the red-bearded and tallit-wearing lead singer of the Returning Light Band, Jerusalem's hottest Hasidic rock band.
His guitarist, Yael Taieb, is at right.
Every Saturday night -- after Sabbath -- they jam before an audience of foot-stomping yeshiva students and tourists at a 400-year-old former synagogue on Mount Zion.
In deference to ultra-Orthodox tradition, tall wooden screens separate male and female fans.


Safety vs. History on Columbia Walkways
Is great architecture in the details?
Preservationists who are angry at Columbia University for rebuilding some brick walkways think so.
Charles McKim of McKim, Mead &amp; White planned Columbia University in the 1890's, he designed walkways of hand-made brick to connect classrooms, laboratories and offices.
But Columbia is currently repaving the now uneven walkways, using bricks that are shorter, narrower, rougher and a brighter red.


Expanding System Metes Out Mashantucket Justice
A MEDICINE wheel decorated with buckskin, trade beads, hackle feathers and the face of a fox hangs on the wall of the Mashantucket Pequot tribal courtroom.
The medicine wheel and a judge's gavel, also embellished with beads and feathers, symbolize the traditions and customs that make the newly created tribal court different from non-Indian courts of law.
The opening of Foxwoods High Stakes Bingo and Casino and the breathtaking pace of its expansion -- nearly 10,000 employees have been hired since the casino opened in 1992 -- have made legal issues come to the forefront on the Mashantucket Pequot Reservation.


Red Sox, In First, Playing Catch-Up
Twenty-four hours after his club's challengers completed a whirlwind of trading activity, Dan Duquette sat in a room at the Otesaga Hotel in Cooperstown, N.Y., yesterday.
"The Red Sox are up here looking for some complete-game pitchers," the Boston general manager, in town for today's Hall of Fame induction ceremonies, said jokingly by telephone.
"They haven't been able to find them on the trade market so they're looking up in Cooperstown."


INSIDE
MAKING IT WORK 3 At the sight of a pregnant woman, the cold-hearted city thaws a bit.
One woman's story.
NEW YORKERS &amp; CO. 4 Tales from the skies: The lofty point of view of the window washers of New York.
MOVIE CLOCK 9  What's showing at the local movie houses, today through Thursday.
PLAYING IN THE NEIGHBORHOOD 12 The world's rarest primates at the Central Park Zoo; free carousel rides in Prospect Park.
GOOD EATING 12 A tour of the West 40's; the leafy and tranquil Barbetta; the simple bistro cooking of Cafe Un Deux Trois.
SOAPBOX 13 The chief Queens librarian's view of his borough.
And letters.


On the Civic Side of the Profit Motive
THE metal No Turns sign dangling from an overhead chain at 14th Street and Park Avenue South often flips in the wind and becomes invisible to drivers, who make the turn and get picked off by cops waiting in ambush.
Watching the sign sway, Rob Walsh said, "Sometimes I get so mad they don't fix that sign, I think I should hang out here and offer my services to drivers who get tickets."
Then came the Rob Walsh smile, that big, engaging, boyish, political smile that crinkles his tanned, handsome, puggy face.
It includes us in the absurdity of the "Mayor of Union Square" abandoning the high rollers of the current hot neighborhood to champion little people cruising in from the boroughs to buy bargains at Bradlees.


Lottery Prize: Permit to Paint
During years of police crackdowns that drove sidewalk artists from Greenwich Village, Times Square and Soho, many of them found refuge in Central Park.
There they set up easels to make quick portraits for pay.
But they lost that sanctuary a couple of weeks ago as the park became their latest battleground.
The police ordered the artists out and hauled one away in handcuffs on a charge of vending without a license.


Gowanus: Rougher Road Ahead; Highway Work Will Make It Worse Before It's Better
It would be hard to blame people in Sunset Park and Red Hook for wanting to turn back the clock, to reclaim western Brooklyn as it was before the soaring, noisy eyesore known as the Gowanus Expressway was rammed through their neighborhoods.
But the river of steel and concrete forced on another generation by Robert Moses in 1941 is about to become even more of an intrusion.


'Vice Versa'
To the Editor:
It is not a surprise to learn that Sir Frank Kermode, an eminent emeritus professor of belles-lettres, author of books on the Bible, the "classic" and Shakespeare, is uninterested in the topic of bisexuality and (therefore?) regards books on that topic to be unworthy of a literary scholar's attention.
What is a surprise is that The Times should have thought him an appropriate reviewer for my book "Vice Versa: Bisexuality and the Eroticism of Everyday Life" (July 9).
This is terra incognita for Kermode, as he is the first to admit.
He loudly proclaims his lack of interest and expertise in the field of human sexuality.
But he has agreed to review the book.


On Surviving a Move, Guinea Pig and All
THE guinea pig survived the move.
It was touch and go for a couple of days.
He sulked the whole weekend and wouldn't let us scratch his snout.
On Monday morning we found him limp and quiet in his cage -- kind of like a Democrat after last November's elections.
But we fed Pepper his pellets by hand, stuck the water bottle in his mouth and spoiled him with fresh alfalfa.
So Pepper came through the first week of the move.
And we did, too.
Goodbye, Bergenfield.
Hello, Upper Montclair.


Bumpy Ride: A Faster Rail Link to Manhattan Runs Into Parking Problems
Like many residents here, Vicki Herzfeld Arlein is excited about the Kearny Connection, the rail link that will offer direct access to midtown Manhattan when it opens next spring.
But like many residents here and in other communities along New Jersey Transit's Morris and Essex Line, she is far from thrilled with the idea of a giant parking garage to accommodate new commuters, right in the heart of town.


Slaying of Connecticut Infant Shifts Policy on Child Abuse
In an eight-day period this spring, three small children in Connecticut died at the hands of adults they knew.
Outraged and revolted, particularly by the rape and fatal assault of 9-month-old Emily Hernandez, Connecticut abruptly changed the way it handled child abuse cases.
Since then, the state has become far more aggressive about removing abused children from their parents and placing them in foster care.
Connecticut officials have shifted their focus from the preservation of families, backing away from the philosophy that governs child welfare in at least 35 other states, including New York and New Jersey.


A Pride of Vanderbilts
A weekend of events in Newport, R.I., salutes the centennial of the Breakers.


Corrections
A brief article on July 16 about an exhibition on the bombing of Hiroshima misstated the affiliation of sponsoring university officials.
They were from American University in Washington, not Washington University.


The Battling Borogh Presidents
Under zoning changes proposed by Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani, sex-related businesses would be prohibited from operating withing 500 feet of residences, schools and houses of worship, and within 500 feet of each other.
Ruth W. Messinger, the Manhattan Borough President, and Claire Shulman, the Queens Borough President, spoke about the issue last week.
CLAIRE SHULMAN
"The zoning as proposed works for us. Of course, we'd like the 500 feet to be 1,000. But in essence, the bottom line is that what has been proposed will protect us more than we are currently being protected and we suport it and I believe it will withstand constitutional challenges.


Harry Zimmerman, Founder of Albert Einstein College, Dies at 93
Dr.
Harry M. Zimmerman, a pioneer in the study of diseases of the nervous system in the United States and a founder of the Albert Einstein College of Medicine, died on Friday at Montefiore Medical Center in the Bronx, where he had trained a generation of neuropathologists.
Mr.
Zimmerman, who was 93, had also taught at Yale and Columbia.
In a varied career that produced hundreds of highly specialized research papers, Dr.
Zimmerman did seminal work on vitamin deficiency and the development of tumors of the nervous system at Yale in the 1930's; helped prevent the spread of parasitic diseases in the Pacific during World War II (his prescription being clean sheets), and while stationed on Guam with the Navy Medical Corps in 1945 and 1946 spurred a wave of new research into Lou Gehrig's disease when he discovered an extraordinarily high incidence of the malady among the native population.


Geography Lesson
To the Editor:
Members of the Telephone Pioneers of America, a community service organization, certainly agree with Ralph Schoenstein ("East Is: (a) West (b) North (c) I Don't Know," June 11) that kids today should know where they are.
That's why Pioneers across the United States and Canada are painting brightly colored maps, 20 by 30 feet, on school playgrounds.
Teachers will use the maps, with the states or provinces outlined but unlabeled, to make learning geography fun through games and challenges.


Corrections
A picture caption last Sunday with an article about living in Marble Hill misidentified the church shown.
It was St.
Stephen's United Methodist Church, not St.
Joseph's.


Sexual Assault Trial Puts a Chicago Congressman's Career on the Brink
Five days into the trial of a Chicago Congressman charged with sexual assault, obstructing justice and soliciting child pornography, a recording of a sexually explicit telephone conversation has cast a long shadow over the short career of a rising political star, while the woman who once claimed to be his victim sits in jail, refusing to testify.
Representative Mel Reynolds, a Democrat elected in 1992 from the Second Congressional District, is accused of having sex with Beverly Heard when she was a 16-year-old campaign volunteer, and of trying to get lurid photographs of a 15-year-old girl.


Has Anyone Examined Artificial Reefs?
Although some shortsighted individuals might disagree, maintaining the integrity of Fire Island and the other barrier islands' fronting the unpredictable Atlantic Ocean is of vital importance to the South Shore of Long Island.
Without those thin ribbons of sand, a whole lot of people and hundreds of millions of dollars of prime real estate would be placed directly in harm's way.
Powerful storms are one of life's harsh realities, and Long Island has seen its fair share of them.
One can only imagine the destruction the likes of a Hurricane Gloria might bring to the South Shore without the protective buffer.
On the other hand, the present expenditure of both government and private funds that address the problems of littoral erosion on Long Island is nothing short of being penny wise and pound foolish.
Millions of dollars are currently spent annually on beach and dune renewal projects that are nothing more than stopgap measures, which do not solve the core problem, the Atlantic Ocean.
A long-term presence requires a long-term solution.


A Visitor From Germany Studies Faces in the Subway
To the Editor:
I am a visitor from Germany, and I have come here for the fourth time because I like the people in New York.
The subway is one of my favored places here, where I can watch people's faces, so different at different times -- tired faces in rush hour, funny faces on weekends.
Your July 16 article "Behind the Subway Trance" opened the faces and gave us a great view of the life and people of the city.
BERND HENDRICKS  Manhattan


Mary DiBenedetto, David Salzman
Mary G. DiBenedetto, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Jack DiBenedetto of Port Jefferson, L.I., is to be married today to David William Salzman, the son of Edward Salzman of Holbrook, L.I., and the late Janet Salzman.
Judge Rockwell D. Colaneri of the First District Court of Suffolk County in Central Islip, L.I., is to officiate at Flowerfields, a catering establishment in St.
James, L.I.
Ms.
DiBenedetto, 32, is keeping her name.
She is a graduate of New York University, where she also received a master's degree in psychology.
She is a doctoral candidate in psychology at Fordham University.


Behind Turbochef's Miraculous Rise
TO paraphrase an old sexist cliche, it's a corporate executive's prerogative to change his -- or her -- mind.
What seems like a good idea on Tuesday might look absolutely dreadful by Thursday.
Rarely can anyone honestly question such rapid-fire strategic reversals.
Unless, of course, the change involves the purchase or sale of a corporate insider's stock.
If an insider wanted to sell one day, why on earth would the same fellow be scooping up new shares a few days later?


Village People


ON THE BORDER OF LIFE
I need to know more so that I may come to closure about Dylan.
The medical staff at the hospital issued a birth certificate.
Did a chaplain ask his parents if they desired some rite for Dylan?
Were his remains treated with dignity?
It puzzles me that nothing was said about this.
ROBERT BARCLAY JR.
Hamilton, N.J.


7 Years Later, Housing Plan Lags in Yonkers
SEVEN years after elected officials here agreed in Federal Court to remedy the practice of banishing minorities to public-housing ghettos, only 200 poor black and Hispanic families have moved from the drug-torn streets of the west side to the green tracts of the city's predominantly white east side.
Moreover, the name calling, blaming and squabbling among politicians and other civic leaders that marked the early days of the Federal desegregation lawsuit against the city continues.
After seven years, 800 units of affordable housing mandated by the court have yet to be built.


Remotely Mozart


Kate Snyder, Don King
Kate Louise Snyder, an actress, and Don Roy King, a director for CBS News, were married last evening at the Burden Mansion in New York.
Rabbi David Benedict performed the ceremony in which Msgr.
Tom Hartman took part.
Mrs.
King graduated from Georgetown University.
She is a daughter of Jean and Edward Snyder of Virginia Beach, Va.
The bride's father is the president of the Checker Flag Motor Car Company, a dealership in Tidewater, Va.


Tamara Morano, Scott Barasch
Tamara Leslie Morano, a daughter of Sam and Marian Morano of East Rochester, N.Y., is to be married today to Scott Patrick Barasch, a son of Elaine Acker of South Salem, N.Y., and Robert Barasch of Larchmont, N.Y.
The Rev.
Michael Moynihan is to perform the ceremony at St.
Michael the Archangel Roman Catholic Church in Greenwich, Conn.
Miss Morano, 29, is a product manager in New York for Springer-Verlag, the German publisher.
She graduated cum laude from Le Moyne College.


Ideas &amp; Trends; A Rage for Merit, Whatever That Is
OF all the questions that bubble around the issue of affirmative action -- questions of fairness, justice, discrimination or quotas -- perhaps none is more nettlesome than that of merit.


Corrections
A report on July 9 about the wedding of Dr.
Melanie Shulman and Marc Alan Feigen misstated the location of the St.
John's College from which the couple received master's degrees.
It is in Cambridge, England, not Cambridge, Mass.


Upscale And Kosher, as the Rebbe Suggested
"See, he just did a double take," said Tamar Elberg, pointing to a man strolling by her brother's seven-month-old restaurant.
"They do that a lot. We're out of our element."
She and her brother, Ruben Elberg, are followers of Rabbi Menachem Mendel Schneerson, the late spiritual leader known as "the Rebbe" to more than 200,000 Lubavitch Hasidim worldwide.
And Ms.
Elberg is right, the Kosher Tea Room, an upscale full-service restaurant at 12th Street and Second Avenue, is a head-turner.


NEW YORKERS &amp; CO.
Louis Vuitton's Itinerary Sends Laura Ashley Packing Laura Ashley closed its New York flagship store, at 21 East 57th Street, on Wednesday after its landlord failed to renew the lease.
The landlord, Starre Realty, hopes to use the site, between Fifth and Madison Avenues, for an office tower of 15 to 25 stories, with retail space on the ground floor.
It has also bought up the two buildings next door, 17 and 19 East 57th Street, to use as part of the high-rise parcel.
Starre is a new partnership formed by Robert Siegel, president of Metropole Realty Advisors (which had owned 21 East 57th Street), and Michael Burke, the president of Louis Vuitton, N.A.
Plans call for Louis Vuitton, the luggage maker, to close its only Manhattan store, on 57th between Madison and Park Avenues, and move into 4,600 square feet in the new building.


The Iron Duke's London House Reopens
Apsley House in London, once the home of the first Duke of Wellington, has reopened after a three-and-a-half year, $9.6 million restoration.
Built by Robert Adam between 1771 and 1778, Apsley House is also known as No. 1 London, because it was once the first house beyond the toll gate at the entrance to the city from the west.
The house and most of its contents were given to the nation by the seventh Duke of Wellington in 1947, and it was opened to the public as a museum in 1952.


Two New York Hotels Are in Transition
As one New York hotel nears the end of a major renovation, another is starting the process.
The Omni Berkshire Place, which has been closed since last July, is scheduled to reopen Oct. 15; the Roosevelt Hotel closed July 1 for at least the rest of this year.
The Omni Berkshire Place, on Madison Avenue at 52d Street, is spending more than $50 million to enlarge its guest rooms, which will number 396, including 44 suites, when the project is completed.
Previously, the hotel had 415 rooms and suites.
Standard rooms will be about 375 square feet.
Twenty rooms will be available for disabled guests.


PLAYING IN THE NEIGHBORHOOD
CENTRAL PARK  Finnish Folksters Remake the Art Form
Critics have likened it to "an atomic folk machine" and called it "possessed." Perhaps.
Whatever the case, JPP is at the forefront of several folk groups from Finland that have transformed their country's traditional music into a new art form.


Tour Fugitive
To the Editor:
The piece by Linda Wolfe was delightful, witty and quite accurate.
I should know -- I'm her cousin, and was mentioned obliquely in the story as a fellow antitour conspirator.
My complaint, a mild one, is directed at the cartoon accompanying the story.
It was cute indeed, but inaccurate.
Our esteemed tour leader, Attilla, is shown wearing a fez.
In fact, he did not wear a fez.
In Turkey today, nobody wears the fez.
You cannot even buy one on Istanbul's Street of the Fez-Makers.
As a religious symbol in a secular society, it is not permitted.
ROBERT SAXON  Princeton, N.J.


Ellen M. Weiss, Derek G. Armitage
Ellen Mary Weiss, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Hyman Weiss of Riverdale, the Bronx, is to be married today to Derek Gordon Armitage, the son of H. Clifford Armitage of Whitley Bay, England, and the late Edith Armitage.
Rabbi Burt Aaron Siegel is to officiate at the Carlyle Hotel in New York.
Ms.
Weiss was until recently a bilingual psychologist at the New York City Board of Education in Manhattan.
She graduated cum laude from Barnard College and received a master's degree in psychology from the City University of New York.


A QUESTION FOR: Robert Rulon-Miller
Q: Is there going to be a collector's market for electronic books and the "new media" in the future?
A: People are more likely to collect programmer's notes for software.
Whoever developed Wordperfect had to have some notations, and that sort of material might be collected.
But I wouldn't think that the disks themselves would be.
I suppose that when Norman Mailer leaves his archives, he will be leaving disks, and if you could get your hands on a disk that had the unfinished novel on it, that would be worth something.
The question is, would the disk itself be worth something or would the little electrons be worth something?
Norman Mailer's markings on the disk's label would certainly make it worth more.


Cloak and Dagger for the Home and Hearth
THOUGHT you could blame somebody else for that missing pint of Haagen-Dazs you polished off while watching your sister's child?
Not if your every move was captured secretly on videotape.
Thousands of people across the country are using hidden cameras and other tools of the spy trade to snoop on family members and baby sitters.


N.R.A. Criticized for Aggressive Tactics
Off to the side of the cavernous room, in the section reserved for the staff, the well-dressed woman with the laptop computer and cellular phone looked like any earnest Congressional aide working on the hearing on the 1993 assault on the Branch Davidian compound near Waco, Tex.
But as the sessions ground into their second week, Democratic staff members figured out who she was and began to grouse about it.
She was not a staff member at all, they learned, but Tammy Begun, a lawyer working for the National Rifle Association.


Senate Panel Approves Cut in Arts Agency
In keeping with the plan of House Republicans to phase out financing for the National Endowment for the Arts in two years, the Senate Appropriations Committee has approved a 40 percent cut in the arts agency's budget for next year.
The Senate panel took the action on Friday as part of a bill allotting $12.1 billion for the Interior Department and numerous independent agencies.
The House passed similar legislation in mid-July after sharply reducing financing for the arts endowment and the National Endowment for the Humanities.
Both agencies have been the target of conservatives.


He Worries After All, About Pigeonholes
HEY, ARE YOU Famous?"A passing teen-ager asked Bobby McFerrin during a photo session recently in Central Park. No, Mr. McFerrin told him, he was just having pictures taken for a family album. But his inquisitor wasn't fooled.
"You look like the 'Don't Worry, Be Happy' guy," he insisted, "except your hair didn't used to be that long."


Countdown in Atlanta: One Year to Go
ANYBODY looking for a clear early line on tickets, traffic and terminals for the Summer Olympics next year might be better off betting on what the Atlanta weather will be a year from now.
While Atlanta in mid-July to August is predictably hot and muggy, there is little that is at this moment predictable about how the city will be coping with the expected deluge of two million visitors.
But it is not for lack of trying, because planning for everything from traffic congestion to ticket availability has been going on for months and in some cases years.


Going First Class
To the Editor:
As a seasoned traveler who has flown the Atlantic over 200 times, I should have known better than to believe an advertisement about an airline.


A Short-Term Solution For the Route 31 Foul-Up
To the Editor:
Your July 23 article reported that the trucks avoiding the New Jersey Turnpike to save on toll money are creating serious safety and quality-of-life problems for the people in the communities through which they drive.
The problem is that tolls are the wrong way to finance roads.
The right way is to raise the gasoline tax.
Fairness would not be an issue, since heavier road users would inevitably pay more.
And any tax increase would be calculated to preserve our price advantage with New York and Pennsylvania.


PLAYING IN THE NEIGHBORHOOD
CENTRAL PARK  Finnish Folksters Remake the Art Form
Critics have likened it to "an atomic folk machine" and called it "possessed." Perhaps.
Whatever the case, JPP is at the forefront of several folk groups from Finland that have transformed their country's traditional music into a new art form.


Ripple Effects From Institute
"Building a Bridge for Business and Science"  [ July 9 ]  states that the Long Island Research Institute has worked with six companies.
In fact, we have worked with over 100 inventors, entrepreneurs and companies in our three-year history.
It is the Long Island Venture Fund, with which we work, that has invested in six companies.
The second point is more important.
In characterizing the effects of the research institutions on the regional economy beyond direct employment, I meant to limit my comment to a specific type of high-tech economic development.
The impacts of the institutions have, in fact, been immense -- and underappreciated.
Brookhaven National Laboratory, for example, contributes approximately $1 billion to the L.I. economy each year.
Stony Brook and North Shore Hospitals assure the highest quality of medical care.


No Headline
"Being able to be a free spirit, a free operator -- that's a luxury of the minority that I don't have anymore." -- SENATOR ALFONSE M. D'AMATO  [ 1:1. ]


NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-15  RISE OF MEXICO'S DRUG LORDS  American demand for illegal drugs has helped a new generation of Mexican traffickers to consolidate their power, carving out an ever larger share of the world's drug trade. 1


Bistro Where Food Isn't an Afterthought
BOOM BISTRO in Bridgehampton is being heralded as the newest Hampton hot spot.
This spinoff of Boom in Manhattan is striving to recreate the sexy SoHo bar scene that has made its big city brother's reputation.
Customers who arrive before 9 P.M. may wonder what the fuss is all about.
What greets them is a half-empty restaurant and waiters on automatic pilot.


Anna Holbrook, Keith Bizzack
Anna Holbrook, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John Holbrook Jr. of New York, and Keith Stephen Bizzack, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
James Bizzack of Lafayette, Calif., were married yesterday in San Francisco.
The Rev.
Terrence P. Ryan, a Roman Catholic priest, performed the ceremony at Old St.
Mary's Cathedral.
Mrs.
Bizzack, 27, and her husband, 29, graduated from the University of Colorado at Boulder.
The bride was until recently a sales assistant at Montgomery Securities in San Francisco.
The bridegroom is a civil engineer at Dillingham Construction in Los Angeles.


Coney Island Injuries
More than a dozen people were injured yesterday when a popular ride at Coney Island broke down, tossing some riders into the air and sending others smashing into the walls.
Article, page 31.


U.N. Watches Romania Violate Sanctions
Three times daily, a blue-and-white Yugoslav Airlines 727 passenger jet, its seats usually empty and carrying only a few crew members, pulls up at the out-of-the-way airport terminal here.
For the brief flight back to Belgrade, each 727 is pumped with much more fuel than it needs -- enough to fill three MIG fighter planes or three turbo-attack helicopters, according to State Department estimates.


Sanders as a Cowboy? Dallas Ponders Ways
Ask Jerry Jones about the possible acquisition of Deion Sanders and then stand back.
Jones, the Cowboys' owner and general manager, launches into a Dallas Chamber of Commerce sales pitch and a near-deification of Sanders, the free-agent cornerback who also plays baseball.
"I think we have something uniquely attractive here to offer Deion," Jones said after a recent practice at St.
Edwards College here.
"Deion being a legitimate two-sport athlete would greatly enhance his earning potential off the field here. Plus, playing for a team with the stature of the Dallas Cowboys, who are one of the leaders in retail marketing in the N.F.L. and a very popular team, would help him. A high visibility athlete could definitely benefit from that."


Flavor and Texture in Vietnamese Salads
SALADS are very much part of the cooking of Vietnam, much more so than in other countries of Southeast Asia.
Even their spring rolls are salad-like, made with large leaves of lettuce rolled around a filling and served cold instead of deep-fried in dough.
At Le Colonial, a Vietnamese restaurant at 149 East 57th Street in Manhattan, the salads are among the most popular dishes on the menu, even in winter, because they are so refreshing.
They are light but highly spiced, combining interesting contrasts of texture and flavor.
The chef, Viet Tran, who is from Saigon -- he worked at Indochine before going to Le Colonial -- uses traditional ingredients like fresh mint, coriander, cucumber, bean sprouts and iceberg lettuce, which adds crunch.
The salads can be prepared ahead of time and put together at the last minute, which makes them great for summer entertaining.


The Race to Armageddon
DARK SUN  The Making of the Hydrogen Bomb.
By Richard Rhodes.
Illustrated. 731 pp.
New York:  Simon &amp; Schuster. $32.50.


Do-It-Yourself Nature Tours in Alaska
Nature-lovers can observe the Alaskan wilderness at close range on two tours designed to take them into the depths of the state's national parks.
The Santa Barbara Botanic Garden and the California Arboretum Foundation are sponsoring an eight-day journey into Denali National Park, beginning Aug. 29.
Participants will be transported to the 15-room Northface Lodge, a retreat some 90 miles inside the park, where they can create their own daily itineraries from a roster of naturalist-escorted tours and activities like hiking or biking.Possibilities for wildlife sightings include grizzlies, caribou, moose and sandhill cranes.
Optional two-day excursions are also offered to Glacier Bay National Park, home to horned puffins, harbor seals and humpback whales, and to Sitka, former Russian capital of North America.


ON THE BORDER OF LIFE
EDITORS' NOTE: The hospital chaplain administered last rites at Dylan's bedside, and the baby was buried in the family's plot, after a brief service.


Saberhagen Shows Mets (and Others) His Stuff
Bret Saberhagen put to rest any doubts last night that he may not be sound.
Now, the only question is whether he will be wearing a Mets uniform come tomorrow at midnight.
"I'm going to be able to sleep tonight," the Mets' ace right-hander said of the coming nonwaiver trade deadline.
"I'm just kind of tired of all the trade talk. If it's going to happen, let it happen. I'll be happy when Tuesday comes around."


D'Amato Wields the Gavel, Without the Scrapper's Style
As he perches in his special seat of power as chairman of the Whitewater hearings, there is an uncharacteristic quietude about Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato that even he himself can find strange.
"Being able to be a free spirit, a free operator -- that's a luxury of the minority that I don't have anymore," said the New York Republican, hardly ruing his return to majority power, but conceding that his street instinct for political cut-and-thrust has been crimped.


ON THE BORDER OF LIFE
Our son Peter was born almost 10 years ago, weighing just over a pound.
At 25 to 26 weeks' gestational age, his eyes were fused shut, too.
Today, he is a healthy child.
He is blind in one eye because of retinopathy of prematurity and receives therapy and adaptive physical education once a week.
He plays the piano and goes to karate, and lives a normal life.
Thank God for the doctors at Brigham and Women's, at Yale New Haven (where he was born) and Bridgeport Hospital, and at teaching hospitals all over the country.
As they have tried to save smaller and smaller babies, they have succeeded in "pushing the envelope."  ELLEN KADDEN Fairfield, Conn.


Where It's Hot, Hot, Hot!
IT was just after midnight on a Saturday at the end of July, and Main Street in Bridgehampton was bustling as though it were midafternoon.
A stretch limousine double-parked outside Bobby Van's was tying up traffic outside the restaurant, where a fashionable postdinner crowd was partying hard.


Beth E. Cheney, Rick J. Mendes
Beth Ellen Cheney, a daughter of Verna and Richard A. Cheney of Mansfield Center, Conn., was married yesterday to Rick J. Mendes, a son of Clementina Mendes of West Haven, Conn., and the late Anthony Mendes.
The Rev.
Gordon Rankin performed the ceremony at the First Congregational Church in Madison, Conn.
Ms.
Cheney, who is keeping her name, is a nurse practitioner and the clinical manager in the department of internal medicine at Yale University Health Services in New Haven.
She is also a clinical instructor in adult and family nursing at Yale University.
The bride graduated from the University of Rochester and received a master's degree in nursing from Yale.


Plan for High-Rise on Last Undeveloped Parcel in Long Beach Starts Dispute
A FIVE-ACRE oceanfront site in Long Beach is setting off a controversy.
Residents, city officials and developers have differing ideas of what to do with the last undeveloped parcel in the city.
Some real-estate experts have estimated it that it is worth as much as $13 million.
The land, known as the "superblock," is between Riverside and Long Beach Boulevards, East Broadway and the Ocean Beach Park Boardwalk.
Five parties now own it.


An Irish Bishop's Words on Priestly Celibacy Prompt a Furor
A prominent Roman Catholic bishop has been ordered to the Vatican next month to explain his insistence that the church in Ireland should have an open debate on the requirement of celibacy for priests.
The dispute has set off widespread contention in Ireland, where 95 percent of the country's 3.5 million people are members of the church.
It has been front-page news since early June as the bishop, Brendan Comiskey, and the Primate of Ireland, Cahal Cardinal Daly, have exchanged volleys in newspaper articles and interviews.
Call-in radio shows have taken hundreds of calls on the issue.


Blocking A Co-op's Sale
To the Editor:
Your article on June 25 about setting floor prices for a co-op and headed "Blocking Co-op Sales" demonstrates the paranoia affecting many co-op boards and their shareholders regarding co-op prices.
They appear to have overlooked the fact that the value of anything is determined eventually by supply and demand.
The low selling price of a given unit does not create the market, but is rather a product of market forces.


The Nation; The Budget Knife Boomerangs Home
FOR many people here, this has been one of the saddest and most anxious weeks of waiting in decades.
The largest county government in America, is facing a potentially disastrous budget gap, and the Los Angeles County supervisors are deciding how to dismantle not just their social, health and other services, but their ideal of what a government should be.
It appeared that nearly 40 walk-in clinics, spread mostly in poor neighborhoods, would disappear.
More than 15,000 county workers would lose their jobs and many social and welfare programs probably would be slashed beyond recognition.


Bedfellows


Catherine C. Huse, Preston F. Crow
Catherine Chandler Huse, the daughter of Ronald and Viola Huse of Allendale, N.J., was married yesterday to Preston Fletcher Crow, a son of Stanley and Donna Crow of Boise, Idaho.
The Rev.
Thomas Ward officiated at the West Side Presbyterian Church in Ridgewood, N.J.
Mrs.
Crow, 25, teaches the fifth grade at the Manito Elementary School in Oakland, N.J.
She graduated magna cum laude from Dartmouth College, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa.
Her parents own the Kerygma Gallery, a contemporary art gallery in Ridgewood.


Lyrical Sentiment
To the Editor:
James R. Oestreich's otherwise excellent article "At Peace in the Lonely Realm of the Oboe"  [ July 9 ]  neglected to mention Sylvia Fine's trenchant opinion of that remarkable instrument in her hilarious patter song "Anatole of Paris," as sung by her husband, the comedian Danny Kaye:
An oboe, it is clearly understood, Is an ill wind that no one blows good.
LEONARD KIAN  Grand Rapids, Mich.


Speak Up for Harry Wu
China now claims that the American human rights activist Harry Wu has confessed to falsifying information in two television documentaries on the Chinese prison system.
The claims, made in a report by China's official news agency, Xinhua, and a videotape sold to news agencies by a state-affiliated firm, cannot be independently assessed at this point.
The tape shows a haggard Mr.
Wu telling four interrogators that a number of scenes in the British Broadcasting Corporation programs were falsely or misleadingly identified.
But nowhere does he say that he was personally involved in any misrepresentations in the broadcasts.
Nor does he admit to the more serious charge of espionage on which he is now being held.
The BBC defends the accuracy of its two programs and plans a detailed rebuttal.


A Short-Term Solution For the Route 31 Foul-Up
To the Editor:
As a commuter who regularly travels Interstate 287, it was obvious when the northern stretch was opened that truckers would use it to avoid tolls on the New Jersey Turnpike, with the resulting overcrowding of Route 31 in Hunterdon and Mercer Counties ("Truckers Carve a New Route, Crowding a Two-Lane Road," July 23).
Since the politicians and highway engineers seem at a loss to deal with this mess, here is a modest proposal for a short-term solution.


Miss Hildreth And Mr. Scully
Elizabeth Anne Hildreth, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Ronald B. Hildreth of Garden City, L.I., was married on Friday to Joseph Percival Scully, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
James F. Scully, also of Garden City.
The Rev.
Richard F. Delaney performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at the Church of St.
Joseph in Garden City.
Mrs.
Scully, 27, graduated from the University of New Hampshire.
She is the advertising sales manager at Hoke Communications Inc., a publisher of trade magazines in Garden City.
Her father is a partner at Brumbaugh, Graves, Donahue &amp; Raymond, a law firm in New York, and is also an adjunct professor at the St.
John's University School of Law in Queens.


Cathleen A. Quinn, Andrew A. Cole
Cathleen Anne Quinn, the daughter of Alice and Richard W. Quinn of East Patchogue, L.I., was married yesterday to Andrew Alexander Cole, the son of Ellen Williams and and George W. Cole, both of Brookhaven, L.I.
The Rev.
Helena Chapin performed the Unitarian ceremony in North Hero, Vt., at the house of the bridegroom's mother and his stepfather, Thomas B. Williams.
Mrs.
Cole, 23, is the manager of Gazelle, a clothing boutique in Madison, Wis.
She graduated from Geneseo College.
Her father teaches English at Patchogue-Medford High School in Patchogue, L.I.
Her mother teaches the first grade at the Kreamer Street Elementary School in Bellport, L.I.


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
FILM DISCUSSIONS
Mount Kisco and Mamaroneck have been chosen as the locations of three New York Film Salons.
Harking back to the literary, musical and art salons of Europe in the 18th and 19th centuries and the Algonquin Round Table of the 1920's in New York, these get-togethers are inspired solely by movies.
Jackie Lent, the New Yorker who produces these and other cultural events for adults, has run 40 film salons in Manhattan.
A list of almost three dozen films used to fuel the fires of discourse include "The Age of Innocence," "Shadowlands," "Forrest Gump," "Muriel's Wedding," "Priest," "Crumb," "The Bridges of Madison County" and "Il Postino."


Fifty Years Later, Still the Day After
THE MANY TELEVISION programs surrounding the anniversary of the dropping of an atomic bomb on Hiroshima, Japan, confirm that the questions left by the Aug. 6, 1945, blast are at least as long-lived as radioactive fallout.
Did the atomic bomb have to be used in the way it was, where it was?
Did it have to be used at all?
After a half-century, the dispute rages.
In recent months, a Smithsonian Institution exhibition on the Enola Gay, the American airplane that carried the bomb, was severely cut back after protests by veterans' groups and members of Congress who contended that the show was loaded against the United States.


Young, Carefree and in Love With Cigarettes
Fifteen-year-old Amber Davis took a long drag on a Marlboro Light, rocking in a swing as the sun set and she surveyed the bedlam of carnival rides and live rock music at the Great Texas Mosquito Festival, an annual bash in this Gulf Coast refinery town.
"It's a social thing, I guess," the freckle-faced Miss Davis said of her smoking habit -- currently 10 cigarettes or so a day.
"And besides," she said, gesturing to the lighted Marlboro, "I'd like to be a model. This burns off a lot of calories."


Jennifer Adams, Robert Traenkle
Jennifer Adams, the daughter of Eileen Meldrum and the stepdaughter of Bernard R. Meldrum of New York, was married yesterday to Robert Kurt Traenkle, the son of Christine and Robert H. Traenkle of Furlong, Penn.
The Rev.
Louis Padovano officiated at St.
Joseph of Yorkville Roman Catholic Church in New York.


High Court Ends Appeals By Tenants
The United States Supreme Court has refused to hear an appeal to safeguard the rent of nine tenants who live at Federally owned apartment building on East 57th Street.
Tenant advocates say the decision is significant because it is the first time that a Federal agency has been allowed to suspend state-established rent control.


New Face in the Urban Jungle
THOSE funny faces staring back at you in the Central Park Zoo's rain forest exhibit are the city's latest addition to its urban jungle: four black lion tamarin monkeys, among the world's rarest primates.
The adult tamarins, two males and two females, were born in Brazilian zoos and arrived last week at the Central Park Wildlife Center/Zoo, which is the first North American zoological park to join international conservation efforts to save this species.
But the zoo isn't taking all the credit.


Curtain Raisers In the West 40's
CAFE UN DEUX TROIS *  (212) 354-4148; 123 West 44th Street; $$; all major credit cards
The atmosphere here is as close as you will get to a fashionably threadbare and lively French brasserie, and the simple bistro cooking remains reliably satisfying.
The short, straightforward menu includes starters of country pate, ravioli Provencal, baked snails in garlic butter and a mixed green salad with a good vinaigrette.
Among the main courses are a nicely done charred steak with pommes frites; steak tartare with a piquant taste of Tabasco, also served with fries; warm roasted chicken; calf's liver served with grilled onions, and your choice of omelets.
For dessert, creme caramel and profiteroles are both good. (Review: 4/5/91; revisited: 6/2/95)  CARMINE'S *  (212) 221-3800; 200 West 44th Street; $; American Express
With its sand-colored walls festooned with publicity photos, whirling fans overhead and neighborly tables, Carmine's dining room looks as if it has been around since vaudeville days.
The kitchen turns out a pleasing mix, essentially Neapolitan, with everything served family style.
Pizettes, or little pizzas, are a good way to begin.
Toppings change daily and might include fennel sausage, tomato, garlic and mozzarella.
Other pleasing starters are the enormous plate of fried calamari served with a tomato dipping sauce, and a mixed salad platter combining greens, mozzarella, tomatoes and roasted peppers.
Popular entrees include rigatoni with sausage and broccoli in a ripe tomato sauce; porterhouse steak topped with an earthy sauce of tomatoes, sweet peppers and onions; grilled swordfish; a grilled pork chop and lobster fra diavolo with shrimp and clams in a spicy sauce over linguine. (Review: 9/25/92)  CHEZ JOSEPHINE **  (212) 594-1925; 414 West 42d Street; $$; all major credit cards
On any given night, this theatrical bistro rivals some of the most entertaining productions on and off Broadway.
You never know when someone will burst into song or hammer out show tunes on the piano.
The earthy bistro fare is prepared with care.
For starters, the Chinese ravioli with goat cheese and toasted pine nuts is always pleasing, as are baked snails in garlic butter, and salad of endive with crumbled Roquefort and walnuts.
This 27-year-old brick-walled tavern has always been known for its buoyant bar scene and simple American fare.
Framed Broadway posters and other theater memorabilia make up the decor, and the dining room is separated from the bar by brick arches.
Salads are a good way to begin, whether the sprightly assembly of grilled portobellos, tender spinach and sweet fennel or the generous plate of endive, watercress, Roquefort and walnuts tossed in a well-balanced vinaigrette.
Other starters include black bean soup, asparagus vinaigrette and fried chicken wings.
For main courses, the kitchen turns out a perfect calf's liver with steamed spinach and buttery whipped potatoes, nicely charred sirloin steak with crispy fries, grilled lamb chops with ratatouille, meatloaf with mashed potatoes and a good house burger. (Review: 8/19/88; revisited: 7/20/95)
LATTANZI *  (212) 315-0980; 361 West 46th Street; $$; American Express
A welcoming family-run restaurant in the heart of Restaurant Row, Lattanzi delivers fresh, tasty pasta and sprightly salads in a low-key setting.
One of the highlights is a menu featuring the cuisine from the ancient Jewish ghetto in Rome.
The best-known dish from that tradition is carciofi alla giudea, or tender artichokes sauteed with garlic and parsley.
Other good starters include a tasty shrimp and arugula salad vinaigrette and a combination plate of eggplant that is first fried then marinated in a sweet combination of vinegar, sugar, olive oil and tomatoes.
The plate also includes fresh mozzarella and suppli al telefono, a Roman specialty that is essentially a ball of mozzarella coated with a risottolike mixture, then rolled in bread crumbs and fried.
Recommended pastas include porcini ravioli, and herby linguine with white clam sauce.
Among the entrees are grilled lamb chops with rosemary and braised shanks of beef with polenta. (Review: 6/23/89; revisited: 7/17/95)  LE MADELEINE


Olivia W. Sala, Danny M. Hodges
Olivia Wendie Sala, a daughter of Giuliana L. Sala of Boynton Beach, Fla., and the late Dr.
A.
William Sala, was married yesterday to Danny Mack Hodges, a son of Sybil N. Hodges of Virginia Beach, Va., and the late Johnnie Lee Hodges.
The Rev.
Scott A. Werner, a Baptist minister, performed the nondenominational ceremony at the Breakers in Palm Beach, Fla.
Ms.
Sala, who is keeping her name, is a lawyer and the director of employment relations at the MBL Life Assurance Corporation, an insurance company in Newark.
She graduated from Manhattanville College and received a master's degree in communications from Hunter College.
She received her J.D. degree from Seton Hall University.


Heather A. Lowry, Douglas Cundey
Heather Ann Lowry, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Austin Clark Lowry of Ithaca, N.Y., was married there yesterday to Douglas Haigh Cundey, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
A.
Haigh Cundey of Essex Fells, N.J.
The Rev.
John A. Taylor performed the Unitarian ceremony in Sage Chapel on the campus of Cornell University.
Mrs.
Cundey, 26, is an account executive at Dewe Rogerson Inc., a public relations company in New York.
She graduated from Cornell, where her father, now retired, was an agricultural economist.
Her mother, Suzanne Lowry, is a home economics teacher at Ithaca High School.


High-Fashion Frolic
STANLEY Donen's FUNNY FACE (1957) is summer caviar, sprinkled with golden Gershwin and stardust: Audrey Hepburn as a bookshop mouse transformed into a glamorous model, Fred Astaire as a magazine photographer and Kay Thompson (in photo, left, with Astaire and Hepburn) as the magazine's madcap editor.
Musical numbers like Thompson's opening "Think Pink" and the trio's "Bonjour, Paris!" from Roger Edens and Leonard Gershe also sparkle.
SUNDAY at 8:30 P.M. and SUNDAY/EARLY MONDAY at 2 A.M. on AMC.
Howard Thompson


Tour Fugitive
To the Editor:
It's unfortunate that readers were subjected to such a biased article as Linda Wolfe's "Fugitive From a Tour Group" (June 4).


Wiggles Wiggles Out of Bankruptcy


A Father's Gift, a Mother's Victory
IT was a meeting of two people whose lives might never have crossed but for a strange constellation of timing, tragedy and fate.
On one side was a father who experienced the tragic death of his daughter.
On the other was a young woman who saw her own dreams for the future evaporating when she faced an unexpected pregnancy in high school.
Despite the darker circumstances that brought them together, the day they met was one of hope and regeneration.


Bonilla Off to a Slow Start With Orioles
White Sox 7, Orioles 4
Bobby Bonilla failed to hit a ball out of the infield last night in his debut with Baltimore, and the Chicago White Sox received two homers from the ex-Oriole Mike Devereaux in a 7-4 victory at Camden Yards.


Sidewalk Cafes Combat The City's Suburbanization
To the Editor:
As the spokeswoman for the Second Avenue Merchants Association, I beg to differ with Kate Walter's indictment of outdoor cafes in the July 2 Soapbox essay "A Pox on Their Sidewalk Tables."


Adriana Lleras and Todd Muney
Adriana Lleras Salazar, the daughter of Helena Salazar Villa of Bogota, Colombia, and Fernando Lleras de la Fuente of Paris, was married on Friday to Todd Stephen Muney, a son of Nancy and Roger Muney of Auburndale, Queens.
Richard J. McCord, the administrative judge of the City Court of Glen Cove, L.I., officiated at the Swan Club in Glenwood Landing, L.I.
Mrs.
Lleras-Muney, 21, received an associate degree from the University of Paris.
She is to begin her senior year at Louisiana State University in August.
Her father is a Colombian minister plenipotentiary in Paris.
Her mother is a translator of Spanish and English in Bogota.


BEST SELLERS: July 30, 1995
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
1
MEMNOCH THE DEVIL, by Anne Rice. (Knopf, $25.) The vampire Lestat is snatched from the world by a mysterious adversary who claims to be the Devil.
2
1
3
BEACH MUSIC, by Pat Conroy. (Talese/Doubleday, $27.50.) An American living in Rome returns to South Carolina and tries to cope with his troubled past.
3
1
LIGHTNING, by Danielle Steel. (Delacorte, $24.95.) The happy marriage of a lawyer and her husband is suddenly changed after she gets a routine checkup.
4
3
155
THE BRIDGES OF MADISON COUNTY, by Robert James Waller. (Warner, $17.95.) A photographer and a farmer's lonely wife in Iowa.
5
2
5
ROSE MADDER, by Stephen King. (Viking, $25.95.) Fleeing an abusive husband, a woman seeks happiness in a strange city by creating her own myth.
6
4
14
THE RAINMAKER, by John Grisham. (Doubleday, $25.95.) A young man barely out of law school tries to expose a corporation's multibillion-dollar scam.
7
6
74
THE CELESTINE PROPHECY, by James Redfield. (Warner, $17.95.) An ancient manuscript, found in Peru, provides insights into achieving a fulfilling life.
8
5
5
THE WITNESS, by Sandra Brown. (Warner, $21.95.) A public defender who seems happy in her work and her marriage is plunged into a morass of bigotry and hate.
9
9
3
DISNEY'S POCAHONTAS. (Mouse Works, $6.98.) The romance of an American Indian princess and an Englishman, told in words and pictures.
10
8
12
LET ME CALL YOU SWEETHEART, by Mary Higgins Clark. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $24.) An unusual murder case haunts a prosecutor's career and her private life.
11
7
9
THE APOCALYPSE WATCH, by Robert Ludlum. (Bantam, $24.95.) Tracking a neo-Nazi movement with designs on American and European officials.
12
1
DANGEROUS TO KNOW, by Barbara Taylor Bradford. (HarperCollins, $24.) A journalist investigates the death of her former husband, a philanthropist.
13
10
58
POLITICALLY CORRECT BEDTIME STORIES, by James Finn Garner. (Macmillan, $8.95.) Classic tales respun to avoid offending current sensibilities.
14
11
14
LADDER OF YEARS, by Anne Tyler. (Knopf, $24.) At 40, a woman leaves her physician husband and children to start a new life in a strange town.
15
12
11
ONCE UPON A MORE ENLIGHTENED TIME, by James Finn Garner. (Macmillan, $9.95.) Eight more "politically correct bedtime stories."
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Nonfiction
1
1
3
TO RENEW AMERICA, by Newt Gingrich. (HarperCollins, $24.) The Speaker of the House describes his solutions to the country's problems.
2
2
6
NEW PASSAGES, by Gail Sheehy. (Random House, $25.) How changing social conditions and longer life expectancies are affecting our lives.
3
3
73
MIDNIGHT IN THE GARDEN OF GOOD AND EVIL, by John Berendt. (Random House, $23.) The mysterious death of a young man in Savannah, Ga.
4
5
9
SPONTANEOUS HEALING, by Andrew Weil. (Knopf, $23.) The ways in which the body heals itself.
5
4
6
A GOOD WALK SPOILED, by John Feinstein. (Little, Brown, $23.95.) A sportswriter reports on the P.G.A.
Tour in 1993 and 1994.
6
7
31
SISTERS.
Essays by Carol Saline.
Photographs by Sharon J. Wohlmuth. (Running Press, $27.50.) The relationships of 36 sets of sisters.
7
6
9
DAVE BARRY'S COMPLETE GUIDE TO GUYS, by Dave Barry. (Random House, $21.) A humorist explains the strange ways of a species of males called "guys."
8
14
7
SLEEPING AT THE STARLITE MOTEL, by Bailey White. (Addison-Wesley, $20.) A Georgia schoolteacher tells about her adventures while traveling and at home.
9
9
PAULA, by Isabel Allende. (HarperCollins, $24.) The novelist tells stories of her family's life as she tends her fatally ill daughter.
10
9
24
THE DEATH OF COMMON SENSE, by Philip K. Howard. (Random House, $18.) How governmental rules and regulations are fettering the lives of all Americans.
11*
1
THE EAGLE AND THE ROSE, by Rosemary Altea. (Warner, $19.95.) An English psychic tells of her struggle to come to terms with who she really is.
12
11
3
WHEN ELEPHANTS WEEP, by Jeffrey Moussaieff Masson and Susan McCarthy. (Delacorte, $23.95.) The emotional lives of animals.
13
10
84
THE BOOK OF VIRTUES, by William J. Bennett. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $30.) Moral stories adapted from the Greeks, the Bible, folklore and elsewhere.
14*
1
SLEEPERS, by Lorenzo Carcaterra. (Ballantine, $23.) The true story, the narrator claims, of four boys in an upstate New York reformatory and the revenge they later take on one of their tormentors.
15
8
42
THE HOT ZONE, by Richard Preston. (Random House, $23.) The discovery of the deadly Ebola virus in Virginia and the efforts to keep it from spreading.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous
1
1
114
MEN ARE FROM MARS, WOMEN ARE FROM VENUS, by John Gray. (HarperCollins, $23.) Communicating.
2
2
19
THE SEVEN SPIRITUAL LAWS OF SUCCESS, by Deepak Chopra. (Amber-Allen/New World Library, $14.) How to "generate wealth in all its forms."
3
3
11
HOW TO ARGUE AND WIN EVERY TIME, by Gerry Spence. (St. Martin's, $22.95.) A lawyer describes ways to win arguments at home and at work.
4
4
11
MARS AND VENUS IN THE BEDROOM, by John Gray. (HarperCollins, $22.) Maintaining passion.
Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending July 15, at 3,050 bookstores plus wholesalers serving 28,000 other retailers (gift shops, department stores, newsstands, supermarkets), statistically weighted to represent sales in all such outlets nationwide.
An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
And Bear in Mind (Editor's Choices of other recent books of particular interest) BEHIND THE WHEEL AT CHRYSLER: The Iacocca Legacy, by Doron P. Levin. (Harcourt Brace, $25.) A Detroit reporter interprets Chrysler under Lee Iacocca's management as a company far better at making sales and deals than cars.
THE ENGINE OF REASON, THE SEAT OF THE SOUL: A Philosophical Journey Into the Brain, by Paul M. Churchland. (Bradford/MIT, $29.95.) A philosopher's argument, clear, witty and scientifically up-to-date, that all of human mental life, however subjective it feels, is reducible to material activity taking place in the brain.
GALATEA 2.2, by Richard Powers. (Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux, $23.) Ingenious, ambitious and cerebral, this novel concerns a novelist (same name as the author's) who works to perfect a machine intelligence that can learn literature and sustain belief in purpose and meaning.
HANGING UP, by Delia Ephron. (Putnam, $23.95.) A compassionate, funny, satisfying first novel whose heroine and narrator can cope with anything but her awful father, who's an alcoholic, a manic-depressive and not very nice besides.
JOHN SLOAN: Painter and Rebel, by John Loughery. (John Macrae/Holt, $37.50.) A thoughtful, absorbing life of an illustrious member of "The Eight," artists who rebelled against the stodgy academic standards of American art at the beginning of this century.
THE LIARS' CLUB: A Memoir, by Mary Karr. (Viking, $22.95.) A haunting memoir of growing up in East Texas while trying to figure one's parents out, especially a hugely enigmatic mother who says little, reads Camus and Sartre and tries to throw herself from cars while drunk.
MOVING VIOLATIONS: War Zones, Wheelchairs, and Declarations of Independence, by John Hockenberry. (Hyperion, $24.95.) Swaggering in a wheelchair isn't easy, but this candidly aggressive National Public Radio correspondent is up to the job (or any other).
MY OLD MAN AND THE SEA: A Father and Son Sail Around Cape Horn, by David Hays and Daniel Hays. (Algonquin, $19.95.) And so they do, round trip from New London, Conn., becoming better, wiser and more loving people en route but never overloading a marvelous sailing yarn.
SECRET LIFE: An Autobiography, by Michael Ryan. (Pantheon, $25.) The biggest secret was Mr.
Ryan's sex addiction, from which he says he is recovering; this disturbing, amazingly risky work of self-exposure by an accomplished poet is a portrait of the artist as a young misfit.
SKINNED ALIVE: Stories, by Edmund White. (Knopf, $23.) Lovely, casually unfolding stories, edited from fugitive memories pulled together under the author's sense of mortality and of gay relationships as inherently impermanent.
THERAPY, by David Lodge. (Viking, $22.95.) An exceedingly funny novel (the author's 10th) of midlife crisis, whose 58-year-old hero, Tubby, is an awfully nice guy but unhappy in a vague way that none of his many therapies seem to help.


Giants' Randolph Carves Out His Corner
Thomas Randolph was asked if last season he was a tad cocky.
"I'm cocky last year, this year, every year," he said today, "and I'm going to be cocky. That's the position I play. You can't be passive. You can't let people run you over and dog you. This is my corner, my island. You aren't going to get on my island. That's the attitude I have. You aren't scoring on me. So, yes, I'm cocky."


Hearings in Congress Draw Fans to the TV
Diners at the Varsity, this city's landmark fast-food restaurant just north of downtown, have a choice of five television rooms where they can have their chili dogs, onion rings and frosted orange drinks with side helpings of soap operas, talk shows or, on these hot July days, Congressional hearings on Whitewater and Waco.
"I'm interested in them because you don't get the clear facts by reading about it or listening to what politicians say about it," said Edward Lloyd, a 51-year-old air-conditioning technician from Marietta who, working in Atlanta for the last few days, has been visiting the restaurant as much for the television fare as for the lunch.


POSTINGS: It's One of the Biggest, 393 Feet Tall; At Navy Yard, The Crane Is Flying
Building the $400 million Brooklyn Navy Yard Cogeneration power plant is a big job, and it's taking one of the biggest cranes in the world to do it.
"It's the first time the city ever certified a crane this large," said Robert F. Bitteker, the site manager.
"You can build a small skyscraper with it."


Susan Smith Verdict Brings Relief to Town
Every day at 12:25 P.M., the local radio station broadcasts obituaries of the county's dead.
People here say the program is one of the most popular, because it tells who is still among them, and who is not, in a way that is respectful and concise.
The murder trial of Susan Smith turned that small-town custom on its head, making the drowning of two little boys a centerpiece of daily life in Union for too long.


Open House
WILLIAM TURNBULL JR.
KNOWS ABOUT NATURE AND ARCHITECTURE.
Thirty years ago, he was one of the designers (along with the late Charles Moore) of Sea Ranch, a cluster of shingled beach sheds so essentially modest and in sync with their environment that they redefined the meaning of vacation architecture.
Turnbull hasn't lost his knack for squeezing high drama out of simple structures.
Only this time, instead of condos on windswept bluffs overlooking the Pacific, he has built a more idiosyncratic retreat for his family burrowed into a sloping valley of Northern California.
Here, even the view from the kitchen sink (of the rugged peaks of Mount St. Helena) is spectacular.


Honors Studies Shine at Community College
GINO SCALABRINI, 21, planned to major in accounting when he entered Westchester Community College in 1992, but he became fascinated with political science after taking courses in the honors program.
He has just completed his junior year at Dartmouth College in Hanover, N.H., where he is majoring in government.
Each year about 100 students take part in the honors program at Westchester Community College in Valhalla.
Many of them credit that program with introducing them to new subjects and stimulating their interest in college-level work.


July 23-29; Mopping Up After an Oil Spill


An Intimate Network Meets Women's Needs
CAN a sense of community be created in a bookstore?
The 46 members of Connections, a women's networking group that began in September, think it can.
Each month, women from Briarcliff Manor, Ossining, Croton-on-Hudson and beyond meet at Books and Things, a Briarcliff bookstore, to share business and professional, community and social interests.
Guest speakers discuss diverse topics like networking for job seekers, analyzing women's role in politics and reassessing the role of women after the American Revolution.


Susan Kuran, Matthew Lodge
Susan Lori Kuran, a daughter of Karen and Richard Kuran of East Pond, Me., was married yesterday to Matthew John Lodge, a son of Margaret and Gerald Lodge of Franklin Lakes, N.J.
The Rev.
Royal J. Parent, a Roman Catholic priest, officiated at Our Lady Queen of Peace Church in Boothbay Harbor, Me.


Don Carpenter, 64, a Novelist Who Wrote About Bleak Lives
Don Carpenter, a novelist and sometime screenwriter whose unflinching examinations of disheveled lives won more critical acclaim than popular favor, took his life on Thursday in a tiny, cluttered apartment in Mill Valley, Calif., where he had lived, worked, raged, exulted and suffered for the last 15 years.
He was 64.
Hailed as a serious literary figure from the moment his first novel, "Hard Rain Falling," was published in 1966, Mr.
Carpenter, whose later works included "Blade of Light" (1968), "Getting Off," (1971), "A Couple of Comedians," (1979) and the movie "Payday," (1973), had not published a novel in six years.


Beyond the Fine Prose: the Stuff of the Writer's Life
GREAT RESEARCH LIBRARIES are expected to own great books and documents.
When the New York Public Library displays, say, its manuscript of T. S. Eliot's "Waste Land," it's business as usual.
Less well known, however, is that distinguished libraries often possess remarkable objects: the hair, teeth, bones, shoes, glasses, luggage, desks and bizarre personal effects of famous writers.
The New York Public Library owns Howard Moss's plastic pencil sharpener and fragments of Percy Shelley's skull.
It also owns Elizabeth Barrett Browning's slippers, which do, in fact, explain something about her life.
Measuring nine inches long and, at their narrowest, one inch wide, they seem way too small for feet that could support a standing adult.
"We figured out why she never got off the sofa," said Lisa Brower, acting curator of the library's Berg Collection.


ON THE BORDER OF LIFE
I suffered through dark memories while reading Darcy Frey's " 'Does Anyone Here Think This Baby Can Live?' " (July 9), but I believe that the physicians involved in this situation conducted themselves with wisdom, grace and sensitivity.
In 1980, I gave birth to a 1-pound, 12-ounce baby at a major teaching hospital in New York City.
Had I been informed of the very real risks of permanent, devastating handicaps possible in babies of this small size, I may have changed many of the aggressive, medical decisions I then approved.


News Gathering; The Press: Bought and Sold And Gray All Over
THE Gannett Company, the biggest newspaper company in the country, bought another 11 daily newspapers last week.
Gannett already owned 82 dailies with a total daily circulation of more than 5.8 million.
Not long ago, sales of newspapers to business behemoths had journalists and critics anguishing loudly about concentration of media power in a few grasping hands.
Yet Gannett's purchase of Multimedia Inc. of Greenville, S.C., barely provoked a peep of protest.


Custom Tours Explore Berlin's Culture
Visitors to Berlin who are interested in the city's cultural offerings can arrange customized tours and meetings with people in the fields of music, literature, art and architecture through a service called Culture Trip.
An itinerary prepared for supporters of the Museum of Modern Art in New York, for example, begins with a briefing on the political and cultural ramifications of German unification.


CLINTON AND DOLE BIDDING TO BREAK WELFARE IMPASSE
President Clinton and Bob Dole, the Senate Republican leader, will offer competing proposals on Monday to overcome a political impasse that has stalled welfare legislation for two months.
The two men are scheduled to outline their proposals in speeches to the National Governors' Association, meeting in Burlington, Vt.
Gov.
Tommy G. Thompson of Wisconsin, a Republican who is the group's incoming chairman, said he would work to line up support for Mr.
Dole's plan.


'Vice Versa'
To the Editor:
Frank Kermode's bumptious review of Marjorie Garber's "Vice Versa" alternately sniggers and snorts but never gets its old-boy prose around any (not a one) of the points made in that brilliant and central book.
Kermode may be as out of sympathy with cultural studies as the G. L. Kittredge and Harry Levin school he cites -- and as ignorant.
But Kittredge and Levin have the excuse of being dead.


Residential Resales
In the following reports, the "listed at" price is the asking price when negotiations began that ended in the sale.
Time on market is from most recent listing to contract.
MANHATTAN
BATTERY PARK CITY  $325,000
250 South End Avenue  (Hudson View East)  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,195-sq.-ft. penthouse condo in a 8-year-old building; concierge, dining area, terrace, Hudson River view; common charge $1,348; taxes $6,636, listed at $350,000, 3 weeks on market (Broker: Innovation Group)  GREENWICH VILLAGE  $356,500
155 Perry Street  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,160-sq.-ft. condo in a loft building; elevator, fireplace, 12-ft. ceilings, wide-plank pine floors, south exposure; common charge $289; taxes $6,480, listed at $379,000, 44 weeks on market (Broker: Debra Kameros)  HAMILTON HEIGHTS  $400,000
452 West 144th Street  7-bedroom, 4 1/2-bath, 2-family, 4 1/2-story Dutch-Flemish rowhouse to be used as a one-family residence; dining room, dressing room, 21- by 8-ft. roof deck, 11-ft. ceilings, 10 stained-glass windows, parquet floors, landmark district; taxes $1,716, listed at $450,000, 22 weeks on market (Broker: Willie Katryn Suggs)  UPPER EAST SIDE  $316,875
171 East 84th Street  (Evans Tower)  1-bedroom, 1-bath, 953-sq.-ft. condo in a 9-year-old building; 24-hr. doormen, concierge, eat-in kitchen, 2 exposures, health club and pool; common charge $602; taxes $6,252, listed at $349,000, 15 weeks on market (Brokers: Feathered Nest; W.B. May)  BRONX
CITY ISLAND  $250,000
76 Reynolds Street  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 65-year-old brick house; dining room, remodeled kitchen, powder room, h/w floors, 3 garages, private beach rights; taxes $1,900, listed at $275,000, 4 weeks on market (Broker: Jacqueline Kyle Kall)  WAKEFIELD  $146,000
726 East 222nd Street  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 54-year-old attached house; dining room, eat-in kitchen, finished basement, 1-car garage; taxes $1,100, listed at $159,500, 2 years on market (Broker: Bryan)  BROOKLYN
BROOKLYN HEIGHTS  $231,500
65 Middaugh Street  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,400-sq.-ft. co-op in a renovated brick schoolhouse; dining area, high tin ceilings, 8 large windows, 3 exposures; maintenance $582, 65% tax-deductible, listed at $265,000, 32 weeks on market (Broker: Brooklyn Landmark)  PARK SLOPE  $370,000
526 11th Street  2-family, attached 1880's brick house; 2 baths in primary duplex; 1 bath in simplex; 2 bedrooms, dining area in each; taxes $1,408, listed at $389,000, 8 weeks on market (Brokers: ERA/Tetkoff; Brooklyn Properties of 7th Avenue)  WINDSOR TERRACE  $171,500
418 16th Street  2-family, attached brick house; 2 bedrooms in primary unit; 1 bedroom in other; eat-in kitchen, 1 bath in each; full basement; taxes $1,296, listed at $175,000, 26 weeks on market (Brokers: Mary Kay Gallagher; Brooklyn Properties of 7th Avenue)  QUEENS
KEW GARDENS  $255,000
84-128 Austin Street  2-family new semi-attached brick house; 1 1/2 baths in primary unit; 1 bath in other; 2 bedrooms, dining area in each; full basement, 1-car garage; taxes $2,500, listed at $289,000, 18 weeks on market (Broker: F.H. Realty Executives)  STATEN ISLAND
GRIMES HILL  $632,000
25 Greta Place  6-bedroom, 3-full, 2-half-bath, 70-year-old Tudor; dining room, eat-in kitchen, 2 fireplaces, oak detail, 2-car garage; taxes $5,500, listed at $650,000, 17 weeks on market (Broker: Vitali-Sunshine)  NEW DORP  $160,000
110 Beacon Avenue  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 33-year-old semi-attached frame house; dining area, eat-in kitchen, finished basement; taxes $1,200, listed at $164,900, 4 weeks on market (Broker: Kingsley)  WESTCHESTER
LARCHMONT  $285,000
26 Lester Place  5-family, 69-year-old stucco frame house; 2 bedrooms, 2 baths in primary unit; 1 bedroom, 1 bath in 2 others; 2 efficiency units; taxes $6,581, listed at $299,000, 1 1/2 years on market (Broker: Houghton &amp; Banks)  MOUNT VERNON  $235,000
32 Carwall Avenue  3-bedroom, 3-bath, 65-year-old Tudor; modern eat-in kitchen, computer room, covered porch, deck; taxes $5,343, listed at $249,900, 23 weeks on market (Brokers: Lindsey; The Prudential Ragette)  SCARSDALE  $675,000
34 Brookby Road  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 33-year-old colonial; modern eat-in kitchen, dining room, family room, fireplace, deck, .50 acre; taxes $14,284, listed at $725,000, 9 weeks on market (Broker: Julia B. Fee)  WACCABUC  $555,000
East Ridge Road  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 19-year-old colonial; entry hall, eat-in kitchen, family room, 2.2 acres; taxes $10,244, listed at $619,000, 34 months on market (Brokers: Coldwell Banker Schlott; Houlihan/Lawrence)  CONNECTICUT
COLCHESTER  $129,900
Oakleaf Drive
3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, new cape cod; dining room, fireplace, full basement, .95-acre lot on cul-de-sac; taxes $2,600, listed at $129,900, 1 week on market (Broker: Beazley Co.)  GREENWICH  $2.435 million
59 Dingletown Road  4-bedroom, 4 1/2-bath, 12-year-old contemporary; electric gate with intercom, gallery, marble master bath, pool, poolhouse with spa, 3-car garage, 2.86 acres; taxes $13,410, listed at $2.495 million, 3 weeks on market (Brokers; Coldwell Banker/Schlott; Preferred Properties)  NEW CANAAN  $258,000
92A East Avenue  (Chatham Walk)  3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 25-year-old town-house condo; c/a, rear deck, 1-car garage; common charge $235; taxes $2,825, listed at $269,000, 4 weeks on market (Brokers: Preferred Properties; Realty Guild)  OLD GREENWICH  $767,000
108 Shore Road  4-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, 188-year-old brick country house; dining room, library, 2 family rooms, eat-in kitchen, c/a, lap pool, .43 acre; taxes $2,493, listed at $799,000, 26 weeks on market (Brokers: Preferred Properties; Prudential Connecticut)  LONG ISLAND
GLEN COVE  $210,000
3 Douglas Drive  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 27-year-old split-level ranch; dining room, eat-in kitchen, on cul-de-sac; taxes $6,000, listed at $245,000, 16 weeks on market (Brokers: Century 21 Jimco Real Estate; Harmonious Homes)  MILL NECK  $515,000
698 Sound View Road  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 35-year-old waterfront contemporary; dining room, eat-in kitchen, family room, 2 fireplaces, 2 decks; taxes $3,700, listed at $550,000, 1 week on market (Broker: Oyster Bay)
NORTHPORT  $130,000
179 Scudder Avenue  4-bedroom, 1-bath, 40-year-old cape cod; eat-in kitchen, basement; taxes $3,800, listed at $139,000, 5 weeks on market (Broker: Prudential Long Island Realty)  ROCKY POINT  $165,000
11 Tall Tree Lane  5-bedroom, 4-bath, 22-year-old farm ranch; dining room, eat-in kitchen, den, c/a, pool; taxes $6,000, listed at $169,900, 4 weeks on market (Broker: ERA Albo)  NEW JERSEY
EWING  $118,000
605 Eggert Crossing Road  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 36-year-old ranch; c/a, h/w floors, deck, fenced backyard, family room; taxes $2,447, listed at $139,000, 24 weeks on market (Broker: Richard A. Weidel)  MILLSTONE TOWNSHIP  $205,000
228 Stagecoach Road  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 25-year-old ranch; eat-in kitchen, 2 acres, dining room; taxes $3,478, listed at $214,900, 12 weeks on market (Broker: Prudential New Jersey)  OCEAN CITY  $147,500
2121 Bay Avenue  20-year-old, 2-family colonial; h/w floors, 2 bedrooms, 1 bath, bay views in each; front and rear deck for top unit, patio for other; taxes $2,751, listed at $159,000, 16 weeks on market (Broker: The Richards Agency)  RANDOLPH  $309,000
1 Eagle Court  3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 4-year-old colonial; cathedral ceiling, 2 fireplaces, whirlpool; taxes $6,731, listed at $319,000, 15 weeks on market (Broker: Weichert)


In a Class Alone
To the Editor:
When Holland Cotter compares Nubian art with Egyptian art, as he does in his essay "Art of Old Nubia Opens a Window to a High Culture"  [ June 25 ] , and views the Nubian output as "no less sophisticated" than that of the Egyptians, he does both cultures a disservice.


Amy Scott, Andrew Vanecek
Amy Lydia Scott, the daughter of Dickson and Lydia Scott of Wallingford, Conn., was married there yesterday to Andrew Joseph Vanecek, a son of Carol Vanecek of Scarsdale, N.Y., and the late Joseph Vanecek.
The Rev.
John Sosnowski performed the Episcopal ceremony at the Choate Rosemary Hall Chapel.
The bride, 31, is keeping her name.
She is a graduate of Choate.
She received a bachelor's degree from Colby College and is a candidate for a master's degree in teaching at Quinnipiac College in Hamden, Conn.


President Powell? Not Just If, but Why?
COLIN L. POWELL'S greatest qualification to be New York City's schools chancellor may be that he graduated from Morris High School in the Bronx.
But that hasn't diminished the separate boomlets for his candidacy launched by people who don't agree about much else.
"I'm not saying the board has to select a business person, or has to select a person who's run another Government agency," Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani said the other day, urging school board officials not to consider only educators.
"Let's say, Colin Powell, who you probably couldn't get, probably wouldn't be interested, maybe isn't the right person, I don't know. But let's say someone like that."


Passing A Co-op Interview
FOR Benjamin Lee, an 89-year-old resident of Florida, the experience was harrowing.
Mr.
Lee and his son, on a visit to New York City earlier this year, were summoned to a meeting.
"I'll never forget it," Mr.
Lee said.
"We were led up to a kind of storage space. There were two men sitting at a table. Behind the table was a curtain. A third man came into the room, turned on a tape recorder, and then started asking me about my income tax. It was like a Star Chamber."


Yes, I Love New York City. And You Can Charge That.
FANS of the Chicago Bulls have a credit card.
So do the members of the American Assocation of Retired Persons.
Now people who love the Big Apple may get one, too.
Partly to raise revenue and partly to promote itself, the city is discussing a credit card program.
Eight companies have submitted proposals, said Deirdra Picou, a spokeswoman for the Mayor's office, which is on the lookout for ways to bridge the budget gap.
"It's not a new idea, but we don't know what to expect," said Ms.
Picou, who pointed to similar programs in Detroit, Newton, Mass., and South Orange, N.J.
These cities, along with thousands of other organizations, are part of a boom in the credit card industry known as affinity marketing, which took off in the early 1980's.


Tennis Legends Ready to Compete in Rye
PICTURE this: you and your doubles partner, Jimmy Connors, competing on center court at the Westchester Country Club against Bjorn Borg and his partner.
Fantasy?
No.
Fact, if you're willing and able to pay $2,500 for the experience.
Don't despair.
There are other opportunities for tennis fans when the Champions Tour returns to the Westchester Country Club in Rye for what will be the second yearly Citibank Champions Tournament Aug. 8 through 13.
In addition to watching top players hotly competing in singles and doubles matches, there will also be the chance to take part in one of 20 clinics held by the players each day.
An hour and 50 minutes of instruction from the likes of Mr.
Borg and others costs $250, said Karen Scott Happer, the tournament director.


Flavor and Texture in Vietnamese Salads
SALADS are very much part of the cooking of Vietnam, much more so than in other countries of Southeast Asia.
Even their spring rolls are salad-like, made with large leaves of lettuce rolled around a filling and served cold instead of deep-fried in dough.
At Le Colonial, a Vietnamese restaurant at 149 East 57th Street in Manhattan, the salads are among the most popular dishes on the menu, even in winter, because they are so refreshing.
They are light but highly spiced, combining interesting contrasts of texture and flavor.
The chef, Viet Tran, who is from Saigon -- he worked at Indochine before going to Le Colonial -- uses traditional ingredients like fresh mint, coriander, cucumber, bean sprouts and iceberg lettuce, which adds crunch.
The salads can be prepared ahead of time and put together at the last minute, which makes them great for summer entertaining.


A Short Course on Jewelry and the Human Body
IMAGINE A WALK-IN JEWEL BOX with all the earrings neatly arranged in pairs, the bracelets sorted, the tiaras and hatpins placed together, the buckles lined up in rows and the necklaces spread out to reveal all their glitter.
Such exquisite orderliness would be the envy of most women.
Yet it can be found in "Body Language: Jewelry and Accessories," an exhibition at the Cooper-Hewitt Museum through Aug. 20.
The 200 pieces from the museum's collection range from a beaded Egyptian necklace made in 1,000 B.C. to an epaulet of gold wire cubes made in the Netherlands in the 1990's.
They offer a short course on what these pieces have meant to people of varied cultures and why jewelry is worn on different parts of the body.


Tort 'Reform' Is a License to Steal
There is a bitter, poignant moment in "Richard II" that could explain everything about the catastrophe that is unfolding in the realm of securities law protection.
In the play, Richard, the legitimate king, is about to be deposed by the well-armed upstart Bolingbroke.
Trying to pretend that his grab for power is a legitimate lineal claim, Bolingbroke says something about "deserving" to have the crown.
Richard Plantagenet interrupts him by saying, "They well deserve to have that know the strongest and surest way to get."


An Old-Fashioned Troupe, and Proud of It
TO the best of my knowledge, no theater in the country is doing what we're doing," says Warren Kliewer.
He backs up his sweeping statement with corroborative references to a scholarly publication (the Cambridge Guide to American Theater) and to the Theater Communications Group, the national service organization for nonprofit professional theaters.
"Not that I want to be narrow-minded or doctrinaire about it," he adds, tempering bravado with modesty.


Of Dates and Chandeliers At a Faded Landmark Hotel
To the Editor:
Your article about the Alexander Hamilton ("Paterson Hopes Hotel's Rebirth Will Lead the City's Way," June 25) was informative, but I should point out that the hotel opened in 1925, not 1930.
The damaged ballroom chandelier in the photograph accompanying the article, incidentally, was there in 1925 and is an adaptation of 18th-century lighting fixtures.


After Three Months on the Job, France's President Exudes Elan
In barely three months as President of France, Jacques Chirac has cultivated a macho image that is the envy of far younger leaders, like President Clinton.
After the French leader made a dramatic call for American and British support for stronger military action against Bosnian Serb attacks on United Nations "safe areas," one Administration aide in Washington said, "Some people in the White House are absolutely convinced that Chirac is grandstanding to make Clinton look bad."


The Summer Festivals: A Platform for the Bold
THIS YEAR, AS USUAL, IT IS mainly the summer dance festivals outside New York that have revealed significant new talent and experimental choreography from abroad.
New York may still lay claim to being the dance capital of the world: no other city plays host to as many performances and companies, both foreign and domestic.
Qualitatively, the dancers on view are no slouches either.
Yet in the 1980's it was the American Dance Festival in Durham, N.C., that introduced Americans to unknown phenomena like Butoh, Japan's neo-expressionist dance-theater, and France's "new dance" choreographers, including Maguy Marin.


Towering Achievements
BOSTON BOHEMIA, 1881-1900  Volume 1 of "Ralph Adams Cram: Life and Architecture." By Douglass Shand-Tucci.
Illustrated. 569 pp.
Amherst:  University of Massachusetts Press.


Tales From the Sky
FROM where Frank Kind works, sidewalks look like gray chalk lines, billboards are the size of postcards and Central Park is a tidy mosaic of bonsai trees and bushes.
When he is perched on a scaffold 45 floors above the cement sidewalk, Mr.
Kind, 58, doesn't think about his brother-in-law Harry Heller, who fell from a scaffold and ended up with one leg shorter than the other.
And he never looks down.
"I just pay attention," he said, "to what I'm doing."


Cigarette Maker Not Responsible For Fire Deaths, Judge Rules
These are tough times for tobacco companies, but recently they won one in court.
In 1981, Dana Griesenbeck's parents and brother died in a Montclair fire when her mother fell asleep while smoking and the cigarette ignited the couch.
Ms.
Griesenbeck sued the American Tobacco Company, arguing that the company should have produced a self-extinguishing cigarette.
She also contended that the company should have warned smokers that cigarettes are not only hazardous to one's health but can also cause fires.


Whose Beach Is It?
Should New Jersey's beaches be open to everyone, or should towns have the right to restrict access?
A Question of Fees
The coastal areas should be accessible to everyone as a national resource.
But there is an economic element to this controversy: the question of access fees.
While undeveloped coastal areas should be open and free, developed sections such as maintained sand beach facilities and boardwalks can justify a fee to recoup expenses on a nonprofit basis.
KENNETH A. CROSSNER  Somerset Don't Drive Tourists Away
Hundreds of thousands of New Jerseyans and out-of-staters visit our beaches every year.
If we take away their access, they will spend their money elsewhere.
And let us not forget that the state of our waters and beaches was not solely created by the beachgoers but also by lax corporate and Government standards of years gone by.
MARY BUYOFSKI  Perth Amboy High Cost of Visiting
I am in absolute agreement that the New Jersey coast should be off limits to those of us who are not privileged enough to own a half-million-dollar beach house or drop 3 grand in rent for two weeks "down the shore."  TRISH VANNI  Ewing  The Best Beaches
I just returned from a stay in Ocean City, Md., and I have stayed at many beaches along the East Coast.
The Wildwood beaches are the absolute best.
What are they doing right down there?
ERIC HOWARD  Somerset  Sharing the Shore
While I can understand the concerns of those who live in beach towns, there are many more towns that do not have the availability of beaches.
Garden State residents should have the absolute right to enjoy all the wonderful beaches throughout the state.
If this access is prohibited, what's next, a law that only residents, not visitors, can travel through or be in their town?
SHIRLEY FRAZIER Paterson Share the Burden
Tax money needs to be allocated to bear the costs of maintenance, but that burden should be shared, as should the sands.
Legislators who promote tax money for beach replenishing should also work for equal access.
JUDITH OWENS  Brick  Fees Are Too High
One of the things I absolutely hate about New Jersey is the concept of having to pay for access to the ocean or beaches.
When I lived in California, I could go to any beach any time for no fee because the beach is all public land.
The pay beaches have lost my tourist dollars forever.
STEPHEN JARVIS  South River


Medicare, to Survive, Needs an Affluence Test; Driving Up the Costs
To the Editor:
"A Bold, Imperfect Medicare Plan" (editorial, July 25), on the Republican proposal to use vouchers in Medicare, makes an assumption that is universal in discussions of health care reform: that the price of care is the cost of care.


Eleanore Griffin, 91; Screenwriter Shared 'Boys Town' Oscar
Eleanore Griffin, a Hollywood writer who shared an Academy Award for a story that became part of a political debate more than half a century later, died on Wednesday at the Motion Picture and Television Fund Hospital in Woodland Hills, Calif.
She was 91.
In a career that extended from the 1930's to the 60's, Miss Griffin wrote or helped write such movies as "St. Louis Blues," "Good Morning, Miss Dove" and "Imitation of Life," but by far her most significant work was "Boys Town," the 1938 movie in which Father Flanagan, a compassionate Roman Catholic priest (Spencer Tracy) runs a school for a group of endearing juvenile delinquents led by Mickey Rooney.


Christopher Links Summit Talks To China's Release of American
Secretary of State Warren Christopher, significantly raising the pressure on China, said today that "it would be very difficult" for President Clinton to hold a summit meeting in October with China's President, Jiang Zemin, unless the Chinese Government first releases Harry Wu, an American citizen charged with stealing state secrets.
Mr.
Christopher made his remarks to reporters as he flew to Brunei for a meeting of Asian foreign ministers and the first meeting with his Chinese counterpart since relations between the Washington and Beijing began to deteriorate.


Increase ad rates while cutting circulation? Seems like a good idea to Hearst.
NINETY-DEGREE weather notwithstanding, the summer doldrums in the magazine industry vanished instantly last week after Hearst Magazines dropped a bombshell.
Citing "unprecedented paper and postal cost increases," Hearst said it would cut the circulation it guarantees advertisers an average of 10 percent at 13 of the company's 15 magazines.
The only exceptions were Marie Claire and Smart Money, which are joint ventures.


Discord Rattles Co-op City Towers; Feuds and Finances Threaten Stability of Middle-Class Refuge
The very idea of Co-op City sounds idealistic, even friendly, like a gigantic concrete commune in the Bronx on the Hutchinson River.
It is the largest cooperative housing development in the country, with 55,000 residents who own shares of the sprawling development.
They are not called tenants or renters or even partners -- they are "cooperators."
Lately, however, "gladiators" would be more fitting.


Avid Technology (AVID,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Software Hype and Hopes
It is not a lunar landing or the cure for disease.
It is simply an improved version of a computer's operating system - like a more efficient transmission for a car.
But 100 million personal computers use the Microsoft Corporation's software.
And on Aug. 24, when Microsoft begins selling a new version of Windows, a multibillion-dollar economy will be set in motion.
Besides deciding whether to buy the $100 Windows 95 software itself, consumers and corporations will need to consider whether to spend hundreds of dollars more on hardware and software that takes advantage of it - or thousands more to buy whole new machines.
Meanwhile, the Justice Department is still considering whether or not to try to prevent Microsoft from including access to its new on-line service in Washington.
Coverage begins on page D1.


For Amicable Discourse on 'Huckleberry Finn'
To the Editor:
Re your July 25 report on the important conference on "Huckleberry Finn" at the Mark Twain House in Hartford: The issue of race in "Huckleberry Finn" is uncomfortable for black readers, as it should be for whites.
The Mark Twain House should be commended for making it a subject for amicable discussion, rather than a shouting match, as it has been in too many cities in recent years.
It is encouraging to see black academics in the discussion in Hartford, among them David Bradley of Temple University, who for several years has added a voice both sensitive and informed to the debate.


Man Charged in Dealer's Killing
A man from Piscataway who prosecutors said left a cache of coins -- including one valued at $14,000 -- at his mother's house has been arrested and charged in the robbery and shooting death of a coin dealer from South River, the A.P. reported.


In D'Amato Book, Dodging Is Artful


Windows of Opportunity for Microsoft
REDMOND, Wash.
The Microspft Corporation plans to begin selling its 272d software title on Aug. 24.
But it is clear that Windows, 95, the latest version of the software that runs some 100 million of the world's personal computers, is much more than just another new product.
Windows 95 is a sign of the times, already creating a stir in markets worldwide, in Washington and on Wall Street, an indication of the inroads the personal comptuer has made into contemporary commerce and culture.
A video producer is churning out five million copies of a Windows 95 tape, convinced that sales of an instructional video on a software program will dwarf those of past best sellers, like the Cindy Crawford workout tapes.
The test versions of the software that Microsoft has been circulating for months have received microscopic scrutiny, not only for technical flaws but even for political slights.
One version had a map with a misdrawn Latin American border, bringing fiery protest from Peru, which is in a border dispute with Ecuador.
Meanwhile, the Justice Department is racing to decide whether to stop Microsoft from using Windows 95 as a springboard for the company's new on-line service.
And the surge in stock prices this year has been led by technology companies, partly in anticipation of increased sales of computer hardware and software that analysts expect in the wake of the Windows 95 introduction on Aug. 24.
Should sales of the new Microsoft program lag behind expectations, the stock market may well tumble.
The fascination, hype and controversy surrounding Windows 95 stems largely from the fact that PC's are now ubiquitous in the workplace and are fast becoming a mainstream consumer product.
The $85- billion-a-year personal computer industry is recognized as a pillar of the American economy.
And as a gateway to the Internet, cyberspace and multimedia, the personal computer affects everything from how people communicate with each other to how children are educated.
Even Brad Chase, the 34-year-old architect of Microsoft's marketing strategy for Windows 95, says he is amazed by all the attention the product has received.
And he readily admits that the phenomenon is only partly explained by the big-budget marketing campaign he has led for the last year from Microsoft's pine-covered corporate campus here, outside Seattle.
"The breadth of interest in Windows 95 is because of all these things, from the Internet to the Justice Department investigation, coming together, all these stars getting into line at once," Mr.
Chase said.
"Windows 95 is a lot more than software."
And how is a single software program linked to all these larger trends and events?
Simply put, because Windows 95 is a new operating system and because it is Microsoft's.
An operating system controls the on-screen look of a personal computer and the keyboard-and-mouse steps required to use it, and more than 80 percent of all PC's use Microsoft's operating software.
So when Microsoft overhauls its operating program, it is changing the language of personal computing.
Windows 95, by all accounts, is the most significant change Microsoft has made in its operating program since 1990.
That was the year the company introduced its first Windows system, which borrowed an approach from Apple Computer's Macintosh by enabling a user to point and click on graphical icons instead of typing arcane commands.
Since then, Microsoft has improved Windows, notably with its Windows 3.1 version in 1992.
But Windows 95 is an entirely new operating system built with 11 million lines of programming code, compared with 3 million lines for Windows 3.1.
All operating systems have their irritating quirks and shortcomings, and Windows 95, priced at less than $100, is no exception.
Some existing programs do not yet run smoothly on Windows 95, and it requires more computer hard-disk space and memory to use than the previous generation of Windows.
But analysts agree that Windows 95 represents a big step forward in making computers less confusing for someone writing a report, browsing the Internet or installing a new printer.
Technology purists point out that some of the new features of Microsoft's new system, like being able to have lengthy file names instead of the eight-character limit of Windows 3.1, are advantages that rival operating systems -- the Apple Macintosh and I.B.M.'s OS/2 -- have had for years.
Yet even with a technical edge, Microsoft's competitors have not been able to challenge the company's dominance of the operating system market, which it attained shortly after I.B.M. chose Microsoft's Disk Operating System for the I.B.M.
PC in 1980.
By now, in the PC operating system market, Microsoft has no genuine rival.
The company's extraordinary marketing campaign, with an estimated budget of $150 million, is intended less to fend off competition than to move computer companies and users -- quickly -- to the new industry standard, Windows 95.
"For Microsoft, the marketing campaign is essentially a $150 million insurance policy to make sure that nothing happens to prevent Windows 95 from becoming by far the most successful product in the history of the business," said David B. Yoffie, a professor at the Harvard Business School.
If Microsoft makes Windows 95 a success, it will have plenty of help from the rest of the personal computer industry.
Dataquest, a market research firm, estimates that in addition to Microsoft's $150 million, other hardware and software companies, retailers and distributors will spend $350 million this year to market Windows 95 and their own Windows 95-related products.
Other software makers, in particular, tend to have a hate-you/need-you relationship with Microsoft.
As the dominant producer, Microsoft makes not only operating software but also applications like word processing programs, data bases, spreadsheets, educational software and games.
So it is the chief rival of most applications-software companies in the industry.
But because the software makers' products run on the Microsoft operating system, they have been rushing to develop products for the new Windows 95 platform.
A successful rollout of Windows 95 in the early months is vital to Microsoft, both to its corporate pride and its profits.
Analysts' sales estimates vary considerably for the last four months of 1995, following the Aug. 24 debut.
At the high end, Dataquest is forecasting sales of 29 million copies this year.
International Data Corporation, another research firm, predicts 20 million.
Another firm, Inteco, estimates it will be only 14 million.
At roughly $50 in revenue to Microsoft for each copy sold, the difference between a torrid and a not-so-fast rollout could make a striking difference in near-term revenues and profits.
Selling 29 million copies this year means roughly $1.45 billion in revenue to Microsoft, while 14 million copies would be $700 million.
Responsibility for seeing that the Windows 95 marketing goes quickly and smoothly rests largely on the shoulders of Mr.
Chase, the general manager of Microsoft's personal systems division, and seven group product managers.
They are all men in their early 30's -- seasoned veterans by Microsoft standards.
They are mainly M.B.A.'s from places like Wharton, Harvard and Northwestern.
Most started in other fields, then recognized that technology was the future, and headed to Redmond.
Mr.
Chase wrote the marketing blueprint one night, shortly before a March 1994 meeting with Bill Gates, the Microsoft chairman.
It sketched out what Mr.
Chase called the "E-strategy" for Educate, Excite and Engage, and it explained that the personal computer market has broadened so much since the introduction of Windows 3.1 in 1992, nearly tenfold, that an entirely different approach was needed this time.
And different it has been.
The company has distributed 400,000 beta, or test, copies of Windows 95, many of them to corporate users licensed to put the software on more than one PC.
By Aug. 24, an estimated million people will have used Windows 95 for nearly 75 million hours.
This means that even before it officially hits the market, Windows 95 will have received more use than all but a few of the most successful software products receive in their entire several-year product cycles.
For more than a year, Microsoft has been bringing software developers, PC makers, corporate customers and members of the computer press to Redmond for briefing and cajoling.
The company presented demonstrations to 50,000 individual customers during a 23-city, three-month tour of the United States..
Microsoft sent the finished code for Windows 95 to factories on July 14.
And the company has revved up seven times its normal production capacity, contracting with 12 plants and engaging a fleet of 500 trucks, to insure that the new product will be at 20,000 retail outlets, from CompUSA to Wal-Mart, on Aug. 24.
Consumers are expected to move quickly to Windows 95, particularly since it will be preloaded on the machines produced for the Christmas season by manufacturers like Compaq, Packard Bell, Gateway and Dell.
But corporate customers traditionally wait six to nine months to buy new operating systems, allowing the early programming bugs to be eliminated.
To try to get companies to move quickly this time, Microsoft and distributors have offered large customers hundreds of free copies as an incentive to buy others.
Companies that have agreed to deploy Windows 95 on many desktops by Aug. 24 include Ford, Dow Chemical, Sprint and Deloitte Touche.
Yet it seems doubtful how quickly even the Microsoft marketing arsenal can prompt companies to move to Windows 95.
Surveys show most companies would wait until next year to make the transition.
"There's no question about it," Mr. Chase said, "inertia is our biggest competitor."


No Headline
This idea that I wasn't politically savvy -- I'll ask you to compare my solution with others in the White House -- to keep the investigators out of Mr.
Foster's office entirely. -- BERNARD W. NUSSBAUM, former White House counsel.  [ A10:1. ]


Patents; A flap here, another flap there, a touch of Velcro, and voila, we're talking haute hospital couture.
A STAY in the hospital is rarely pleasant.
For many people, insult is added to injury when they are handed a paper gown with a rift in the backside and told that will be the fashion for the next few days.
Jean Bannon, a professor of nursing at San Antonio College in Texas, wants to change that with her patented hospital dressing gown.
Her design allows doctors and nurses access to a patient's body while preserving a sense of being fully dressed.


In Somalia, a Chameleon Thrives
A millionaire businessman, reputed arms dealer and drug trafficker, self-styled diplomat and peacemaker, Osman Hassan Ali has his own private army in Somalia.
But as he limps into the lobby in Nairobi's Intercontinental Hotel, wearing a jacket and striped shirt and clutching a crutch in one hand, he hardly raises an eyebrow.
Accompanied by only one bodyguard, Osman Ato, as he is widely known (Ato is a nickname that means "skinny"), has come for coffee and a chat with an American Embassy official.
The get-together is part of a whirlwind of meetings on Somalia's future that occupy much of his time these days as he commutes in and out of Mogadishu.


N.F.L. TRAINING CAMP REPORT
Broncos Edge 49ers
The analytical mind of Denver Broncos Coach Mike Shanahan has no room for sentiment.
Shanahan, who helped the San Francisco 49ers win a Super Bowl during his three-year stint as offensive coordinator, beat his old team, 9-7, in his Denver debut Saturday night in a National Football League preseason opener at Mile High Stadium.
Asked how he felt going against his former players and coaching colleagues, Shanahan could think only in terms of X's and O's.
"Mentally, it really wasn't tough because I've had a chance to go over this game for several months," Shanahan said.
"Because I know their personnel, I could anticipate some of the calls. A couple of times when they audibled, we knew what they were going to do because the terminology we use is the same."


Living Centers of America Inc.(LCA,N) reports earnings for 3d qtr to Jun 30


Berkshire Eagle's Painful Decision to Sell
For 103 years, The Berkshire Eagle has been a Yankee institution, as important to the intellectual, social and political life of this corner of New England as the town meetings it has covered.
With a daily circulation of 32,000, The Eagle has been tough, thoughtful and thorough.
Awarded the Pulitzer Prize for editorial writing in 1973, its reputation for excellence has extended far beyond Berkshire County.
Journalists nationwide revere The Eagle as a guardian of their professional values.


Investors Group reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Sports of The Times; Both New Inductees Sound an Alarm for Game
IT was a day when all should have been right with the world and with baseball in particular.
It was a day in which the sun was bright and a huge, spirited crowd created what appeared to be a sea of red caps in sprawling Clark Field to honor a pair of Philadelphia Phillies and those two stars -- Mike Schmidt and Richie Ashburn -- who were inducted into the Baseball Hall of Fame.
And yet on this day, a note of alarm was struck.
By both Schmidt and Ashburn.
"The game," Schmidt said yesterday, "has reached a crossroads. Take a look at the empty seats in ball parks and the empty ball fields in playgrounds. It concerns me, and for those in baseball, it should scare you."


Chase Brass Industries(CSI,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Forget the Tutor: Jets' Dixon Steps Into a Starting Role
As much as any player on this formless collection being sculpted by Jets Coach Rich Kotite, Cal Dixon symbolizes what it is about: he is not quite a baby, but has not quite made it either.
"The other way didn't work," Kotite said.
So the coach wants -- insists -- that younger performers "step up."


Bonilla Still Looks For First Orioles Hit
Orioles 8, White Sox 3
Bobby Bonilla still doesn't have a hit with the Baltimore Orioles.
Bonilla, obtained from the Mets on Friday, went 0 for 3 with 2 walks yesterday as Baltimore beat the Chicago White Sox, 8-3.
In two games, he is 0 for 7 and has stranded 9 runners.
"I had some good hacks," he said.
"I've had four opportunities with runners in scoring position and I've struck out twice right-handed. That's unusual."


Nortek Inc.(NTK,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jul 1


Editorial Notebook; Can Merger Save the Unions?
The merger announced last week between the auto workers, steel workers and machinists unions reflects weakness, rather than revival, of organized labor.
The three large unions, which total about two million workers, are rapidly losing members, revenues and political clout.
Like corporations in trouble, unions too grab at mergers for survival.
The numbers are staggering.
Over the past 20 years, membership in the auto workers' union has shrunk by half, to about 800,000.
The steel workers' union has fallen by about 30 percent, the machinists by 40 percent.
There are many reasons, mostly beyond the unions' control.
Competition from abroad and a 20-year slowdown in productivity have stripped unions of their power to raise wages.
Manufacturing, the traditional bastion of union organizing, continues to slip behind hard-to-organize service industries.
The Federal Government under Presidents Reagan and Bush did little to enforce laws that protect labor's right to organize.


Southdown Inc.(SDW,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


And We Seem Eccentric to the Japanese
To the Editor:
The latest in your survey of Japanese curiosities (news article, July 27), about some Japanese consumers' obsession with "germ-free" cleanliness and the products that inspires, suggests a conscious effort to trivialize Japan.
Recent articles have poked fun at a variety of things Japanese, such as the push for success in competitive university examinations, public school students who scrub the halls and toilets of their schools, the high prices of domestically grown fruit and the inability of narrow Japanese streets to accommodate oversize American cars.
These articles are attention-getting and can be said in some ways to humanize Japan for American readers.


TIG Holdings Inc.(TIG,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


TJ Intl. reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jul 1


Strawberry Is Still on Hold
Darryl Strawberry's representatives today held out hope that the onetime All-Star who remains landlocked in the minor leagues might be called up by the Yankees for a three-game homestand against Milwaukee this week.
"There's nothing as of yet, but we're hoping," said Ray Negron, a partner of Strawberry's agent, Bill Goodstein.
"We're waiting to see what happens. We're hoping for Tuesday."


Different Departures For Bagwell And Kruk
John Kruk, the poster boy for critics who deride baseball players as physically fit athletes, voluntarily walked off the field in Baltimore yesterday, for good.
Jeff Bagwell, whose hitting as the National League most valuable player last season created the opposite image, walked off the field in San Diego, for bad.
Eleven weeks after the Chicago White Sox lured him out of what appeared to be retirement, Kruk indeed ended his nine-and-a-half-year career after stroking a single in the first inning.


S. &amp; P. System Will Rate Life and Health Insurers
A third of the country's life and health insurance companies are vulnerable to failure, according to a broader ratings system to be introduced today by the Standard &amp; Poor's Corporation unit of McGraw-Hill Inc.
The new system adds ratings on 810 companies, based solely on the financial reports that they file annually with state regulators.
The ratings are issued whether or not the company chooses to pay to be rated.


Mobilized, Chicago Beats Temperatures Near 100
With temperatures soaring to nearly 100 degrees, Mayor Richard M. Daley declared a heat emergency here today, as rescue crews knocked on doors to check on elderly people inside sweltering homes.
But conditions, while uncomfortable, did not appear likely to result in a disaster like the one earlier this month, when a heat wave that peaked at 106 degrees here was blamed for killing more than 500 people.


Valcor Inc. reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


President Credited First Latina Speechwriter
To the Editor:
Your July 23 article on three recent defining speeches by President Clinton credited several familiar names for producing the speeches.
But the President, who deserves all the credit for his courage, named just one person who helped write the most important speech.
In a speech following his affirmative action address, the President told the National Council of La Raza:


Joffrey Drops Chicago Merger Talks
Merger talks between the newly named Arpino Ballet (formerly the Joffrey Ballet) and Ballet Chicago ended on Friday, bringing to a close a quixotic plan that was intended to establish a home base for the financially hard-pressed New York company and to pool the resources, fund raising and repertories of the two troupes.
The talks failed because of continuing philosophical differences between the boards over fiscal planning, touring and the degree of integration of the companies, according to a statement released on Friday by the board of Ballet Chicago.
The two groups had been negotiating since last November.


Economic Calendar
Listed below are the scheduled release dates for major economic indicators this week.


Symantec Corp.(SYMC,NNM) reports earnings for 1st qtr to Jun 30


Vulcan Materials Co.(VMC,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


How the Software and the Network Stack Up
SOFTWARE: THE DESKTOP
Many of the technological improvements in Windows 95 mimick characteristics long available in Apple Computer's Macintosh operating system and I.B.M.'s OS/2 -- particularly the use of visual icons and task bars to make it faster and easier to operate the computer.
All three operating systems now offer "plug and play," meaning that peripheral devices like printers and CD-ROM drives can be added with no need for the user to reconfigure the software.
With Windows 95, users can do this only with software programs created specifically for it.
Windows 95:
The start button summons the initial menu of options.
A sub-menu lets the user launch programs directly, instead of searching through several sub-directories, as the old Windows required.
Users can add frequently needed applications to the task bar that always appears on the screen.
Macintosh:
There are several ways to start programs and organize files on the Macintosh.
One way is the Apple menu.
Another way is the launch pad, which made its debut last year in System 7.5.
It is a round-up of icons for the user's most frequently accessed applications.
OS/2:
OS/2 also features a launch pad.
The software also integrates so-called drag-and-drop mouse commands, which make it easy to fax or print a document, simply by dragging the document icon to the printer or fax icon.
FILE MANAGEMENT
With the Windows update, individual files are now handled much the same way in all three operating systems.
The differences lie in efficiency.
OS/2 offers true "multi-tasking," which means that the computer can perform several tasks simultaneously.
Windows 95 offers true multi-tasking only when all of the programs in use are ones designed specifically for the new Windows.
Otherwise, tasks like sending a fax can slow down other operations.
Windows 95:
The user can organize the files into folders and sub-folders of his or her choosing, displayed in a tree-and-branch format.
Individual files created in the same program are all represented by the same icon, for easier visual identification.
Macintosh:
Windows 95's file-management approach is similar to the Macintosh's.
Macintosh's visual desktop setup uses icons to represent the hard drive and other components, as well as a trash can for deleting files.
OS/2:
Files are organized in folders as icons, as shown above, or using the tree-and-branch motif.
INTERNET ACCESS
Unless the Justice Department intervenes, Microsoft plans to offer direct access to its new Microsoft Network and to the Internet through Windows 95.
Apple offers Internet access through its own eWorld service.
OS/2 offers Internet access through I.B.M.'s network.
Windows 95:
This is the Microsoft Network's E-mail screen.
While most users choose services based on their content, they actually use plain-Jane tools such as E-mail most frequently.
OS/2:
The OS/2 interface allows for full use of the Internet, including the World Wide Web.
A user dials into I.B.M.'s systema and the comptuer is automatically configured to use E-mail, the Web and other tools.
THE NETWORKS: A COMPARISON
On Aug. 24, the same day it begins selling Windows 95, Microsoft also plans to enter the on-line business with the Microsoft Network, known as MSN.
Tables show how it will compare with the current leaders.
MICROSOFT NETWORK LAYOUT
Designed to be fully integrated with Windows 95, the Microsoft Network uses a visual navigation system very similar to that of the operating system.
The network's on-line customer help and support service will also handle user questions about Windows 95.
THE OPENING SCREEN -- Offers access to the five areas on the network.
CONTENT -- The usual potpourri of chat rooms, film reviews and information.
Some 100 content providers have signed up, including NBC News, the retailer Eddie Bauer and the basketball star Shaquille O'Neal, with ShaqWorld Online.
NEWS MSN -- Today offers news bits, as well as information about the service, and provides links to other areas on the network.
HELP AND REGISTRATION -- Provides on-line customer service for the Microsoft Network and allows customers to make changes to their accounts.
On-line support for Windows 95 and other Microsoft programs is available through the Categories area.


New York Politicians Punish New York
To the Editor:
Representatives Sherwood Boehlert, Mike Forbes, Dan Frisa, Peter King, Rick Lazio and Susan Molinari, New York Republicans, all wrote to defend their votes to phase out the National Endowment for the Arts (letters, July 23).
They prove that we continue to elect people to represent us who think that in punishing New York -- City and State -- by voting to curb Federal funds for the arts, a new Pennsylvania Station, Medicaid, aid to families with dependent children, youth programs and education aid, they are acting responsibly in our behalf.


Boyz II Men, the Gentlemen Lovers for the 90's
Some five hours into the show at Madison Square Garden on Saturday night, professionalism finally reared its head.
Boyz II Men appeared, and for the first time in the long and plagued concert, a group managed to make it convincingly through a song and managed to stay on key.
Boyz II Men, the best-selling vocal group in the world, has spent money on choreography and staging, and with their clean and romantic sexuality, they slayed the girls in the audience, of which there are plenty.
The concert, featuring the singers Montell Jordan, Mary J. Blige and the group TLC -- some of the best-known names in pop music -- should have been an event.
It wasn't.


Haven't heard of Windows 95? Where have you been hiding?
TO introduce Windows 95, the Microsoft Corporation is amassing almost every weapon in the advertising arsenal short of hiring planes to fly over computer stores towing banners that bear the address of its World Wide Web site.
Microsoft plans to use traditional tactics like teaser ads to entice consumers into anticipating the computer operating system as much as a Super Bowl or a birthday party.
It will also have cross-promotions with retailers and marketers of related products.


TBC Corp.(TBCC,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Cipsco Inc.(CIP,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Composer Leaves Jim Dandy Field in a Cloud of Dust
Composer won the Jim Dandy Stakes by five lengths today, while Hoolie and Star Standard ran out of the money and thereby brought massive confusion to the ranks of the rivals who will chase Thunder Gulch in the Travers Stakes in three weeks.
At least, they brought confusion on themselves.
Composer, a 3-year-old son of the renowned Easy Goer, brought intrigue into the picture.
He is a lightly raced colt who ran once and won once last year and who has run first or second in five of his seven starts this year.
He is also a late developing colt who ran eighth in the Belmont Stakes in his only Triple Crown appearance and who never won a stakes race.


Interstate Power (IPW,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Athletes, Not Officials, Want Event to Continue
The United States Olympic Festival ended today, and "ended" may be the operative word.
To the consternation of the athletes, but not the administrators, the festival, as we know it, seems dead.
The United States Olympic Committee said that, as expected, the 1997 festival had been canceled.
It said future festivals conducted in the current format were in doubt.


Lesco Inc. reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


2 Killed as Speeding Car Crashes Into Police Cruiser
Alcohol, reckless driving and an apparently fake 911 call combined in deadly fashion before dawn yesterday in the Bronx, when a 31-year-old immigrant from the Dominican Republic drove a red Honda into the side of a police cruiser, killing himself and his girlfriend and injuring two police officers, a Police Department official said.
Witnesses told police investigators that the Honda, heading south on Crotona Avenue, had run at least one red light and had crossed a double yellow line before it went through a stop signal at East 180th Street in East Tremont at about 75 miles per hour, said Deputy Chief Frank Biehler, the Police Department's executive officer in the Bronx, at an afternoon press conference at the 48th Precinct.


Tennant Co.(TANT,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Sprinters Aim to Restore Canada's Image
When Ben Johnson shattered the world record for 100 meters at the 1988 Seoul Olympics, an indifferent sprinter named Donovan Bailey celebrated in an Ontario club, saluting a Canadian hero with the same Jamaican roots, the drinks flowing as fast and unimpeded as Johnson's stunning victory.
"The bartender had announced free drinks if Ben won," said Bailey, now 27, who would not gain much attention until this season.
"He was pretty poor that night."


West Marine Inc.(WMAR,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jul 1


Japan Supports Credit Rescue
After a weekend of meetings, Japanese financial officials have decided to contribute funds to help a troubled credit institution and while a large crowd of customers appeared today at its offices, there was no run on its deposits.
Cosmo Shinyo Kumiai, Tokyo's largest credit association, has denied that it is facing serious difficulties.
Even if it fails, such credit associations play a small role in the overall financial system in Japan, and the authorities are expected to be able to insulate the problem.


David Wineman, 79, Authority On Issues of Troubled Children
David Wineman, a longtime social work professor who was an expert on disturbed children and advocate of children's rights, died on Wednesday at Grace Hospital in Detroit.
He was 79 and lived in Southfield, Mich.
The cause of death was cancer, said his brother, Saul.


Taking In the Sites; Web Provides Link to S.E.C. Short Forms
Offerings of new stocks and bonds are accompanied by flurries of paperwork, including prospectuses and other forms required by the Securities and Exchange Commission.
The S.E.C. forms can get quite lengthy and expensive to copy, and the commission has been encouraging companies to file by computer and mark important parts of each form with a special tag.


Bracing for a Microsoft Onslaught, Apple Sees No Reason to Panic
In Silicon Valley it is fashionable to predict that the imminent arrival of Windows 95 spells the ultimate demise of Apple Computer Inc.
A growing chorus of pundits and Wall Street analysts has zeroed in on Apple and its home-grown operating system as the biggest potential losers in the wake of the introduction, due in late August, of the Microsoft Corporation's updated computer operating system.
Apple popularized the personal computer in the late 1970's and made computing much simpler with the introduction of the Macintosh in 1984.
But its lead in simplicity will be narrowed by Windows 95.


Gypsy Moth Is a Threat, Again
State agriculture officials say the gypsy moth is once again attacking forests in southern New Jersey.
About 39,000 acres of woods have been defoliated, mainly in Cape May, Cumberland, Salem and Atlantic Counties, the A.P. reported.


Promising Young Lives Were the Future of a Church
Elizabeth Cha and Ha-Joon Chung shared much in life.
They grew up in hard-working Korean immigrant homes, graduated from Stuyvesant High School, and taught Sunday school at their church.
On Wednesday, they will share a funeral.
For the St.
Paul Chong Ha-Sang Roman Catholic Church in Flushing, Queens, the deaths of Miss Cha, 26, and Mr.
Chung, 17, in a van crash Saturday night were a devastating blow.


No Headline


Giving the Refrigerator More Brainpower
Pity the refrigerator, the biggest appliance in the house but also the dumbest.
These days, the dinkiest microwave oven is run by a computer chip, as is the conventional oven, the dishwasher, the clothes washer and the dryer.
Even the puny thermostat and doorbell can outclass the refrigerator in brainpower.
But refrigerators are finally joining the information age.
The Whirlpool Corporation and Amana Refrigeration Inc. are making high-end refrigerators equipped with microprocessors that keep track of the amount of frost forming on the evaporator coils, which are the metal parts that cool the boxes, giving the machines the brains to know when they should defrost.


Amnesty Stands by Report's Accuracy
To the Editor:
Your July 26 news article about proving rights abuses contained misleading implications about Amnesty International and its recent report on secret arms shipments to the perpetrators of Rwanda's genocide.
In a democratic movement such as Amnesty International, there will be different opinions on how most effectively to address human rights violations.
There's no disagreement about the importance of maintaining the highest standards of accuracy.


IN PERFORMANCE: POP
Drums and Improvisation From a Senegalese Star  Kine Lam S.O.B.'s
It's hard to find a more expansive conception of how music can work than the one brought to S.O.B.'s on Thursday night by the Senegalese singer Kine Lam.
Ms.
Lam's two percussionists, looking directly at the dancing audience, cheerfully improvised.
Ms.
Lam improvised chiding lines in Wolof for the men, who were wooing her, and lines of praise for the women, who were watching and dancing.
The band made the music sound completely pliable, able to encompass any passing influence.


Ag-Chem Equipment Co. reports earnings for 3d qtr to Jun 30


Amtran Inc.(AMTR,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Floyd McDaniel, 80, Guitarist and Singer
The guitarist and singer Floyd McDaniel, best known as a member of the Five Blazes, died on July 22 in Chicago, where he lived.
He was 80.
The cause was cardiac failure, said Doug Engel, the promotion director of Delmark Records, for which Mr.
McDaniel recorded.


Bridge; A Chicago squad wins the Grand National Team Championship in New Orleans.
An exuberant Chicago squad won the Grand National Team Championship here Saturday night at the American Contract Bridge League's Summer Nationals.
Steve Garner and Jack Oest, both of Chicago, Larry Robbins of Deerfield, Ill., Jerry Goldfein of Lincolnwood, Ill., Gerald Caravelli of Des Plaines, Ill., and Gary Cohler of Lake Zurich, Ill., won the final by 71 imps, thanks largely to a third-quarter surge that gained them 52.
The losing finalists were Peter Nagy, Billy Cohen, Marc Jacobus and Harold Lilie, all of Las Vegas, Nev.


SENATE COMMITTEE STARTS RESHAPING HOUSE BUDGET BILL
Less than two weeks after a raucous House approved a $23.2 billion spending bill crammed with political trouble, the Senate has begun quietly but methodically stripping the measure of its most controversial provisions on abortion, AIDS education, the Mexican peso and the outright abolition of offices in the core of the Democratic White House.
The House's efforts drew headlines and loud debate on the floor of Congress.
But much less notice was given six days later to the Senate Appropriations subcommittee that quietly picked up the House bill, excised each of those provisions, and cut spending by $175 million more.


Partition of Bosnia Would Reinforce Injustices; What of Serb Victims?
To the Editor:
A.
M.
Rosenthal is correct to suggest that bombing Bosnia's Serbs will not solve the political dispute in Bosnia (column, July 21).
Bombing will only lead to more war, more civilian deaths, more refugees and more destruction of cultural monuments.


Les Elgart, 77, Dies; Led a Dance Band
Les Elgart, a trumpet player and leader of a big band, died on Saturday at the home of a relative in Dallas.
He was 77 and lived in Dallas.
The cause was a heart attack, said Lynn Elgart, the wife of his brother, Larry, a saxophonist and band leader.


Dividend Meetings
Following is a partial list of dividend meetings this week:


Symantec Corp.(SYMC,NNM) reports earnings for 1st qtr to Jun 30


Pedal to the Metal: The Speed Limit Is Hitting 65
Starting tomorrow, New York will become the 46th state to unbridle its automobiles by increasing the speed limit to 65 miles per hour from 55 m.p.h.
At dawn, workers will remove covers on 340 traffic signs, some new and some reconfigured old ones.
So will end one of the state's most poorly heeded laws.


NEWS SUMMARY
INTERNATIONAL A2-7 MILITANCY IN CROATIA  In Zagreb, the Croatian capital, many people seemed eager to go war to try to get back territory that ethnic Serbs have captured, even as Croatian troops moved toward the region.
A1  ON MEXICAN DRUGS, JUST PROMISES  Mexico has promised repeatedly to make progress against drug traffickers.
The United States, concerned for the free trade agreement, has praised its progress, but the drug trade continues.
A1  U.S.
RAISES PRESSURE ON CHINA  Secretary of State Warren Christopher said "it would be very difficult" for President Clinton to meet with China's president in October unless China frees Harry Wu, an American citizen charged with stealing state secrets.
A1  China's hinted at a possible settlement over oil-rich islands.
A3  PARTIAL TREATY ON CHECHNYA  Russia and Chechnya signed a partial treaty that they said would end the fighting in Chechnya, but the negotiators have been unable to resolve the future status of the breakaway region.
A3  ISRAEL TO SEEK EXTRADITION  The Israeli Government decided that it would seek extradition from the United States of a man believed to be a senior leader of a militant group responsible for deadly attacks against Israel.
A3  CHAMELEON OF SOMALI POLITICS  With Somalia in turmoil and three men claiming they are the president, one Somali politician and businessman has shown himself to be a master of survival and of adapting to shifting alliances.
A7  Yangon Journal: Building a pagoda, and Burmese tourism.
A4 NATIONAL A8-11, B6 WRANGLING ON BUDGET ADDITIONS  As a Senate Appropriations subcommittee picks up House spending bills, it is taking out some of the controversial provisions.
A1  NUSSBAUM DEFENDS ROLE  Bernard Nussbaum, the former White House counsel, said that when he showed Hillary Clinton a suicide note written by Vincent Foster, she said, "Bernie, I can't deal with this," and left his office.
A1  TRAFFICKING IN ART  An explosion of discoveries about the lost civilizations of Mesoamerica has led to a dramatic increase in the brazen looting of archeological sites in Central America.
A1  FACTORIES RESUME WORK  Two aircraft ball-bearing factories in western New York that were shut down on Friday after an investigation into defective parts resumed limited production.
A8  HEAT EMERGENCY IN CHICAGO  The mayor of Chicago declared a "heat emergency" after temperatures hit nearly 100 degrees.
A8  GOVERNORS PONDER MEDICAID  The nation's governors, meeting in Vermont, are worried about what changes Congress will make in Medicaid, and are searching for ways to alter the program.
A10  MOYNIHAN SUPPORTS PACKWOOD  Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan has emerged as one of the chief supporters of Senator Bob Packwood.
A11  A memorial service was held for Jimmy Hoffa.
A11  Baltimore Journal: A police station proves vital to a neighborhood.
A8 METRO DIGEST B1 TEACHERS IN FATAL CRASH  A van carrying 14 young Korean Sunday school teachers from Queens crashed on the Gov.
Thomas E. Dewey Thruway, killing two passengers and injuring all their companions, three critically.
A1  Sports C1-8  Baseball: Isringhausen wins.
C1  Yankees beat Twins, 7-4, to get over the .500 mark.
C1  Columns: Berkow at the Hall.
C3 On Baseball.
C5  Football: Switzer's subtlety faces a test.
C1  Graham relaxed.
C2  Jets' Dixon gets his shot.
C2  Racing: Serena's Song beats the boys again.
C8  Composer impresses.
C8  Track: Canada banking on its sprinters.
C7  Powell's motivation.C7  Business Digest D1  Obituaries B7  Dr.
Harry M. Zimmerman, pioneer in study of nervous system diseases.
Arts/Entertainment C9-14  A Shakespeare lab for Americans.
C9  Karlheinz Stockhausen presents a Helicopter Quartet.
C9  Joffrey and Ballet Chicago end merger talks.
C14  Music: Lollapalooza tour.
C9  Mostly Mozart.
C10  "Hello Out There." C10  Boyz II Men.
C12  Books: Gary Kates's "Monsieur d'Eon Is a Woman." C14  Editorials/Op-Ed A12-13  Editorials  A threat to media diversity.
Waco's unlearned lessons.
Michael M. Weinstein: Unions.
Letters  Anthony Lewis: Is reality dawning?
Bob Herbert: Out of work.
William Safire: An orgy of summer advice.
Alice Vachss: Megan's Law won't reduce sex crimes.
Louis Harris: Affirmative action and the voter.
Bridge C14 Chronicle B2 Crossword C14


Vigoro Corp.(VGR,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Yanks Surpass .500 With a Little Help From Twins' Defense
The climb back was a long, tough one and surely at times seemed impossible to traverse.
But the Yankees tonight finally did what they could not for over two months: break above .500, thanks to the generous Minnesota Twins.
The Yankees defeated the once-mighty Twins, 7-4, tonight.
They did so thanks to the fielding of the Twins, who this weekend treated the Metrodome like a chamber of horrors and any ball hit by the uncanny Mike Stanley as untouchable.


Fast Food at the Fair


Tractor Supply (TSCO,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jul 1


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS  Agassi Tops Sampras
Top-ranked Andre Agassi rallied for a 3-6, 6-2, 6-3 victory over No. 2 Pete Sampras yesterday in the final of the du Maurier Ltd.
Open in Montreal.
Agassi, who successfully defended the hard-court title he won last year at Toronto, recorded his 400th career victory, seventh among active ATP Tour players.
With the on-court temperature at 104 degrees, Sampras broke Agassi's service for a 4-2 lead that helped him win the opening set.
But Agassi raised his game in the second set, while Sampras began to struggle with his serve.
Agassi broke for a 4-1 lead in the second set and broke to lead by 3-1 in the third.


Southern National Corp.(SNB,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


CROATS CONFIDENT AS BATTLE LOOMS OVER SERBIAN AREA
On this muggy weekend, as the threat of war sent families of American diplomats packing, residents of this sleepy capital went about their normal lives today, going to Mass, buying vegetables at the open-air market and seeking relief from the heat on the pebbly beach at Lake Yarun.
It is not that they were oblivious to rumblings that war with the ethnic Serbs in their country was imminent, but rather that they were eager for it, and diplomats here believe that they will get their wish.


Abroad at Home; Is Reality Dawning?
In the minds of many Americans there has been a strange disconnect between the radical Republican program in Congress and its consequences.
People like the idea of smiting the Government without understanding what the slashing and burning would do to them.
I noticed it several weeks ago in the response to a column that looked at the likely consequences.
I foresaw a country with wetlands disappearing, air and water increasingly polluted, food and drugs unsafe.
To my surprise, readers asked where I got such ideas.
I got them from the precise terms of legislation pending in the House or already passed.


Partition of Bosnia Would Reinforce Injustices
To the Editor:
In "A Realistic Entity: Greater Sarajevo" (Op-Ed, July 26), Ronald Steel tries to prove himself a big friend of a smaller Bosnia.
But, like other apparently "realist" proponents of partition, he ends up making excuses for ethnic cleansing without giving any reason to think that capitulation would end the process.
"The Serbs have largely achieved their territorial goals," he instructs us, before proceeding to the corollary that fresh territorial concessions must now be made -- by the Bosnian Government!
This blurring of distinctions launches him on a risky re-evaluation of recent history.


Wolff: Ukulele Hitter Makes Hall of Fame as Broadcaster
His fantasy, he said Saturday night as he stood before a trio in a hotel bar, was to sing and play his patched-up, 40-year-old ukulele to an audience the night before his induction into the broadcasters' wing of the Baseball Hall of Fame.
"I really should be practicing my speech," Bob Wolff said.


Medusa Corp.(MSA,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


On a Sticky Night, Mozart, Cooling Brow and Brain
In the dog days of New York summer, Mostly Mozart is air-conditioning for the soul.
It soothes; it comforts; sometimes you barely notice it's there.
Friday's edition at Avery Fisher Hall, with the Mostly Mozart Orchestra under Gerard Schwarz, provided another evening of relief.
Challenge was deferred to a cooler season.
Mozart -- darkly beautiful, deeply sophisticated -- gave satisfaction.
Beethoven's "Ah, perfido," waggled its angry finger of accusation, just as it has for precisely 200 years.
An overture and aria from Simon Mayr's "Medea in Corinto" introduced to many listeners a thoroughly forgettable composer, but then again, it may take occasional remembering to forget the forgettable with any finality.


Most Wanted; A Crossover, And a Takeover
"Dreaming of You," the posthumous crossover album by Selena Quantanilla Perez, became the fastest-selling recording by a woman on its first day of release and made Selena, as she was known, the first Latin performer to ever top the pop album chart.
Selena was gunned down outside a Texas hotel in March.


Surgical Care Affiliates Inc.(SCA,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


In America; Out Of Work
A very small group of people at a church in Greenwich Village is attempting to seriously engage the most devastating issue of our time -- the wholesale elimination of employment.
Jeremy Rifkin titled his book on this frightening phenomenon "The End of Work."


IN PERFORMANCE: JAZZ
Celebrating Sound, In Bulk and Diversity  Griffmobs Big Band Smalls
The big band is every thinking jazz musician's dream.
It offers a huge harmonic palette, the rhythmic intensity of great dance music, the volume and the excitement that come with it, now heard only in popular music.
Commercially, big bands went the way of the dinosaur.
But they're still around, if only to satisfy the desires of musicians.


CHRONICLE
Eloise, that mischievous tyke who lives at the Plaza and gets into all sorts of scrapes, is 40 years old, but HILARY KNIGHT , the artist who created her, does not want people to think of her that way.
He first drew her to illustrate Kay Thompson's book "Eloise," published by Simon &amp; Schuster in 1955.
But he insisted the other day, "She is still 6 years old, no matter what."


One Route to Hall of Fame: Start in Philadelphia


Equity Offerings Scheduled for This Week
The following equity and convertible debt offerings are expected this week:


Aaron Rents Inc. reports earnings for 1st qtr to Jun 30


United Water Resources Inc.(UWR,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Board to Vote on School's Status
The State Board of Education will vote on Wednesday whether to accept a recommendation to certify the Union City schools, which state officials have been monitoring since 1989.
Louis Acocella, who until recently was Superintendent of Schools for Hudson County, said that school buildings got the necessary repairs, thanks to a $26 million bond.
He also gave the district high marks for improving standardized test scores, revamping its curriculum, drafting guidelines for investing district funds and giving parents and teachers a greater role in school planning.


Telxon Corp.(TLXN,NNM) reports earnings for 1st qtr to Jun 30


Enigma of a Nobleman, Pretender to Femininity
MONSIEUR D'EON IS A WOMAN A Tale of Political Intrigue and Sexual Masquerade
By Gary Kates
Illustrated. 368 pages. Basic Books. $25.
The title of Gary Kates's savory story of politics, espionage and sexual fakery is a quotation from an 18th-century French nobleman passing along a piece of gossip to a British friend.
But, it should be noted, it was a false piece of gossip.


A Threat to Media Diversity
The telecommunications bill that the House will vote on this week takes a good idea -- deregulation -- and carries it to destructive extremes.
It promises consumers a wider choice of cable and telephone companies.
But it risks putting local phone companies in a position to drive rivals out of business.
It could also end up concentrating control of the main media outlets -- newspaper, TV and radio -- in too few hands.
The bill, written by Republicans and mirroring legislation already passed by the Senate, would affect nearly everyone by altering the telephone, television, cable and, perhaps, newspaper industries.
These industries have poured tens of millions of dollars into lobbying campaigns to sway Congress.
The local phone companies have contributed the most and seem to have won the most.
But the victories by the regional Bell companies are not necessarily victories for the consumers.


Israel to Ask U.S. to Yield Palestinian
The Israeli Government decided tonight to seek the extradition of a Palestinian detained last week in the United States.
The man, Mousa Mohamed Abu Marzook, is said to be a senior leader of Hamas, the militant Islamic group that has waged a campaign of deadly attacks against Israel.
The decision to request his extradition came after talks among Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin, Foreign Minister Shimon Peres and senior justice and security officials.


Unum Corp.(UNM,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Baltimore Journal; Japanese-Style Booths Put Police at the Center of the Action
The little booth sits just off a downtown intersection that once stood at the retail heart of the city, with large department stores, movie theaters and fashionable restaurants.
In recent years, with one street a pedestrian mall and the other reserved for buses and commuter trains, the neighborhood has become a collection of specialty shops and stores for the budget-conscious.
But as the neighborhood struggles to stay vibrant without the tourist appeal of other downtown attractions like Oriole Park at Camden Yards and Harbor Place mall, few buildings seem to be as vital to the area's well-being as the small booth.
It is known as a koban, a police substation modeled and named after similar buildings used in Japan as part of that country's law-enforcement policy of stationing officers among the people they protect.


On L.I., the Cocktails Mix Business, Politics and Pleasure
There are some wealthy people who will try to argue that a weekend in the Hamptons really and truly is a getaway from the high-pressure city worlds of politics, business and corporate culture.
Most do not even bother.


T. Rowe Price Associates (TROW,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Transactions
WEEKEND Baseball  American League
BALTIMORE ORIOLES -- Optioned outfielder Mark Smith, outfielder, to Rochester of the International League.
Sent Joe Borowski, pitcher, to Rochester.
Recalled Rick Krivda, pitcher, from Rochester.
CHICAGO WHITE SOX -- Announced the retirement of John Kruk, designated hitter.
KANSAS CITY ROYALS -- Sent Bob Hamelin, designated hitter, to Omaha of the American Association.
Called up Scott Anderson, pitcher, from Omaha.
Moved Chris Haney, pitcher, from the 15-day to the 60-day disabled list.
TORONTO BLUE JAYS -- Placed Danny Cox and Darren Hall, pitchers, on the 15-day disabled list.
Moved Duane Ward, pitcher, from the 15-day to the 60-day disabled list.
Called up Paul Menhart and Jimmy Rogers, pitchers, from Syracuse of the International League.
National League
LOS ANGELES DODGERS -- Signed Derek Lilliquist, pitcher, to a minor-league contract and assigned him to Albuquerque of the Pacific Coast League.
SAN FRANCISCO GIANTS -- Placed Luis Aquino, pitcher, on the 15-day disabled list.
Recalled Chris Hook, pitcher, from Phoenix of the Pacific Coast League.
Mid-America League
ANDERSON LAWMEN -- Sold the contract of Vincent Griffin, outfielder, to Merrillville.
Released Robert Harmon, infielder.
Northern League
ST.
PAUL SAINTS -- Activated Steve Curry, pitcher.
Waived Scott Centala, pitcher.
Northeastern Fall League
PISCATAWAY CHIEFTANS -- Named R.Bronson Jr. general manager.
Football  National Football League
NEW YORK GIANTS -- Agreed to terms with Jessie Armstead, linebacker.
OAKLAND RAIDERS -- Signed Russell Freeman, offensive tackle.
Released Willie Stubbins, offensive tackle.
Canadian Football League
BALTIMORE STALLIONS -- Placed Nick Subis, center, on the injurd list.
HAMILTON TIGER-CATS -- Signed Andrew Martin, slotback, to the practice roster.
MEMPHIS MAD DOGS -- Placed Gary Anderson, running back, and Donald Smith, cornerback, on the injured list.
SAN ANTONIO TEXANS -- Activated Jeff Sawyer, defensive end, and Kitrick Taylor, wide receiver, from the injured list.
Released Ephesiana Bartley, linebacker; Tony Jackson, running back; and Daryle Smith, offensive lineman.
Placed Jimmy Lee, running back, and Kitrick Taylor, wide receiver, to injured list.
SASKATCHEWAN ROUGHRIDERS -- Activated Scott Hendrickson, guard, and Elbert Turner, wide receiver, from the injured list.
Released Timothy Broady, linebacker.
Placed Wayne Drinkwalter, defensive tackle, on the injured list.
College
CALIFORNIA -- Promoted assistant baseball coach Dave Lawn to associate head baseball coach.


Physician Sales &amp; Service Inc.(PSSI,NNM) reports earnings for 1st qtr to Jun 30


Isringhausen's Triumph Brightens Mets' Future
Yesterday belonged to Mets' ace of the future, not to the current one who might be a former Met by midnight tonight.
With the clock on the non-waiver trade deadline ticking and the rumors growing stronger out of Boston about the possible departure of Bret Saberhagen, Jason Isringhausen, age 22, went out and won his first major league game in the Mets' 2-1 victory over the Pittsburgh Pirates.


Pitt-Des Moines Inc.(PDM,A) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Griffon Corp.(GFF,N) reports earnings for 3d qtr to Jun 30


Powell Makes a Long Jump From Sadness to Motivation
The phone call came at 4 A.M. on Saturday, delivering this cryptic message: "8.96 on his last jump."
Mike Powell was hoping to get through the night as the world record-holder in the long jump, but he feared the worst.
Now his fears were confirmed.
Jumping at altitude in Sestriere, Italy, Ivan Pedroso of Cuba had broken Powell's four-year-old record by a quarter-inch, jumping 8.96 meters or 29 feet 4 3/4 inches.


Former Presidential Counsel Cast as Whitewater's Heavy
Six days after the suicide of Vincent W. Foster Jr., Bernard W. Nussbaum urgently led Hillary Rodham Clinton into his White House counsel's office.
He showed her a note, which had been found in shreds on the bottom of Mr.
Foster's briefcase and lay on his conference table, pieced together by Mr.
Nussbaum and an aide like a jigsaw puzzle.
In it, Mr.
Foster, one of Mrs.
Clinton's oldest and dearest friends, spoke of his anguish about Washington.
She glanced at Mr.
Foster's observation that he was not up to his job and that in Washington, "ruining people is considered sport," and she looked shaken, Mr.
Nussbuam recalled in an interview.


Clean Harbors Inc. reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Switzer Subtlety Will Face Test
On the sun-baked practice field at St.
Edwards College here, Cowboys Coach Barry Switzer sometimes fades into the scenery so deep that he vanishes.
When he watches from the sidelines, he is easy to lose.
Nothing in his manner or dress distinguishes him from his assistant coaches.
Switzer doesn't do face-mask grabbing, nose-to-nose screaming tirades with rookie free agents.
He walks among the various units during practice as if he were looking at an empty apartment to rent.


Yangon Journal; Raising a Pagoda for Statecraft and Buddha's Tooth
U Tim Myint, whose English-language nickname is Johnny and whose plastic hard hat is the same bright shade of yellow as the sarong wrapped snugly around his waist, is a Christian in what may be the most devoutly Buddhist nation on earth.
Behind him rises the concrete skeleton of a pagoda -- the grandest pagoda to be built in years in a city already happily crowded with golden, bejeweled pagodas.


China Hints Move to Settle Islands Dispute
China insisted today that it had "indisputable sovereignty" over a chain of potentially oil-rich islands in the South China Sea but also opened the door to negotiating a settlement over their ownership.
The statements, made at a summit meeting of Asian foreign ministers in the sultanate of Brunei, were welcomed by Southeast Asian diplomats who had worried that the island chain, the Spratly Islands, could become a military flash point.


Treasury to Auction Bills This Week
The Treasury's schedule of financings this week is confined to today's regular weekly auction of three- and six-month bills.
By the close of the New York cash market on Friday, traders said, the rate on the outstanding three-month bill was 5.41 percent and a six-month bill was 5.36 percent.


New Speed Limits
NEW RULE Starting tomorrow, motorists on New York State's rural interstates will be able to travel legally up to 65 miles per hour.
In June, the New York State Assembly passed legislation increasing the speed limit.


In Lollapalooza, Stage Is No Barrier
It was easy to tell that Elastica was the new band of Lollapalooza, alternative rock's biggest touring package, which stopped on Saturday afternoon at Downing Stadium for the second of two shows in the stench of Randalls Island (there's a sewage-treatment plant nearby).
Taking the place of Sinead O'Connor, who dropped out of the tour to cope with her pregnancy, Elastica performed a consistent, straight-ahead set of two-minute songs probing the intersection between punk and new wave.
They didn't goof off, they didn't interact much with the audience and they thanked the crowd for being "lovely" (they're English).
This kind of set wouldn't seem out of place on other tours, but on Lollapalooza, a summer camp for alternative-rock stars, it seemed wooden.
Part of the appeal of alternative rock is that its performers emphasize that they are no different from their audience.
By Saturday, 25 days into the tour, Lollapalooza's bands were relaxed enough to imbue a grand outdoor space (filled with more than 20,000 people) with the casualness and intimacy of the small clubs that these groups normally tour.
At big concerts in the past, the stage has always been a barrier separating the artists from the faceless mass of fans, and that border was never crossed except when an audience member eluded security or a performer hovered over the crowd in a cherry picker or another protective device.


After a Raid, Ball Bearing Manufacturer Back at Work
Two aircraft ball-bearing factories in western New York, which shut down on Friday after Federal agents raided them as part of an investigation into defective parts, resumed limited production yesterday.
The owner of the two factories, MRC Bearings, said it hoped to be back in full operation by Friday.
But first it must copy all the documents seized by Government officials last week because the documents detail the specifications needed for manufacturing the bearings, said Allen G. Belenson, general counsel for MRC Bearings' parent company, SKF USA Inc., based in King of Prussia, Pa.
The American parent is a subsidiary of the Swedish company SKF.


A First Date Ends in a Far-Too-Scary Ride
On Saturday night, Lourdes Gonzalez and Martin Quinones, like thousands of New Yorkers before them, headed for Coney Island on their first date.
For Ms.
Gonzalez, 24, a single mother of three from Bay Ridge, Brooklyn, it was a renewed hope for romantic possibilities.
"It was beautiful day," she said.
"We walked on the boardwalk. I got on one ride; he didn't want to go on any rides. I tricked him into going on the ride with me. I said, 'This is a haunted house.' "


Wyle Electronics Inc.(WYL,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Campo Electronics, Appliances &amp; Computers Inc.(CMPO,NNM) reports earnings for 3d qtr to May 31


Of Grace, Damnation and Best Sellers
For as long as humans have written, they have been publishing works (stone tablets, books, CD-ROM's) that wrestle with the notions of Good and Evil, and man's efforts to forge a spiritual life between the two.
Passions aside, it has not been bad business.


'Waterworld' Disappointment As Box Office Receipts Lag
"Waterworld," the most expensive movie ever made, opened this weekend and managed to stay afloat.
But barely.
With a staggering $235 million cost, "Waterworld" is a symbol of Hollywood-style excess and ineptness, studio executives say.


Builders Transport Inc. reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


What Happened to Plan For 42d St. Theaters?
To the Editor:
Re "Reviving the Rialto" (editorial, July 23): The good news is that thanks to two other huge entrepreneurs starting gigantic enterprises on 42d Street, Disney will go ahead with restoring the New Amsterdam Theater.
The bad news is that three historic theaters on 42d Street's south side -- the Eltinge, Sam H. Harris and Liberty are apparently to be sacrificed to make way for a supermultiplex film complex, while on the north side, the Lyric and Apollo will be "restored" into one huge auditorium.


Computer Users Told To Go Slow in Change Of Operating Systems
When it finally goes on sale on Aug. 24, Microsoft's Windows 95 will be better, faster and easier to use than any previous version of the software.
So why is Brian Mott, a computer consultant to small and large companies, telling his clients not to buy?
Wait till next year, Mr. Mott advises.


4 Are Hurt in Hotel Fire
Four people were injured and more than 300 were evacuated yesterday after a dryer ignited a fire and caused smoke to waft through air ducts in the 22-story Meadowlands Sheraton Hotel, the police said.
The injured were treated for smoke inhalation and released, the A.P. reported.
Guests were permitted back in their rooms at 3 P.M., about four hours after the fire was reported.


Cone Took Step Up Stepping In For Yanks
It just felt right.
David Cone felt secure in the gray uniform with New York stitched across his chest.
He felt comfortable after the Yankees swiped three runs on a botched fly ball Saturday night and he never let Minnesota even sniff the lead again in New York's 4-2 victory.
Maybe this is where he belonged.
Maybe this was home.
Maybe? Definitely.


Raymond James Financial Inc.(RJF,N) reports earnings for 3d qtr to Jun 30


United Illuminating Co.(UIL,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Sierra Might Squeeze Into Pinstripe Profile
For some time, psychological profiles have been all the rage for major league teams that wish to look beyond raw talent to determine whether a prospect possesses the right stuff.
For years, the Yankees were infamous for using reverse psychology, inadvertently importing far too many sensitive souls.
Despite their on-field credentials, such players as Dave Collins and Ed Whitson and more recently Danny Tartabull were often cowed by a Big Apple that is too often famous for taking a big bite out of fragile egos.


Olympic Steel (ZEUS,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Trimas Corp.(TMS,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Thomas &amp; Betts (TNB,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jul 2


Beeson's Gritty Tale of Danger and Longing
Those who think the heritage of American opera is impoverished should have been at the Museum of Modern Art on Friday night.
As part of the Summergarden series examining American music during the 25 years after World War II, Jack Beeson's one-act chamber opera "Hello Out There" received an arresting concert performance by splendid musicians from the Juilliard School, with Joel Sachs conducting.
The 40-minute opera for three singers, which Mr.
Beeson wrote in 1953, when he was 32, is a testimony to his early operatic expertise.
The libretto, adapted from a William Saroyan play, tells of a dashing and dangerous young gambler who is charged with rape and jailed in a small Texas town, and of a lonely young woman, the jailer's daughter, who is drawn to him.
The story is somewhat dated, and in certain ways so is the music.
With its mixing of folkloric elements, hymnal harmonies and expressionistic modernism, the score harks back to all those gritty W.P.A.-sponsored operas about downtrodden Americans.


Waco's Unlearned Lessons
At the start of the hearings on the Waco catastrophe, it seemed possible that detailed testimony might show that despite appearances, the Justice and Treasury Departments had some idea of what they were doing.
Eight days of House hearings have only deepened the evidence that the military-style attack on the Branch Davidian compound was badly planned on the ground and recklessly approved in Washington.
Most alarmingly, Attorney General Janet Reno has professed to have learned nothing in the two years she has had to analyze the fiasco.


Governors Try To Find Unity On Medicaid
While welfare preoccupies Washington, the nation's governors are more worried about what cuts and changes Congress will make in Medicaid, and are searching at their annual summer meeting for a common position on how to alter the health care program for the poor.
Medicaid costs the states six times as much as welfare.
So while many governors are reconciled to what Democrats call "cuts" and Republicans call "slower growth" in Federal Medicaid spending, they are arguing intensely about formulas for distributing the money to the states and the need to reduce Federal directives on how it gets spent.


Utilicorp United Inc.(UCU,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


To Help Keep Mexico Stable, U.S. Soft-Pedaled Drug War
Soon after becoming President at the end of 1988, Carlos Salinas de Gortari sent his new drug-enforcement chief to help rescue Mexico's troubled relationship with the United States.
The official, Javier Coello Trejo, quickly formed a 1,200-member task force, seized tons of drugs and put the most-wanted cocaine smuggler in Mexico behind bars.
He brought the Government within reach of its broader goal, sufficiently impressing American officials with Mr.
Salinas's resolve to dislodge the drug issue as an obstacle to closer ties between the countries.


Hevesi Returns to Combative Mode of Old in a Challenge to Giuliani
During his first 18 months in office, City Comptroller Alan G. Hevesi pursued a strategy that surprised some who recalled his more partisan, Republican-baiting days in Albany.
He decided that attacking a popular Republican Mayor would not earn him credibility in his new role as the distant, dignified and even dull steward of the city's fiscal health.
Then late last month, Mr.
Hevesi, for 22 years a liberal Democratic Assemblyman from Forest Hills, Queens, seemed to break dramatically from this approach: he vowed to block Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani's proposed sale of the city's water system for $2.3 billion, a measure aimed at raising $400 million this year alone for construction projects.
The move represented an extraordinary use of the Comptroller's powers, and by Wednesday, when Mr.
Hevesi announced his final decision to block the sale, the issue had erupted into the first full-fledged fire fight between the two men that is now headed for court.


Another Step for Bond-Issue Act
Voters will be asked in November to approve the latest in a series of so-called Green Acres bond issues for the preservation of farmland and historic sites.
Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman says she will sign the $340 million Green Acres Bond Act on Thursday during a ceremony at Liberty State Park, which would receive $10 million if the measure is passed.


METRO DIGEST
CHURCH OUTING LEADS TO A TRAGEDY
They were the future leaders, the exuberant young promise, of their families and their Queens congregation, the nation's largest Korean Catholic church.
They had worked hard to overcome immigrant hardships.
They labored happily for their community, excelled in education and were dedicated Sunday school teachers and camp counselors.
But as the 14 friends rode together on a weekend outing in the Catskill Mountains, their van swerved out of control and rolled over and over again in a nightmarish crash on the Gov.
Thomas E. Dewey Thruway near Kingston.  [ Page A1. ] Elizabeth Cha and Ha-Joon Chung shared much in life.
On Wednesday, they will share a funeral.  [ B4. ] NEW YORK CITY TWO DIE IN CRASH WITH CRUISER
Alcohol, reckless driving and an apparently fake 911 call combined in a deadly fashion in the Bronx, when a 31-year-old immigrant from the Dominican Republic drove a red Honda into the side of a police cruiser, killing himself and his girlfriend and injuring two police officers, a Police Department official said.  [ B3. ] WHEN POLITICS MEETS POETIC LICENSE
Alfonse M. D'Amato's new book is good summer reading.
Short sentences.
Breezy paragraphs.
And artful dodging throughout.
As he portrays himself in his new book, "Power, Pasta and Politics: The World According to Senator Al D'Amato," the New York Senator is nostalgic one moment, brash and defiant the next.
He trumps and dumps on the bad guys.
He is unforgiving of his enemies.
He takes deliciously nasty potshots at his critics and delights in parading as a populist, defending little people from the evildoers everywhere.
This being Mr.
D'Amato's first venture into literature, it may be natural that he helped himself to a generous portion of poetic license.
Metro Matters by Joyce Purnick.  [ B3. ] A FISCAL STEWARD CHANGES TACTICS
During his first 18 months in office, City Comptroller Alan G. Hevesi pursued a strategy that surprised some who recalled his more partisan, Republican-baiting days in Albany.
He decided that attacking a popular Republican Mayor would not earn him credibility in his new role as the distant, dignified and even dull steward of the city's fiscal health.
Then late last month, Mr.
Hevesi, for 22 years a liberal Democratic Assemblyman from Forest Hills, Queens, seemed to break dramatically from this approach: he vowed to block Mayor Giuliani's proposed sale of the city water system for $2.3 billion.  [ B2. ] REGION SPEED LIMIT BUMPED TO 65
Starting tomorrow, New York will become the 46th state to unbridle its automobiles by increasing the speed limit to 65 miles per hour from 55 m.p.h.
At dawn, workers will remove covers on 340 traffic signs, some new and some reconfigured old ones.
So will end one of the state's most poorly heeded laws.
State Department of Transportation studies show that almost everybody, 94 percent of drivers, speed on these roads.
The average rate is 64 m.p.h.  [ B5. ] 2 METRO-NORTH UNIONS REJECT CONTRACTS
The members of two unions have turned down tentative contracts with Metro-North Commuter Railroad, undoing a good portion of the progress made in talks this month and casting doubt on the prospects for quick settlements with other unions.
The votes by the International Association of Machinists and the International Brotherhood of Firemen and Oilers undercut management's assertion that the tentative accords had established a pattern that the other unions and Federal mediators would follow.  [ B5. ] IN HOCKEY COUNTRY, A NEED FOR RINKS
His three sons want to play ice hockey like their heroes -- the New York Rangers -- and so for 10 months a year, Daniel Tisch takes on the role of team driver.
Three times a week, he makes the 44-mile round trip from Scarsdale, N.Y., to Englewood, N.J., for his oldest boy's practice.
Five times a week, he drives 10 miles to Rye and back so his younger sons can practice.
Then there are the games themselves, which can easily add 200 miles to the odometer each weekend.
It's no wonder that Mr.
Tisch, a financier, and some fellow Scarsdale parents have banded together to build a rink in their own town.  [ B5. ] Chronicle B2


A Helicopter Quartet. What Else?
The German composer Karlheinz Stockhausen has long had a reputation for startling his followers, but his latest work has come as a bolt from the sky.
As part of this summer's Holland Festival, the composer staged the premiere of the Helicopter Quartet, written for four string instruments and, no less, four helicopters.
The work took off from a field on the outskirts of Amsterdam, at the Westergasfabriek, a former gasworks that has become a theater.
Here, in the gentle evening light last month, Mr.
Stockhausen said goodbye to the members of the Arditti String Quartet as each went off to his own helicopter and pilot.


Sex Offender Is Arrested Again
A convicted sex offender who was registered with the local police has been arrested and charged with the sexual assault of a 15-year-old Toms River boy, the authorities said.
The police said that John Edward Greene, 28, lured the teen-ager to his room last Friday with an offer to escape the heat and watch television.
Mr.
Greene, who had been convicted of sexually assaulting a girl in Dover Township in 1991, was paroled in February.


Russians and Chechens Sign Partial Accord
After seven months of a war that has devastated much of Chechnya and damaged the course of Russian reform, officials for both sides signed a partial treaty today that they said would bring an end to the fighting.
"We have now legally confirmed the end of the war in Chechnya," said Usman Imayev, the senior Chechen negotiator at a news conference in Grozny, after signing a military accord there with his Russian counterparts.


CHRONICLE
As prospects for Government financing for public television become increasingly uncertain, WILLIAM F. BAKER , president of Channel 13 / WNET, finds himself becoming more imaginative about fund raising.
That is why Dr.
Baker will be leading what he hopes is a merry band of travelers on a luxury trip to Antarctica this winter.


O, the Torment! of Reciting Shakespeare
They sat in a semicircle, in T-shirts and shorts, reciting some of the most powerful dramatic lines ever written.
"O, what a rogue and peasant slave am I!" declaimed a bespectacled young man wearing two days' growth of beard.


The Battle By the River Drags On
Donald Trump's long delayed plan for Riverside South, a $2 billion cluster of apartments and park land on the West Side of Manhattan, hit another snag last week when the House of Representives blocked the use of Federal funds to reconstruct part of the West Side Highway.
The measure, sponsored by Representative Jerrold L. Nadler, a West Side Democrat who fiercely opposes the project, provoked a barrage of criticism.
The funds were to submerge the elevated section of the highway, between 59th Street and 72d Street, making way for a park with unimpeded access to the Hudson.


What Forced Goldwyn to Seek Sale?
In 1993, the Samuel Goldwyn Company was basking in the critical and box-office success of art-house films like Kenneth Branagh's "Much Ado About Nothing" and "The Wedding Banquet," directed by Ang Lee.
And the Goldwyn-produced syndicated television hit "American Gladiators," in its fifth year, seemed to be an enduring cash cow.
So why is Goldwyn, one of the last independent film distributors in Hollywood and a producer of mass-market television shows, now up for sale?


Essay; An Orgy of Summer Advice
What are newsmakers to do when pundits take summer vacations?
Where will the column-addicted leaders get their regular fix of advice?
Here is a month's supply of policy tips and moral strictures.


Tragedy of Pet Breeding
To the Editor:
Both sides in the debate over "munchkin" cats are missing an important point: It's silly, if not tragic, to breed ever more animals at a time when so many of those already born are destined to die homeless in a shelter or on the street ("A Cat Fight Breaks Out Over a Breed," news article, July 23).


Dr. Harry Zimmerman, 93, Dies; Founded Albert Einstein College
Dr.
Harry M. Zimmerman, a pioneer in the study of diseases of the nervous system in the United States and a founder of the Albert Einstein College of Medicine, died on Friday at Montefiore Medical Center in the Bronx, where he had trained a generation of neuropathologists.
Dr.
Zimmerman, who was 93, had also taught at Yale and Columbia.
In a varied career that produced hundreds of highly specialized research papers, Dr.
Zimmerman did seminal work at Yale in the 1930's on vitamin deficiency and the development of tumors of the nervous system; helped prevent the spread of parasitic diseases in the Pacific during World War II (his prescription being clean sheets), and while stationed on Guam with the Navy Medical Corps in 1945 and 1946, spurred a wave of new research into Lou Gehrig's disease when he discovered an extraordinarily high incidence of the malady among the native population.


A Program to Help Rape Victims
Twenty-two nurses at Riverview Medical Center in Red Bank and Monmouth Medical Center in Long Branch will be trained to help rape victims and gather evidence that can be used in court under a new $90,000 pilot program included in a bill enacted last week.
Training will be provided by the Monmouth County Prosecutor's Office.


Sun Distributors L.P.(SDP,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


The real significance of Windows 95 is reaching the Web with a single click of the mouse.
IT'S damn the subpoenas, full speed ahead.
Unless the Justice Department pulls the plug in the final countdown days before Aug. 24, the Microsoft Corporation is preparing to start its most ambitious, and potentially most lucrative, venture since Bill Gates won the job in 1980 of providing I.B.M. with a piece of software called DOS 1.0.


Kathleen Turner Back In 'Indiscretions' Cast
After a weeklong absence that caused a steep decline in ticket sales, Kathleen Turner returns tonight to the cast of "Indiscretions," the play at the Ethel Barrymore Theater in which she co-stars with Eileen Atkins and Roger Rees.
The play's press agent, Alma Viator, said Ms.
Turner's doctors had ordered her to rest after nodules were found on her vocal cords.


IN PERFORMANCE: JAZZ
A Wide-Ranging Style With Material to Match  Ethel Ennis Michael's Pub
Ethel Ennis, the Baltimore-based jazz and blues singer who is appearing in New York for the first time in many years, is a performer who flits from style to style without leaving an indelible personal signature.


INSIDE
Partial Pact on Chechnya
Russia signed a partial treaty with Chechnya to try to end the fighting there, but it did not resolve the separatist region's status.
Page A3.
Israel to Seek Extradition
Israel will seek extradition from the United States of a man said to be a leader of a group responsible for deadly attacks in Israel.
Page A3.
Governors Seek Consensus
COncerned about Congress's plans for Medicaid, the nation's governors, meeting in Vermont, are tyring to find common ground.
Page A10.





Surgical Care Affiliates Inc.(SCA,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


California Energy (CE,N) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Members of 2 Unions Reject Contracts With Metro-North
The members of two unions have turned down tentative contracts with Metro-North Commuter Railroad, undoing a good portion of the progress made in talks this month and casting doubt on the prospects for quick settlements with other unions.
The votes by the International Association of Machinists and the International Brotherhood of Firemen and Oilers undercut management's assertion that the tentative accords had established a pattern that the other unions and Federal mediators would follow.


Art for Whose Sake?: Trading in Antiquities; Rare Pre-Columbian Relics, at Any Cost
In a 15-minute videotape that tomb robbers in Guatemala are circulating among art dealers and archeologists, there are several views of a milky-colored limestone slab, about 4 by 5 feet.
It is the Cancuen panel, a sort of Maya Rosetta stone covered with hieroglyphic signs carved on it 1,500 years ago.
For $75,000, anyone can buy a chunk.
Actually, the Cancuen panel is priceless, a historically significant treasure that turned up during the present explosion of discoveries about the lost civilizations of Mesoamerica.
It is also indicative of a dramatic increase in the rampant and brazen looting of archeological sites in Central America that dates to the early years of the century.


BUSINESS DIGEST
In Congress, a Battle On Spending and Ideology  When a Senate Appropriations subcommittee picked up the $23.2 billion spending bill passed by the House, it excised a slew of controversial provisions advanced by House conservatives.
The Senate committee quietly stripped the bill of its ideology and cut spending by $175 million more.
The move would unite two of the largest companies in business forms, printing and labels.  [ D2. ] Changing Hands After a Century  For 103 years, The Berkshire Eagle has been a Yankee institution, a Pulitzer Prize-winning daily with a reputation for excellence that has extended far beyond New England.
The Miller family has owned the paper all these years.
But now, the family's Eagle Publishing Company -- burdened by $19 million in debt -- is about to sell.
An announcement of The Eagle sale is expected within two weeks.  [ D7. ] Factories in Inquiry Re-open  Two aircraft ball-bearing factories in western New York, which shut down on Friday after Federal agents raided them as part of an investigation into defective parts, resumed limited production.  [ A8. ] Hearst Makes Waves  When Hearst Magazines said it would cut the circulation it guarantees and raise prices for advertisers and subscribers, it created waves.
Curiously, the reaction has run the gamut from high praise to astonishment.
Deirdre Carmody: Magazines.  [ D7. ] What Caused Goldwyn's Troubles?
The system rates 810 companies based solely on the financial reports that they file annually with state regulators.  [ D10. ] China Claims Islands  At a meeting of Asian foreign ministers, China insisted it had "indisputable sovereignty" over potentially oil-rich islands in the South China Sea but opened the door to negotiating a settlement over their ownership.  [ A3. ] The End of the Gown Gap?
A professor of nursing has designed a new hospital gown that gives doctors and nurses the access they need without overexposing the patient.
Sabra Chartrand: Patents.  [ D2. ]


In Packwood Ethics Case, Support From a Democrat
Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan, the senior Senator from New York and a Democrat, has emerged as one of the chief supporters of Senator Bob Packwood, the Oregon Republican accused of sexual and official misconduct.
Mr.
Moynihan rose at a Democratic caucus meeting last week and told his colleagues that he supported Mr.
Packwood and that it was not the time for public hearings on the accusations.
He said any decision about what to do next should be left to the Ethics Committee, which is to resume its closed-door discussions of the case on Monday.


Queens Church Trip Ends in Fatal Crash Along the Thruway
They were the future leaders, the exuberant young promise, of their families and their Queens congregation, the nation's largest Korean Catholic church.
They had struggled to overcome immigrant hardships.
They labored happily for their community, excelled in education, were dedicated Sunday school teachers and camp counselors and were devoted to their faith and to one another.
But on Saturday night, as the 14 friends rode together on a weekend outing in the Catskill Mountains, their van swerved out of control and rolled over and over again in a nightmarish crash on the Gov.
Thomas E. Dewey Thruway near Kingston, 75 miles north of New York City.
Two were hurled from the tumbling vehicle and others were trapped in the mangled wreckage.


Metal Fatigue Is Suspected In Ride Wreck
Metal fatigue probably caused the calamitous failure of a Coney Island thrill ride Saturday night that injured 13 people, including a woman who nearly lost a part of her leg, city officials said yesterday.
The ride known as the Hell Hole, a name that proved eerily apt for a few terrifying moments, was inspected three months ago by the city's Department of Buildings and found to be sound.
But officials said it was unclear whether the inspectors had missed signs of impending disaster, or if evidence of a problem appeared too late to be caught.


Dovatron International Inc.(DOVT,NNM) reports earnings for 2d qtr to Jun 30


Graham Knows He's No. 2, but Works Like a No. 1
Kent Graham looks more relaxed.
He got his hair cut the other day, and his blond spikes almost stand on end.
When someone joked he looks like a punk rocker rather than a pro quarterback, he laughed.
Graham can joke about these things now because there isn't as much at stake for him.
Last year was different.
He was in the fight of his career for the Giants' starting job.
And it was strange seeing the naturally light-hearted and warm Graham be so tense.
That isn't how he is now.
There is no question who is the starter and who is the backup.


Franklin (Ben) Retail Stoes Inc. reports earnings for 1st qtr to Jun 30


Dream Teamers Back for 1996
As expected, four players from the original Dream Team were officially selected yesterday to the 1996 USA Basketball squad for the Atlanta Games.
And also as expected, only two players from the 1994 world championship team, which made more headlines with its showboating than its play, were chosen.


