David Lawrence, 67; Prolific Letter Writer
David Nickerson Lawrence, a former marketing executive who had scores of letters and snippets of wry commentary and irreverent verse published in New York City and Westchester County newspapers, died on Tuesday at his home in North Salem, N.Y.
He was 67.
The cause was cancer, his family said.


Jerry Brown, 82, Fabric Shop Owner
Jerry Brown, a Manhattan specialty shop owner who offered couturiers an array of rich natural fabrics for nearly half a century, died on Wednesday at the New York University Medical Center.
He was 82 and lived in Manhattan.
The cause was congestive heart failure, his nephew, Dr. Bertram Brown, said.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
9.00
9.00
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
5.25
5.25
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
6.12
6.16
3.64
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.69
5.68
3.60
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.83
5.79
3.91
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.19
7.15
6.93
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.43
7.41
7.26
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.32
8.31
7.95
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.37
6.34
6.36
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Christopher Proposes Tighter Curbs on Trade With Iran
Secretary of State Warren Christopher has concluded that the American strategy for isolating Iran is not working and has recommended that the United States ban most trade with the country, senior Administration officials said today.
The recommendation, presented in a recent meeting at the White House by Deputy Secretary of State Strobe Talbott, would prohibit American companies from buying Iranian oil on the open market and from investing in projects in Iran, the officials added.


A Wild Day for the Markets as Dollar Resumes Its Plunge
The dollar plunged to new post-World-War-II lows against the German mark and the Japanese yen yesterday, as stocks closed mixed after a tumultuous day that began with a fall of more than 60 points in the Dow Jones industrial average.
After sharp swings of their own, long-term interest rates rose slightly.
Although stock and bond prices rallied from their lows, analysts say the three-month-long decline in the dollar may finally be dragging down the stock and bond markets in the United States, as a weak dollar discourages foreign investors from buying American assets.


Corrections
An article yesterday about the influence of lobbyists in writing legislation misidentified Larry Block, who works for the Senate Judiciary Committee.
He is a counsel to the committee, not its staff director.


Clinton, in Haiti, Marks the Withdrawal of G.I.'s
Luxuriating in the cheers of thousands of Haitians, the praise of President Jean-Bertrand Aristide and the crisp salutes of soldiers from a score of nations, President Clinton today handed over the responsibility for the security of Haiti from American troops to a United Nations peacekeeping force.
Saying the restoration of Mr.
Aristide to power after an American military intervention last fall represented "the triumph of freedom over fear," Mr.
Clinton promised the United States would continue to support efforts to establish democracy here.
But he also made it clear that Haitians must bear the primary burden of building a just and prosperous society.


Son, Mother, Suspicion
"The Day the Sun Turned Cold" begins when a young man named Guan Jin walks into the eerie blue light of a police station, offering information about a 10-year-old murder.
In an unemotional voice he says that the victim was his father; the murderer, he believes, was his mother.
Based on a true story, this restrained, atmospheric tale by the Hong Kong-based film maker Yim Ho quickly takes off, grafting elements of film noir onto a radically different visual palette.
Guan Jin and the police investigator travel to his home village in the north of China, to a bright, snowy rural landscape.
As they do, the film flashes back to Guan Jin's youth, reconstructing what the 14-year-old heard and saw.
His memories offer little absolute knowledge.


112 Cleaners Are Arrested At Airport
Officers from three Federal agencies and the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey arrested more than 100 illegal aliens employed by a cleaning company at Newark International Airport on Thursday, in a nighttime sweep that the authorities said ended a 15-month investigation of undocumented workers at the airport.
Federal officials said the investigation began after they received tips that the cleaning company, Lisbon Cleaners Inc. of Newark, which employs about 500 people in northern New Jersey, had a large number of undocumented employees.


Health Systems Wins a $2.5 Billion Contract
Adding spice to the latest California health care merger fight, Health Systems International won a $2.5 billion Government contract yesterday.
The losing bidders included Wellpoint Health Networks, which is trying to buy Health Systems.
Dr.
Malik M. Hasan, chairman of Health Systems, said in a telephone interview that his advisers were "currently examining" whether the added value "is high enough to go back and renegotiate" Wellpoint's $1.78 billion stock-swap offer for Health Systems.


Hopes for Settlement Could Be Premature
Baseball's extended and decidedly dysfunctional family should be used to wild roller coaster rides on the emotional rails by now.
But when a Federal court judge threw an injunction in the path of the owners yesterday and forced them to honor old work rules, the owners and their replacement players were sent reeling anew.
Major league players did not reel.
Instead they were almost giddy with anticipation after following through on their promise to end their seven-and-a-half-month strike, the longest in sports history, and return to work.
That done, they immediately began talking about the quickest routes to back to the norm -- by way of spring training camps, arbitration decisions and rapid-fire signings for the 833 players who are on rosters but don't have contracts, as well as the hundred-plus unsigned free agents.


No Disbarment in Assault Case
A prosecutor "must combat acts of domestic violence, not commit them," the State Supreme Court said.
The court reprimanded but declined to disbar a former Gloucester County assistant prosecutor, Lawrence G. Magid, who pleaded guilty and was given a year's probation in 1993 for beating his girlfriend.


Meihan Nonoyama, Researcher Who Led Institute, Dies at 57
Dr.
Meihan Nonoyama, co-founder and president of the Tampa Bay Research Institute in St.
Petersburg, Fla., died on March 24 at his home in St.
Petersburg.
He was 57.
The cause was cancer, said a spokesman for the institute, Dr. Raymond Lau.


Lively Day at Grant's Tomb


Agassi Warms To His Task After Soggy, Cold Beginning
Except for a prescient few who resorted to full-length fur and didn't regret it, dutiful locals put on their parkas and gathered to watch Andre Agassi inaugurate a weekend of Davis Cup tennis in frigid, rain-soaked Sicily today.
At the Circolo del Tennis Palermo, the Davis Cup quarterfinal between the underdog Italians and the megateam from the United States suffered a foreboding beginning.
Bad weather was the culprit.


CHRONICLE
Another Grammy Award winner, SUZANNE VEGA, the singer-songwriter, married MITCHELL FROOM, a record producer, in a ceremony at New York's City Hall on March 17, The Associated Press reported yesterday.
STEVE KARAS, a spokesman for A &amp; M Records, the label for which Ms.
Vega records, said that the marriage was not announced until yesterday to give the newlyweds time to enjoy their honeymoon.
Friends and family celebrated the marriage two days later at the couple's Manhattan home, Mr.
Karas said.


Ralph Levitz, 82, Furniture Executive
Ralph Levitz, former chairman of the Levitz Furniture Corporation, died on Saturday at his vacation home in La Costa, Calif.
He was 82 and lived in Palm Beach, Fla.
He suffered a long illness due to a stroke, his family said.


BACKED BY COURT, BASEBALL PLAYERS CALL STRIKE OVER
A Federal judge issued an injunction against major league baseball owners yesterday, setting the stage for their players to return to work after a nearly eight-month-old strike.
The players, who walked out last Aug. 12, have offered to end the longest work stoppage in professional sports history and revitalize a game that last year lost its signature, the World Series, for the first time in 90 years.


Corrections
A music review yesterday about a performance of Brahms's "German Requiem" by Kurt Masur, the New York Philharmonic and the Westminster Symphonic Choir on Wednesday evening at Carnegie Hall misidentified one of the instruments in the concert.
The organ was a small pipe organ brought in for the performance; it was not electric.


Have Camera, Will Travel
LOUIS MENDES paced the decks of the Staten Island Ferry looking for women and children first.
So what if the afternoon light was the only thing sinking?
He saves life's moments.


Why the Philippines Exports Its Children
To the Editor:
Re "Filipino Migrant Workers Find a Harsh World" (letter, March 25): Jacqueline Siapno explains how the Filipino elite distance themselves from their domestic helpers when they are alive by referring to them as "hayup" (animals), and when they are dead by martyring them with the rhetoric of nationalism.
But why?


POP
A Rejuvenated Survivor And the Rhythms He Plays  Israel (Cachao) Lopez, bassist S.O.B.'s


METRO DIGEST
POLICE AND TRANSIT FORCES TO MERGE Accomplishing what two Mayors before him had tried and failed to do, Mayor Giuliani has won final agreement to merge the transit police with the New York City Police Department, after promising to maintain the present level of officers on patrol in the subways.
Under an agreement with the Metropolitan Transportation Authority, the state agency that runs the transit police, the Mayor pledged to keep an average of 1,023 officers policing the city's 230 miles of subways and 469 stations each day.
Page 1.
NEW YORK CITY  REPORT WEIGHS HOSPITAL PLAN A long-awaited study of the feasibility of the Giuliani administration's plans to sell three of New York's municipal hospitals says the hospitals are inefficiently run now and would cost the city $1.7 billion to maintain over a decade.
But City Council officials said the report failed to provide enough information on the costs and benefits of the planned sale.
Page 23.
GIULIANI PROMOTES HIS PRESS SECRETARY For months, Cristyne F. Lategano, press secretary to Mayor Giuliani, has shared the headlines with her boss, becoming an object of resentment to reporters and editorial writers chafing under her intensely protective style.
The Mayor has provided her with his response to the criticism: a promotion and a $25,000 raise.
Page 23.
SAVING DECADES OF LIFE'S MOMENTS Louis Mendes paced the decks of the Staten Island Ferry looking for women and children first.
So what if the afternoon light was the only thing sinking?
He saves life's moments.
For much of the last three decades, Mr.
Mendes has crisscrossed the city with his instant camera, plying his craft as a street photographer.
About New York by David Gonzalez, page 23. 2D ARREST IN 13-YEAR-OLD MURDER CASE More than 13 years after a young resident in pediatric surgery at Columbia-Presbyterian Medical Center was shot and killed in a struggle with muggers, a second suspect has been arrested by the Manhattan detective whose tenacity broke the long-dormant case with a first arrest last summer.
Page 23.
FISH WHOLESALERS TO BE INVESTIGATED Investigators plan to seize the financial records of the wholesalers who operated in the Fulton Fish Market building that burned in an arson blaze on Wednesday.
Page 22.
REGION  A LATE BUDGET FOR NEW YORK As the midnight deadline for passing the New York State budget loomed, Governor Pataki and legislative leaders conceded that negotiations had collapsed and that the state would have a late budget for the 11th consecutive year.
Page 24.
BANKER PLEADS GUILTY IN KICKBACK CASE Alexander S. Williams, a New Jersey banker, pleaded guilty to falsifying the books at First Fidelity Bank to hide $200,000 paid in kickbacks to get municipal bond business for the company, Federal officials said.
Page 24.
MAN GUILTY IN BOMBING DEATHS OF FIVE A jury took just three hours to convict a man of sending lethal package bombs to relatives of his girlfriend.
Michael Stevens, 54, was found guilty on all 16 counts in the deaths of five people in the bombing spree.
Page 24.
STORE OWNER CLEARED IN WIFE'S DEATH The Somerset County Prosecutor said that he would not file charges against a jewelry store owner who fatally shot his wife during an attempted robbery on March 14.
Page 25.


Chicken Pox Vaccine Offered Many Challenges
To the Editor:
Re "Delay of Chicken Pox Vaccine Had High Cost" by Terese Loeb Kreuzer (letter, March 25):


Banker Pleads Guilty in Scheme To Hide $200,000 in Kickbacks
Alexander S. Williams, a New Jersey banker, pleaded guilty to falsifying the books at First Fidelity Bank to hide $200,000 paid in kickbacks to get municipal bond business for the company, Federal officials said yesterday.
As part of a plea bargain, Mr.
Williams has agreed to cooperate with the further investigation of the case, said Marvin Smilon, spokesman for the Federal District Court in Manhattan.


In a G.O.P. World, a Democrat Rules Chicago
Republican Mayors call the shots in New York and Los Angeles.
Republicans control Congress, and talk radio everywhere echoes Republican dreams and schemes.
But Chicago belongs to Mayor Richard M. Daley, a throwback to the days when big-city mayors usually came in only one flavor: Democratic.
The oldest son of the city's legendary political leader, Richard J. Daley, Richard Michael Daley is the soul of a new machine; a Democrat with the instincts of a Republican, a self-professed outsider who ritually bad-mouths "the bureaucrats in Washington." He says he has no serious beef with the Republican revolution, and he preaches privatization, big development and small government.


A Life Saved, a Life Lost: Gun Issue Gets Personal
Sharon-Jo Ramboz was a teen-ager when, home alone one day, she was beaten and left for dead by a man who had broken into the house.
She was emotionally devastated and dropped out of school.
Years later, in 1989, after she was married and had children, another man broke into her home, in suburban Maryland.
This time she was ready.
"I calmly walked to our closet where the firearm was stored," she testified today at a Congressional hearing on the proposed repeal of last year's ban on 19 varieties of assault weapons.
"I took my Colt AR-15 semiautomatic rifle" and "inserted the magazine while I was in the closet.


She's Waiting for the Meat Man
The wedding is off, but the lawsuit is on.
Kimberly Rolle, 25, an Ocean County woman who had to postpone her wedding after she lost a $35,000investment, filed suit against Charles N. Cugliari of Marlton, a k a Chucky the Meat Man.
The United States Attorney said that his meat business was a pyramid scheme.


Serena's Song Seeks 2 Firsts
Serena's Song was the 8-5 favorite today to become the first filly to win the $600,000 Jim Beam Stakes, the richest prep for the Kentucky Derby, and to lead a powerful group of California horses trained by D. Wayne Lukas into the Kentucky Oaks and the Derby five weeks later.
The filly drew the No. 3 post position for the mile-and-an-eighth race at Turfway Park on Saturday.
She has succeeded the retired Flanders as the prize filly in the Lukas barn and was expected to run in the Oaks on Friday, May 5, the day before Timber Country and Thunder Gulch carry the Lukas silks into the Derby.


Safety Note
Fire officials recommend changing the batteries in smoke alarms twice a year, when daylight time starts and ends.
This spring, the date is tomorrow.


Transactions
Baseball  National League PHILADELPHIA PHILLIES -- Released Pete Conlin, Gary Brahs, Bob Craskey, Jeff Hull, Steve Lankard, Joe McCann, Bill Phillips, and Jim Rasmussen, pitchers; Carlos Diaz and Joe Singley, catchers; Todd Cruz, Mike Huyler, and Alex Ojea, infielders; John Gibbons and Steve Sabo, outfielders.
Re-assigned Todd Coburn, catcher; Tex Baldridge and Greg Dunn, pitchers; and Jim Freeman, infielder-outfielder, to extended spring training camp.
Football  National Football League MIAMI DOLPHINS -- Signed Bernie Parmalee, running back, to a two-year contract.
NEW YORK JETS -- Agreed to terms with Matt Brock, defensive lineman.
SAN FRANCISCO 49ERS -- Signed Troy Wilson, defensive end, to a one-year contract.
Canadian Football League HAMILTON TIGER-CATS -- Signed Tony Bailey and Steve Grant, defensive linemen, and Greg Patrick and Shawn Prendergast, linebackers.
MEMPHIS MAD DOGS -- Signed Rodney Harding, defensive tackle.
TORONTO ARGONAUTS -- Agreed to terms with Reggie Barners, running back, and Jock Climie, slotback.
Hockey  National Hockey League BUFFALO SABRES -- Recalled Viktor Gordiouk, left wing, from Rochester of the American Hockey League.
NEW YORK RANGERS -- Re-assigned Jon Hillebrandt, goaltender, and Sylvain Blouin and Andy Silverman, defensemen, from Charlotte of the East Coast Hockey League to Binghamton of the American Hockey League.
American Hockey League FREDERICTON CANADIENS -- Signed Brady Kramer, center.
ROCHESTER AMERICANS -- Signed Sergei Klimentiev, defenseman.
College  BRIGHAM YOUNG -- Announced the retirement of Lu Wallace, women's athletic director.
NAVY -- Named Ken Niumatalolo running backs coach.
TUSCULUM -- Announced the resignation of Angelo Botta, women's basketball coach.
WAKE FOREST -- Named Mary Jones volleyball coach.


One Australia Advances With a Backup
With a state of limbo settling into the America's Cup defense trials both in racing on the water and in jury proceedings ashore, at least the fate of the challengers has been decided.
In an easy, 2-minute-41-second victory over Japan's Nippon 95 today, One Australia clinched the second berth in the Louis Vuitton Cup challengers' finals.
The Australian syndicate, whose newer boat sank on March 5, will be competing against one of Team New Zealand's two boats, both named Black Magic.


Bond Prices Drop for 2d Consecutive Day
Prices of Treasury securities fell yesterday for the second straight day in reaction to news of higher-than-expected economic growth late last year, soaring precious metals prices and a slide in the dollar.
The 30-year bond fell 7/32 , to a price of 10211/32 for a yield of 7.43 percent, up from 7.41 percent on Thursday, and 7.36 percent a week ago.


Kovalev Injury Adds to Ranger Ills
When the Rangers try to end their seven-game losing streak in Boston Garden this afternoon, they may play without one of their top forwards.
Aleksei Kovalev, who is sometimes the center for the second line and also plays right wing, suffered a charley horse in his right leg during Thursday night's 5-4 loss to the Quebec Nordiques at Madison Square Garden.


Hasty, Washington Join Chiefs; Jets Add Defensive Lineman
Seeking to improve their defense with speed and experience in the secondary, the Kansas City Chiefs signed one-half of what was the Jets' secondary for the last five years, cornerback JAMES HASTY and safety BRIAN WASHINGTON, as unrestricted free agents yesterday.
The 29-year-old Hasty received a four-year deal, and Washington, also 29, a five-year contract.
No other terms were disclosed.
Hasty has started all 111 games he played since joining the Jets in 1988.
He has missed just one game in his career and has started 103 in a row.
Washington, who played for the Cleveland Browns as a rookie in 1988, has missed just two games in his career.
Combined, they have accounted for 45 interceptions in their six years.


Harvey E. Lyon, 71; Led Trident Program
Harvey Eugene Lyon, a retired rear admiral and submariner who helped to build Trident missile submarines in the 1970's, died on Monday at his home in Fairfax, Va.
He was 71.
The cause was a heart attack, his family said.


Holzinger Winner Of the Baker Award
He first tried figure skating at age 7, wearing hockey skates bought at a garage sale.
From that modest beginning, the sporting life went onward and upward for Brian Holzinger, who was today named winner of the Hobey Baker Award as college hockey's player of the year.


Bennett Gets Wisconsin Job
DICK BENNETT, who turned Wisconsin-Green Bay into an N.C.A.A. tournament team, became Wisconsin's basketball coach yesterday.
Bennett, 51, has coached for 30 years in Wisconsin, in high schools and college.
In 10 years at Green Bay, he compiled a 187-109 record, and was 174-79 in 9 seasons at Wisconsin-Stevens Point.
He succeeds STAN VAN GUNDY, who was dismissed after less than a year after a 13-14 season. (AP)


G.D.P. Growth in Late '94 Is Revised Sharply Higher
The Government issued revised figures today indicating that the economy grew even faster in late 1994 than previously thought, with output expanding at an annual rate of 5.1 percent, a pace that raised concern on Wall Street.
The surprisingly large upward revision in gross domestic product, which a month ago had been calculated to have grown at a 4.6 percent pace, weighed on the bond and stock markets as investors and analysts re-evaluated the prospects that the Federal Reserve would once again raise short-term interest rates to restrain the economy.


A Frothy Cole Porter Rarity Makes a Case for Erotic Fantasy
Poor Juno.
After 26 centuries of marriage to Jupiter, who is continually sneaking away from Mount Olympus to have affairs with earthlings, she looks somewhat the worse for wear.
In Andrea Martin's hilarious portrayal of the beleaguered Greek goddess in City Center's concert revival of "Out of This World," Juno is a brassy realist with a sense of humor that matches her toothy, cockeyed grin.
While everyone around her frantically pairs off, Juno throws up her hands and cheerfully laments her wallflower status: "The breeze is chasing the zephyr/The moon is chasing the sea/The bull is chasing the heifer/But nobody's chasing me."


Ex-Officer Is Wounded by Payroll Robbers
A 63-year-old retired housing police officer delivering a $20,000 cash payroll was wounded yesterday in a gun duel with robbers who were waiting for him in a Brooklyn industrial building, the police said.
The former officer, Vincent C. McNeil of Brooklyn, was reported in stable condition at Bellevue Hospital Center after more than an hour of surgery for a chest wound that a hospital spokeswoman said was superficial.


INSIDE
Russians Report City's Fall
The last city in the separatist region of Chechnya has fallen, Russian forces said.
But the rebels are expected to continue to wage a guerrilla war in the mountains.
Page 3.
Dollar Falls to Postwar Lows
The dollar plunged to postwar lows against the German mark and the Japanese yen.
Stocks closed mixed in tumultuous trading.
Page 35.
More Curbs Sought on Iran
Secretary of State Warren Christopher has recommended that the U.S. ban most trade with Iran, Administration officials said.
Page 5.
Lives Saved, and Lost
At a House hearing on repeal of an assault weapons ban, each side produced witnesses who told of guns' effect on their lives.
Page 26.
A Reminder
Daylight savings time resumes at 2 A.M. tomorrow. Clocks are set ahead one hour.


Hit Bands You See But Don't Listen To
In case you don't watch MTV, here's a guide to a few of the new bands with one-word names that music-television watchers are talking about: Weezer is the group with the video that parodies the sitcom "Happy Days"; Bush is the band that looks like Pearl Jam cast in a Nirvana video, and Wax is the group with the video featuring the burning man who doesn't seem to mind that his backside is on fire.
What does the music of these bands sound like?
Who cares.
The age of the one-hit wonder, a band that makes its name on the basis of a catchy top-40 hit and then disappears, is over.
It's now the age of the one-video wonder, a band that breaks into the mainstream because of a memorable moving image and then disappears.
From its inception, MTV showed that it wasn't afraid of musicians with no career.
The first video it played when it began broadcasting in 1981 was by a band that had already proved itself a one-hit wonder, the Buggles, whose two-year-old top-40 song "Video Killed the Radio Star" was an appropriate way for the network to celebrate itself.
But it was the content of the song that mattered, not the image of the video.


Shuzenji Journal; Was Lost Family a Victim of the Cult?
Her voice breaks, a tear trembles in her eye, then suddenly she is back from the brink and radiates a dazzling smile as she describes how she has just bought new school clothes for her grandson.
What makes Sachiyo Sakamoto different from a million other grandmothers is that she does not know whether her grandson is alive.


Corrections
An article on Tuesday about the cancellation of a program to move poor families to better neighborhoods misstated the given name of an opponent of the program.
He is Howard Husock, not Henry.


It All Goes Knicks' Way For One Night
The Knicks had been looking for a game like last night's at Madison Square Garden.
Their offense clicked.
Their bench contributed.
Their defense dominated.
New York made it look easy against the Dallas Mavericks, who had won 6 consecutive games and 9 of their last 10.
With eight and a half minutes to play, New York led by 23 points.
It was time for Coach Pat Riley to rest the starters, and why not?
Everyone Riley called upon did something positive.


For Sale: A Suspect Iranian Airport
The Iranian owners of a civilian airport in Germany, which Western intelligence officials said was used to smuggle weapons and high technology to Iran, have put it up for sale.
The Iranian owners, Mehdi Kashani and Moussa Khayer Habibollahi, who bought the Hartenholm airport in 1993, informed the government of Schleswig-Holstein a few days ago of the proposed sale.
An article about the airport appeared in The New York Times on March 15.


Bridge
The American Contract Bridge League's Spring National Championships began here today with thousands in attendance but one notable absentee.
Edgar Kaplan of Manhattan, who has been at almost every national for the last 45 years, was missing because he underwent surgery earlier this week; he is making a good recovery.
He has a world reputation as a player, administrator, theorist, author, teacher, commentator, authority on the laws of the game and editor of "The Bridge World." He was one of the three living players, along with Alvin Roth and Robert Wolff, to be inducted into the league's Hall of Fame on Thursday.


Giuliani Gives Press Secretary a Promotion
For months, Cristyne F. Lategano, press secretary to Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani, has shared the headlines with her boss, becoming an object of resentment by reporters and editorial writers chafing under her intensely protective style.
Yesterday, the Mayor provided her with his response to the criticism: a promotion and a $25,000 raise.
Ms.
Lategano, 30, is now the administration's director of communications, a job Mr.
Giuliani had planned to fill earlier but for which he never found the right candidate.
The Mayor said yesterday that Ms.
Lategano would be in charge of his press office, his speech writing and research office and all his public scheduling and would also coordinate City Hall's public comments and responses with other city agencies.
Her salary will increase to $102,000 from $77,000.


RESULTS PLUS
N.B.A.
Pacers' Streak Halted  Dikembe Mutombo scored 13 of his 22 points in the first quarter, sending Denver ahead to stay last night as the Nuggets won at Indiana, 107-92, to snap the Pacers' five-game winning streak.
Denver, battling Sacramento for the eighth spot in the Western Conference playoffs, posted its first victory at Market Square Arena since March 13, 1988.
Indiana had won six in a row since.
Rik Smits topped Indiana with 23 points. (AP)  MAGIC 101, JAZZ 98: Dennis Scott's pair of free throws with 23.4 seconds left broke a tie, helping Orlando win at Utah.
The Magic, which had lost 9 of its previous 12 road games, got its biggest one of the season, handing the Jazz just its second loss at the Delta Center in 19 games.
Shaquille O'Neal had 28 points and 11 rebounds to lead Orlando and had a key block in the final minutes.
Anfernee Hardaway added 21 points. (AP) SPURS 118, BUCKS 102: David Robinson had 26 points and 10 rebounds and host San Antonio won its 10th straight.
The victory, coupled with Orlando's victory over Utah, pushed the Spurs half a game ahead of the Jazz for the best record in the Western Conference. (AP) 76ers 86, TRAIL BLAZERS 85: Clarence Weatherspoon hit a 17-foot jump shot with 3.3 seconds left to give host Philadelphia the victory. (AP) CAVALIERS 98, BULLETS 88: Chris Mills scored 24 points and Cleveland overcame a 19-point first-half deficit to beat visiting Washington.
Tyrone Hill had 20 points and 11 rebounds for the Cavaliers. (AP) CELTICS 100, HEAT 99: Dino Radja took a pass from Sherman Douglas and scored on a dunk with 1.7 seconds remaining as host Boston outdueled Miami down the stretch. (AP) N.H.L.
Bondra Carries Capitals  Peter Bondra extended his goal-scoring streak to seven games, high in the National Hockey League this season, and the Washington Capitals beat the Quebec Nordiques, 6-4, last night at Landover, Md.
Bondra has 10 goals during his streak, 21 this season over all. (AP) LIGHTNING 2, WHALERS 0: At St.
Petersburg, Fla., Daren Puppa stopped 25 shots for his first shutout this season and the rookie Aleksandr Selivanov scored his eighth goal as Tampa Bay shut out Hartford. (AP) TENNIS  Sanchez Vicario Injured  Arantxa Sanchez Vicario, the world's top-ranked player, made a painful exit from the Family Circle Cup yesterday while the defending champion, Conchita Martinez, made a forceful entry into the tournament's semifinals at Hilton Head Island, S.C.
Sanchez Vicario withdrew from a tournament for the first time in her 10 years as a professional because of a painful right ankle sprain.
She wrenched the ankle sliding on a forehand return on Thursday against Amanda Coetzer.
The Spaniard won that match, but yesterday her ankle was encased in bandages and ice packs.
Martinez overcame her own woeful display of tennis to reel off 12 straight games and reach the semifinals, 2-6, 6-3, 6-0, over Iva Majoli.
Martinez will face Natasha Zvereva in today's semifinals, and Magdalena Maleeva, Sanchez Vicario's opponent, will meet Silvia Farina. (AP)


Nets Are Reeling Once Again
The Nets are reeling again, and their goal of making the playoffs might be in jeopardy with their franchise player out for at least one week.
Derrick Coleman injured his left (shooting) wrist for the second time this season in a 106-103 loss to the Portland Trail Blazers at the Meadowlands on Thursday night.
He underwent a magnetic resonance imaging test yesterday and was diagnosed with a sprained left wrist.
He is being treated by Dr.
Charles Melone, the Manhattan hand specialist who performed wrist surgery on Kenny Anderson last May.


Same Time, Same Jacket, With a Difference
The jacket he wore was a keepsake, with a year-old logo and the word "Charlotte" on its sleeves, a reminder of the weekend that Arkansas became national champions, Nolan Richardson reached the top of his profession and the President led the cheers.
As he approached the end of a year that has held as much frustration and scrutiny as a 31-6 season can bring, Richardson's voice sounded softer and more reflective today than it did through this weekend last year.
No matter how much Richardson issues the same reminder to the Razorbacks, he understands that two weekends, last year and this year, have become connected by the achievements of the same five starters and the expectations that have followed.


Public Interest, Not State's
Just hours after the State Senate voted to block Rutgers University from automatically deducting $15 annually from each student's tuition payment to finance the New Jersey Public Interest Research Group, Governor Whitman signed the bill into law.
The Governor objects to the group's exclusive claim on mandatory financing by students.
JOE SHARKEY


First Grader Totes Governor
The kid thinks big.
In January, a first grader at Chapin School wrote to Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman to ask: "Will you be my show and tell?" Charmed, the Governor agreed.
Ross Uhrich, 6, brought her in yesterday, and she stayed for 45 minutes.


ISRAEL SAYS SYRIA IS PROMISING TIES FOR GOLAN RETURN
President Hafez al-Assad of Syria was reported by Israeli officials today to have agreed to establish relations with Israel in return for getting back the Golan Heights, which his country lost in war 28 years ago.
The officials said Mr.
Assad had told Secretary of State Warren Christopher two weeks ago that he would allow Israel to maintain "a low-level diplomatic representation" in Damascus even before it completes a withdrawal from the Golan Heights.


Yesterday in Washington
ASSAULT WEAPONS -- A Congressional panel heard testimony from a woman who said she had frightened off an intruder in her home with the sound of her semiautomatic rifle being prepared to fire.
The witness, Sharon-Jo Ramboz, said that years earlier, when she was a teen-ager, she was home alone when an assailant broke into the house, beat her and left her for dead.
This time, she said, the rifle saved her life and the lives of her three children, and she supports Republican efforts to repeal a law passed last year banning them.
But in the audience was another woman, Byrl Phillips-Taylor, whose 17-year-old son, Scott, was shot six times with an AK-47 fired by an 18-year-old classmate, and she was there to show her support of the assault-weapons ban.
DELAYS IN CONGRESS -- A new political skirmish broke out in the Senate, again delaying a vote on midyear budget cuts and prompting the majority leader, Senator Bob Dole, to threaten political war against the White House.
"We're not bringing up any more bills that the White House wants until we have some understanding on the legislation that we thought would go through here in a normal way," Mr.
Dole said, suggesting that President Clinton was orchestrating Democratic efforts to slow work in the Senate.
Mr.
Clinton responded by chiding Mr.
Dole for not having approved millions of dollars in emergency spending to cover the costs of military operations in Haiti, Somalia and elsewhere.
But any hope of a quick vote on that bill or the separate midyear budget cuts was further dimmed by a partisan fight over taxation of multimillionaires.
Senator Edward M. Kennedy, Democrat of Massachusetts, vowed to tie up debate in the Senate unless it first considered his proposal to close a loophole that has allowed a handful of multimillionaires to renounce their United States citizenship to avoid taxes.
Mr.
Dole moved immediately to try to crush the threatened filibuster by filing for a cloture vote on Monday.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 2-5  CLINTON MARKS HAITI CHANGEOVER
Luxuriating in the cheers of thousands of Haitians, President Clinton handed over the responsibility for the security of Haiti from U.S. troops to a U.N. force. 1  IMAGE OF A POLICY SUCCESS
After the setback in Somalia and the agony of the Bosnian civil war, Haiti has become the Administration's example of what peacekeeping can do. 4  AGREEMENT ON GOLAN HEIGHTS?
Syria's President was reported by Israeli officials to have agreed to establish diplomatic relations with Israel in return for getting back the Golan Heights. 1  RUSSIAN TROOPS TAKE CITY
Russian forces said that the last urban center in the separatist region of Chechnya had fallen.
Nevertheless, guerrilla warfare is likely to continue. 3  SEEKING TRADE BAN WITH IRAN
Secretary of State Christopher has concluded that efforts to isolate Iran are not working and has recommended that the U.S. ban most trade with Iran, officials said. 5  U.N. restructures its peacekeeping operation in the Balkans. 2  A jetliner crashes in Romania, killing all 59 people aboard. 3  Shuzenji Journal: A missing Japanese family may be cult victims. 4  National 6-7, 47  G.O.P.
SEEKS MEDICAID OVERHAUL
Republican governors and Congressional leaders are negotiating changes in Medicaid to limit the escalating costs and transfer new authority to the states in deciding eligibility and benefits.  1  MEXICAN SINGER KILLED IN TEXAS
A singing star on both sides of the Mexican border, Selena, was shot to death in Corpus Christi, Tex.  1  A MIDWESTERN ANOMALY
In a time of Republican ascendancy, Chicago is a throwback to the days when big-city mayors usually came in one flavor: Democratic.  1  DISPUTE OVER A SPRING RITE
Atlanta is caught up in debate over the merits, and perils, of Freaknik, an annual, often rowdy gathering of black college students.  6  NEIGHBOR DID NOT SEE BRONCO
A neighbor testified that he did not see O. J. Simpson's Ford Bronco outside his home during the time prosecutors say that the killings of his wife and a friend occurred.  6  UNEASY NEIGHBORS
A militant anti-abortion group has established its headquarters next door to a Dallas clinic that employs the woman whose case led to the legalization of abortion.  6  AIRPORT PASSES FLIGHT TEST
Denver's new airport may have problems with parking and baggage retrieval, but Federal officials say few flights are being delayed.  7  STRIKES AT AUTO PLANTS
Workers reached a tentative agreement hours after striking a Chrysler transmission plant in Kokomo, Ind.
Other workers struck a General Motors plant in Michigan.  7  CONFLICTING VIEWS ON GUNS
Congress heard emotional testimony from both sides of the gun debate: people who said guns had devastated their lives, and people who said guns had saved them.  26  WARNING TO THE WHITE HOUSE
A new political skirmish in the Senate delayed a vote on midyear budget cuts and prompted the majority leader to threaten political war with the White House.  26  FOUNDING DOCUMENTS AT RISK
Sealed glass cases protecting the Declaration of Independence, the Constitution and the Bill of Rights are deteriorating, experts say.  26  Beliefs: How will the Pope's life arguments play?  25  Metro Digest 21  POLICE FORCES MERGE
Accomplishing what two mayors before him had tried and failed to do, Mayor Giuliani won final agreement to merge the transit force into the larger Police Department. 1  Business Digest 35  Sports 28-33  FEDERAL JUDGE ISSUES INJUNCTION
Arts/Entertainment 9-14  Sid Caesar recalls the old days.  9  The one-video wonder bands.  9  Theater: A Cole Porter rarity.  9  Film:"Born to Be Wild." 13
"The Day the Sun Turned Cold." 14  "The Sexual Life of the Belgians" 14  "Zinat." 14  Music: A feast of piano and oboe.  11  Editorials/Op-Ed 18-19  Editorials  Banning gay soldiers by trickery.
The C.I.A.: a pattern of deceit.
Burning bright.
Re-clogging the prisons?
Letters  Russell Baker: April fooling around.
Bob Herbert: Guns for everyone!
Hans W. Morsbach: What goes on under the table.
Kenneth B. Clark and Michael Meyers: Separate is never equal.
Peter Reuter: Myanmar's heroin habit.
Chronicle 20  Bridge 12  Crossword 12


CLASSICAL MUSIC
New Voices Take Over In the Met's New 'Butterfly'  'Madama Butterfly' Metropolitan Opera


Beliefs; How will the Pope's life arguments play, inside and outside the church?
On Thursday, Pope John Paul II issued "Evangelium Vitae," or "Gospel of Life." It is almost 200 pages long, and those pages range from unmistakably clear declarations on abortion and euthanasia to highly compressed philosophical arguments about morality and the law, to the intricate and sometimes daunting filigree of Biblical quotations and personal meditation that is this Pope's specialty.
But then an encyclical is a hybrid creature, part theological treatise, part spiritual reading, part political manifesto.
An encyclical makes arguments, but these arguments do not stand alone.
The dozen pages in "Evangelium Vitae" on the vexed subject of the relationship between civil law and moral law do not pretend to substitute for whole volumes on that topic.


Why Should Poultry Have More Protection Than People?
To the Editor:
Re your March 27 news article on the arrest of 296 people at a cockfight in the Bronx:


11 Years, 11 Late Budgets: Divided Albany Misses the Deadline Again
As the midnight deadline for passing the New York State budget loomed, Gov.
George E. Pataki and legislative leaders conceded tonight that negotiations had collapsed and that the state would have a late budget for the 11th consecutive year.
Clearly frustrated, Mr.
Pataki blamed Assembly Speaker Sheldon Silver, a Democrat from Manhattan, for the deadlock.
The Governor had made an on-time budget a major Republican campaign pledge.
He said Mr.
Silver, after weeks of negotiations, had not even released a plan showing how much the Democrats wanted to spend or how they would pay for it.
Mr.
Pataki said he would follow through with his threat to withhold paychecks on Wednesday for himself, the 211 legislators and their 4,462 aides unless the budget is passed by then.
However, aides to State Comptroller H. Carl McCall, a Democrat, raised questions about whether the Governor had the legal authority to carry that out.
That is because the April 5 paychecks will be for work performed in early March.
And under one interpretation of state law favored by the Democrats, the Governor is required to honor all the state's financial obligations from the previous fiscal year, which ends tonight.
"The Assembly has failed," Mr.
Pataki said in a news conference after a brief negotiating session with Mr.
Silver and the Republican Senate majority leader, Joseph L. Bruno, ended bitterly.
"They haven't passed my budget bills, they haven't passed the Senate's budget bills, they haven't passed their own budget bills and they continue to refuse to allow the people to see where they stand."
In equally testy tones, Mr.
Silver said the stalemate was a result of the Governor's refusal to consider any Democratic ideas for raising more revenue.
The Assembly Democrats want to restore cuts to education, health care and mental health programs, among others, in the Governor's $32.4 billion proposed budget.
As the talks between Mr.
Pataki and legislative leaders stalled this evening, each house of the Legislature was trying to pass its own version of a budget bill.
Because neither bill stands much chance of passing the other house, the votes were largely political exercises intended to inoculate the two sides against criticism for delaying the budget.
The Republican-controlled Senate today finished passing most of a budget supported by Mr.
Pataki.
The Senate's version would increase spending by $335 million above Mr.
Pataki's original plan, and the additional spending would be used to lighten the cuts to hospitals, nursing homes, higher education and local school districts.
But illustrating the great division between the two sides, Mr.
Silver called the Senate-Pataki budget "a sham" because it will not be the final version.
"The people of this state want to know what kind of health care the senior citizens are going to have," Mr.
Silver said.
"What's the tuition of the state and city universities going to be?" The Senate bills, he said, "will be telling the public nothing in that regard."
Nevertheless, Mr.
Silver said the Assembly would begin amending the Republican budget, probably by adding spending opposed by Mr.
Pataki.
That process will probably continue throughout the weekend.
Mr.
Pataki has said that legislative aides will receive their checks only after a budget is passed.
But Steven Greenberg, a spokesman for Mr.
McCall, who issues state paychecks, said it was unclear what would happen on Wednesday.
Mr.
Greenberg said Mr.
McCall has the legal authority to issue checks on Wednesday because he is required to pay the state's outstanding obligations from the 1994-95 fiscal year.
Those paychecks would cover work done in early March, which was part of that fiscal year.
On the other hand, Mr.
Greenberg said Mr.
Pataki could ask the Legislature to pass emergency appropriations bills that would forbid the Comptroller to pay the legislative employees.
It is unlikely that Mr.
Silver would support such a bill.
There is a twist, however.
Mr.
Greenberg said that if Mr.
Silver were to block Mr.
Pataki's emergency appropriations bills, there would not be enough money available to pay thousands of other state workers.
If legislative employees were paid while other state workers were not, it would place Mr.
Silver in a politically awkward position.
Throughout the day, legislative employees braced for the worst.
Some said they planned to take emergency $500 loans at 12 percent interest from their credit union.
Others plan to seek help from relatives.
Late budgets have not always been the rule. .
Former Gov.
Nelson A. Rockefeller, a Republican, had Republican-controlled legislatures for most of his 14-year tenure, and most of his budgets passed on time.
That all changed in 1974, when a Democrat, Hugh L. Carey, was elected governor and the Democrats took control of the Assembly.
Democrats have held the Assembly ever since, while the Senate has remained controlled by Republicans.
That history of divided Legislatures has made timely passage of the budget virtually impossible.
Since 1975, Mr.
Carey's first year in office, the budget has been late 17 times: 6 times under Mr.
Carey, 10 times under Mario M. Cuomo and now once under Mr.
Pataki.
Though Mr.
Bruno tried to show solidarity with Mr.
Pataki by passing a budget the Governor supports, he also demonstrated some independence from the Governor by vowing to pass what he called an "economic development" plan that includes spending Mr.
Pataki opposes.
The Senate's budget bill, which is expected to pass on Monday, includes $77 million for stadiums and other athletic projects in mainly Republican districts, including a $24 million swimming center in Nassau County.
"I think some of them are sound economic development projects," Mr.
Pataki said.
"Others of them are at best questionable."


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an obituary on March 18 about the playwright and screenwriter Albert Hackett referred incorrectly to one of the films for which he and his wife, Frances Goodrich, wrote the screenplay.
The 1956 film "Gaby" was a remake of "Waterloo Bridge" (1931), not an adaptation of the Francoise Sagan novel "A Certain Smile." A Hackett-Goodrich screenplay based on the Sagan novel appeared in 1958.


Cost to Run 3 Hospitals Is $1.7 Billion a Decade
A long-awaited study of the feasibility of the Giuliani administration's plans to sell three of New York's municipal hospitals says the hospitals are inefficiently run now and would cost the city $1.7 billion to maintain over a decade.
But City Council officials said the report failed to provide enough information for them to weigh the costs and benefits of the proposed sale.
The report, by the investment banking firm of J. P. Morgan &amp;Company, provided a sketchy assessment of how attractive the three hospitals would be for potential buyers.
It calls Coney Island Hospital in Brooklyn a "relatively valuable asset" but says Queens Hospital Center will have to be "creatively packaged" to be sold.
The third hospital, Elmhurst Hospital Center in Queens, had a high percentage of nonpaying patients, which could be a drawback, but it also has a brand-new unit, the report notes.


Italian Left Could Play Kingmaker Role
To the Editor:
"Tell These Italians Communism Doesn't Work" (Reggio Emilia Journal, March 24), on the "consistency and even efficiency" a Communist administration has brought to the town of Reggio Emilia, highlights the increasingly prominent role the left is playing in the Italian social, political and economic arena.


UConn Looks in Mirror And Stares at Stanford
During the women's Final Four Saturday, keep an eye on the game involving unbeaten Connecticut (33-0), the nation's top-ranked team.
On offense, you'll see a fly-down-the-floor transition game or a quick point guard feeding big and effective post players or perimeter shooters who can hit 3-point shots.
On defense, you'll see physical play under the boards.


F.C.C. Plan, With a Twist, To Require Educational TV
Federal regulators are proposing an unusual method to provide more educational television for children: broadcasters will be forced to carry up to five hours of educational programming a week, but stations can pay other stations in their areas to do the job for them.
The idea, which the Federal Communications Commission will formally propose on Wednesday, is the latest and perhaps the strangest attempt yet by the Government to promote social improvement by invoking the marketplace's self-interest.


Ruling Gives Mets' Owner Reason to Smile
The Mets sent their replacement players to Cleveland today for their final exhibition game, but after their departure Fred Wilpon referred to the trip as a "thank you" and strongly implied that Saturday afternoon's game against the Indians would be the substitute players' final performance in a Mets' uniform.
Although he repeatedly emphasized the necessity of reaching an agreement between the union and management, Wilpon, a moderate among baseball's owners, appeared almost pleased today by what he clearly saw as the coming demise of replacement baseball and the arrival of the major league Mets in camp -- with or without a collective bargaining agreement -- sometime soon.


Teen-Ager's Body Incinerated?
As the accused murderer was arraigned yesterday, the authorities said they believe the body of 16-year-old Nicole Russo will never be recovered because it was placed in a Long Island Dumpster and incinerated.
Louis Urcinoli, 19, who the police say murdered the teen-ager in his Seaside Park motel room on March 12 or 13, was held on $500,000 bail.


COMPANY BRIEFS
SEARS, ROEBUCK &amp; CO., Chicago, said its shareholders had approved the spinoff of its 80.2 percent ownership of the Allstate Corp., a property casualty and life insurer.
Sears shareholders are expected to receive an estimated 0.93 of a share in Allstate common stock for each Sears common share held.
TANDY CORP., Fort Worth, the consumer electronics retailer, completed the sale of its credit card portfolios to SPS Transaction Services Inc., Riverwoods, Ill., a unit of Dean Witter, Discover &amp; Co., for an estimated $650 million.


The C.I.A.: A Pattern of Deceit
There is a pathology of secrecy and deceit at the Central Intelligence Agency that seems to defeat all remedial efforts, starting with the Congressional inquiries 20 years ago into intelligence abuses.
The latest sign of the agency's chilling indifference to democratic principles is the still unfolding story of two killings in Guatemala and the C.I.A.'s role in impeding the investigations and subverting a suspension of aid to Guatemala.
Each day seems to bring a disturbing new disclosure in these cases.
First Representative Robert Torricelli reported that a Guatemalan colonel on the C.I.A. payroll as an informant ordered the killing of Michael DeVine, an American living in Guatemala, and Efrain Bamaca Velasquez, a rebel leader married to an American, Jennifer Harbury.
Though there is no evidence so far that the agency knew of the killings in advance, it withheld information about them after it learned, impeding the State Department's efforts to determine what had happened to the men.


A Fretful Atlanta Awaits a Deluge
Like viewing azalea blossoms, agonizing over the annual April onslaught of thousands of black college students is becoming a rite of spring here.
The Atlanta Black College Spring Break, popularly known as Freaknik since it was first celebrated by local students in 1985, has attracted increasing numbers of black students from around the nation in the last few years.
The event is a raucous three-day party in which the two central activities are lounging in Piedmont Park to the party rhythms and sexually explicit lyrics of rap music and cruising bumper to bumper, horns blaring, in a car caravan that renders streets around the park, just north of downtown, impassable.


Giuliani Wins Police Merger In M.T.A. Vote
Accomplishing what two Mayors before him had tried and failed to do, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani won final agreement yesterday to merge the transit force with the New York City Police Department, after promising to maintain roughly the present level of officers patrolling the subways.
The change will take effect tomorrow morning.
Under an agreement with the Metropolitan Transportation Authority, the state agency that runs the transit police, the Mayor pledged to keep an average of 1,023 officers policing the city's 230 miles of subways and 469 stations each day.


Dog-Walking Neighbor Contradicts Simpson's Account of When Vehicle Was Outside House
A neighbor of O. J. Simpson testified today that he did not see a white Ford Bronco parked outside Mr.
Simpson's home when prosecutors say Nicole Brown Simpson and Ronald L. Goldman were killed.
His testimony was another contradiction of Mr.
Simpson's account to the police, and extended to nearly an hour the length of time for which the car's whereabouts are unknown.
Accused of killing his former wife and her friend around 10:15 P.M. last June 12, then returning from the crime scene in the Bronco, Mr.
Simpson has insisted that the car sat unused outside his house after 8 or 9 o'clock.
A maid for one of Mr.
Simpson's neighbors has corroborated that account.


125 Years Later


CLASSICAL MUSIC
A Pianist's Lyricism That Fills Large Spaces  Ivo Pogorelich Carnegie Hall


Serenade to the Love of Boy and Gorilla
Katie, the adorable gorilla who captures the heart of 14-year-old Rick Heller (Wil Horneff) in "Born to Be Wild," is one of Hollywood's more successfully designed animatronic wonders.
The creature Rick rescues from wretched captivity as a flea market attraction is a remarkably lifelike synthetic creation equipped with radio-controlled facial expressions that are manipulated by a team of puppeteers.
The details of Katie's behavior aren't the only things that the movie, which opened yesterday, manipulates with a shrewdly knowing hand.
"Born to Be Wild," which takes its title from the 1968 Steppenwolf hit (naturally the song is included on the soundtrack), is a road movie for children that follows a thoroughly formulaic route.


Corrections
An article yesterday about the Federal Communications Commission's decision to order rate reductions by local telephone companies misstated the given name of a telecommunications analyst with NatWest Securities who was quoted on the impact of the order on long-distance companies and their customers.
He is William Vogel, not Mark.


Manic Haste, Matchless Humor: Sid Caesar on the Good Old Days
If the sublimest form of comedy mingles laughter and tears, Sid Caesar added new meaning to the concept one night on "Your Show of Shows," his live variety program that dominated Saturday night television in the early 1950's.
Reminiscing before an audience at the Museum of Television and Radio on Thursday night, he recalled a spoof of the film "High Noon" in which cast members, playing cowardly deputies, took off their badges and, one by one, pinned them to Mr.
Caesar's chest.
There was one problem.
Someone had forgotten the protective rubber cushion that was supposed to line Mr.
Caesar's shirt.
His eyebrows signaling wildly, face twitching with fear, Mr.
Caesar tried to call off the troops, to no avail.


Wrangling in Senate Again Bars Vote on Midyear Budget Cuts
A new political skirmish broke out in the Senate today, again delaying a vote on midyear budget cuts and prompting an exasperated majority leader, Senator Bob Dole of Kansas, to threaten political war against the White House.
"We're not bringing up any more bills that the White House wants until we have some understanding on the legislation that we thought would go through here in a normal way," Mr.
Dole said, suggesting that President Clinton was orchestrating Democratic efforts to slow work in the Senate.
"If the President doesn't care, that's good enough for me. If he doesn't want this legislation, we're not going to take it up. But neither are we going to take up legislation that he wants."


Re-clogging the Prisons?
Gov.
George Pataki was on the right track when he proposed changing some of the sentencing rules that have clogged New York State prisons with nonviolent drug offenders.
But the Governor is undermining that sensible impulse by simultaneously proposing big cuts in funding for alternatives to prison.
New York's prison population has grown fivefold since enactment of the so-called second-felony-offender law in 1973.
That law, which mandates stiff prison terms for anyone convicted of two felonies within 10 years, has been used to incarcerate hordes of young, low-level drug users and dealers caught twice.


Sports of The Times; Hope Comes To Baseball Just in Time
TELL me, Indiana Jones, famed archeologist, what is that strange prehistoric painting on that giant wall?
What does it mean, this athletic man wielding a club?
What does it mean, these 40 hash marks, eight groups of five?
This riddle confronts us as we stroll the streets of Seattle, seeking the ultimate double espresso, waiting for the Final Four to commence today.
Looming above us, in a clever advertisement by an equipment manufacturer whose name rhymes with "psyche," is a reminder of another age, dimly remembered.


New Park, Not New Players, Draws Fans
Everywhere around Coors Field, there were baseball fans clad in purple and black hustling to get inside the splendid new stadium.
They arrived early to gawk at the Camden Yards look-a-like and to peek at the replacement players who would be the first to grace it.
Maybe the first and last replacement players.
With United States District Judge Sonia Sotomayor having granted an injunction to the National Labor Relations Board in New York earlier today that restored baseball's prestrike contract conditions, there was a very good possibility the major league players would be returning to work soon and the replacement players would vanish.
So today's exhibition game, inside a facility that cost $215.5 million to build, had a chance to be a collector's item of sorts.


Fed Minutes Indicate Some Voiced Doubt on Rate Rise
Federal Reserve officials were unanimous in deciding to raise short-term interest rates on Feb. 1, but some of them initially expressed concern that the central bank was moving too quickly, according to minutes of the meeting released today.
While the Fed's rate-setting group, the Federal Open Market Committee, remained united then, the minutes suggest that sentiment may be building that 7 rate increases over the last 14 months may have been enough to prevent rapid economic growth from leading to inflation.


Settlement for Marine Damage
The operators of the Salem Generating Station will pay $10.5 million to Delaware for damage to aquatic life on the Delaware River caused by the circulation of river water through the nuclear plant's cooling system.
As a result, Delaware dropped its challenge to the permit New Jersey granted Public Service Electric &amp; Gas Co. to operate the plant.


Republicans Want to Give States Vast New Powers Over Medicaid
Republican governors and the Republican leaders of Congress are negotiating major changes in Medicaid that would limit the soaring cost of the program and vastly increase the states' power over it.
The proposal, if adopted, would give the states new authority in deciding eligibility, benefits and methods of paying doctors and hospitals for the care of 36 million low-income people.


2 Yank Prospects Among the Top 100
Baseball America rates the Yankees' Derek Jeter and Reuben Rivera among the top 100 prospects in the minor leagues this season.


Dr. John Bright, 86, A Biblical Historian
The Rev.
Dr.
John Bright, an authority on biblical history and prophetic interpretation, died on Sunday at Westminster Canterbury House, a Presbyterian-Episcopal retirement home in Richmond.
He was 86.
Dr.
Bright, who lived in Richmond, suffered a long illness, said Prof.
James L. Mays, presiding scholar of the Old Testament at Union Theological Seminary in Richmond.


Why Should Poultry Have More Protection Than People?; Cruel Elephant Walk
To the Editor:
We were dismayed to read Michael T. Kaufman's jeu d'esprit about the elephants paraded into New York City for the Ringling Brothers and Barnum &amp; Bailey Circus (About New York column, March 24).


New York City Prepares to Seize Wholesalers' Records at Market
Investigators with the police, New York City's Department of Investigation and the Manhattan District Attorney's office plan to seize the financial records of the wholesalers who operated in the Fulton Fish Market building that burned in an arson blaze on Wednesday, according to city and law enforcement officials.
The officials said they had a warrant for a search this morning at the building that housed seven of the major fish wholesalers in the market.
Investigators will look for evidence of the kinds of fraud or extortion that have long been suspected at the lower Manhattan site -- everything from no-show jobs to payoffs to possible underpayment of rent to the city or under-reporting of revenues.


Observer; April Fooling Around
Seems like every time you turn around the Republicans are trying to amend the Constitution again.
(Editor's Interruption: "Do we absolutely have to have that folksy 'seems like' construction in my newspaper? It makes us sound like a conspiracy of country slickers trying to sell yellow shoes to city saps.")


INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS: An Eyewear King's U.S. Push; In a Hostile Bid, Luxottica's Head Sees Retail Gold
If you wear glasses, there is one chance in five that the frames were made by Luxottica Group S.p.A. of Italy.
Leonardo Del Vecchio wants to improve the odds.
Mr.
Del Vecchio, the 59-year-old chairman of Luxottica, has big plans for the United States.
In early March, the company started a hostile $1.11 billion takeover bid for the United States Shoe Corporation, hoping to snag its Lens Crafters chain of optical stores.


From Pianist and Oboist, A Feast of Many Delights
Well, they had to call it something, and Festival for Piano and Winds pretty well covers the ground.
But if you really want to know, what the 92d Street Y is presenting is a festival for the pianist Andras Schiff and the oboist Heinz Holliger, with a few of their friends scattered about.
Not complaining, mind you.
Any music lover should be eager to follow wherever two such enterprising and accomplished guides care to lead.


Jail Term for Former Postmaster
A former Montvale postmaster who embezzled $870,000 told a Federal judge that compulsive gambling made him do it.
But the judge dealt Edward J. Hascup a two-and-a-half-year sentence anyway.
Mr.
Hascup netted $67,000 in Atlantic City casinos and ran through his stake on high living, the prosecutor said.


S.I. Port Sludge to Be Sent Out of State
Bowing to concerns of residents on both sides of New York Harbor, Gov.
George E. Pataki and Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani have agreed on a plan to dump 150,000 tons of contaminated sediment in an out-of-state landfill rather than into underwater pits off Coney Island and Staten Island, despite the new plan's higher costs.
The sediment would come from dredging the waters of the Howland Hook Marine Terminal, a cargo port that is to be deepened to about 40 feet from 31 feet so deep-hulled ships can start docking there.


Abortion Foes Move Next to 'Roe's' Clinic
Operation Rescue has moved into its new national headquarters next door to an abortion clinic that employs the woman who was at the heart of Roe v.
Wade case 22 years ago.
The clinic, A Choice for Women, at 9222 Markville Drive, now shares a common wall with the anti-abortion group, whose members have already tried to discourage women from entering the clinic.


Tanzania Closes Its Border to Rwandans Fleeing Burundi


From Haiti, Images of a Foreign Policy Success
The last time an American President came to this unlucky Caribbean nation was in 1934, when Franklin D. Roosevelt came to pay tribute to the marines who were winding up a 19-year American occupation.
Today, by contrast, President Clinton was celebrating a mission whose American-led phase has lasted just six months.
He chose a makeshift Army base as his first stop on an 11-hour visit, and there was no mistaking his gratitude as climbed atop a stage and addressed some of the troops who have helped him to claim at least a limited foreign policy success.


Second Man Is Under Arrest In a Doctor's Killing in 1981
More than 13 years after a popular young resident in pediatric surgery at Columbia-Presbyterian Medical Center was shot and killed in a struggle with muggers, a second suspect has been arrested by the Manhattan detective whose tenacity broke the long-dormant case with a first arrest last summer.
The new suspect, Daryl Whitley, 32, has been in prison for 6 of the last 13 years on robbery and drug convictions and was to be released from an upstate prison in May after serving a term in a parole violation case.
He was brought to New York from his cell on Thursday and charged with the murder of Dr.
John Chase Wood Jr.


Japan Reports Plan on Economic Rules, and Criticism Is Swift
The Government disclosed a five-year plan today to abolish or relax hundreds of economic regulations, but both businessmen here and American officials immediately criticized the package as inadequate.
"There are some things that are hopeful," Walter F. Mondale, the American Ambassador to Japan, said in an interview today.
"The rest of it is so general and delayed and vague that we just can't give it any weight."


U.N. Votes to Keep Its Troops In Balkans for 8 More Months
After a last-minute squabble over a name, the Security Council restructured the United Nations peacekeeping operation in the former Yugoslavia today by splitting the force into three contingents for Croatia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, and Macedonia.
Only hours before the expiration of the current peacekeeping mandate, the Security Council unanimously extended mandates in all three countries for eight months.


Denver Airport's Headaches Are on Ground, Not in Air
The new Denver airport may have drawn complaints from passengers -- about long cab rides, inadequate parking and slow baggage retrieval -- but it is working out well for planes, the Federal Aviation Administration said today.
In the first 30 days of operation, Denver International Airport handled 42,000 landings and takeoffs with 245 delays, or about six-tenths of 1 percent, the agency said.


Banning Gay Soldiers by Trickery
A Federal district judge has deftly exposed the semantic shuffle underlying the military's current policy banning homosexuals.
Judge Eugene Nickerson in Brooklyn has concluded that the Pentagon's "don't ask, don't tell" policy is a crafty attempt to avoid constitutional challenge by defining the speech of homosexuals as if it were conduct.
This dodge cannot be allowed, the judge concluded.
He found that it violated both the free speech and equal protection clauses of the Constitution.
The current policy allows homosexuals to serve as long as they keep silent about their status.
It admonishes commanders not to ask individuals about their sexual orientation and homosexuals not to reveal it.
If homosexuals do affirm their status, even by simply saying "I am gay" or "I have a homosexual orientation," they can be discharged, whether or not they have ever engaged in or intend to engage in homosexual acts.


F.A.A. Considers Safety the Primary Mission
To the Editor:
Re "A Flight Hazard Neglected" (editorial, March 23):
The primary mission of the Federal Aviation Administration is safety.
When a tragic accident occurs, such as what happened in 1994 near Roselawn, Ind., with the ATR commuter plane, the shock and grief is palpable because the best aviation safety system in the world has failed those passengers.


No Headline
"I think the Democrats just went haywire. They're a Washington party. They live in the Potomac. They swim in the Potomac. They'll die in the Potomac." -- RICHARD M. DALEY, the Democratic Mayor of Chicago.  [ 7:1. ]


Corrections
Because of editing errors, an article yesterday about a bill that would limit expansion of the budget of the National Service Corps, and the Diary listing of the day's major actions in Congress, referred incorrectly to the status of the bill.
The Senate has not voted on it.


PEN Literary Winners Honored at a Ceremony
The winners of the 1995 PEN Literary Awards were honored last night at a ceremony and reception in the Time &amp; Life Building auditorium in Manhattan.
The PEN/Book-of-the-Month Club translation prize was awarded to Burton Watson for "Selected Poems," by Su Tung-p'o (Copper Canyon).


For Half Century, Tradition Has Foiled Attempts to Clean Up Fulton Fish Market
Fifty years ago, the Government arrested and won the conviction of a ruthless gangster, Joseph (Socks) Lanza and confidently proclaimed victory in eradicating the Mafia's influence at the Fulton Fish Market.
The proclamation was premature.


In Love or in Lust, Neither Seems Satisfactory
Some people think love rules the world; some would vote for sex.
Each side presents its case in a quirky, droll, entertaining program at the New Directors/New Films series.
On the romantic side is Claudia Silver's 29-minute "Kalamazoo." Adrienne Shelly (best known for her roles in Hal Hartley movies) plays Adrian, a young actress lost in the illusion that her old boy friend, Jonathan, still cares.
The pitch-perfect New York terrain is defined by the presence of Wallace Shawn as her hapless psychiatrist.
Adrian is certain that Jonathan will call on her birthday, though she hasn't heard from him in a year.
When he doesn't, she tells the shrink that his not calling must be a sign he cares too much.
The film is anchored in the thoroughly lifelike details of a struggling actress's world.
There is her maddeningly dull job as a file clerk, which she eventually sabotages; the hopeless auditions; the good-looking actor who assures her it's an exciting time to be in the theater.
But "Kalamazoo" goes beyond that, to recreate snippets of Adrian's fantasies.
Though in one fantasy Jonathan shows up at the door with flowers, more typically Adrian sees his snobbish mother (Katharine Houghton) telling him to dump her.
The mother, after all, once complimented Adrian's long, wild hair by saying, "It's so urban."


Jewelry Store Owner Cleared in Wife's Death
The Somerset County Prosecutor said today that he would not file charges against a jewelry store owner who fatally shot his wife during a March 14 attempted robbery.
The Prosecutor, Nicholas Bissell Jr. said that the attempted robbery was re-enacted Thursday, and the owner, Jeffrey Wolf, interviewed for seven hours.
After that, he said, he had no doubt that the shooting was accidental.


CHRONICLE
TOMMY HILFIGER used wool pants and suspenders.
TODD OLDHAM chose all ribbons.
And VERA WANG went with a fake leopard print.
All this by way of making bookbags that are lined up for a silent auction to be held on Sunday evening at the Josephine Pavilion in Bryant Park.
In all, 100 celebrities' designs are included.
The "Dream Auction," sponsored by Allure magazine, is to benefit the Hetrick-Martin Institute, a nonprofit social service agency in the East Village that provides counseling and education to lesbian and gay youths and runs several H.I.V./AIDS prevention and treatment programs.


F.A.A. Considers Safety the Primary Mission; Commuter Plane Tests
To the Editor:
Your March 23 editorial "Flight Hazard Neglected" misrepresents ATR's extensive efforts to enhance the safety of its aircraft.
Aircraft are not designed or certified to fly in freezing drizzle or rain, not because of neglect, but because available technology does not allow for sustained flight in those conditions.


Stock of John Alden, a Health Insurer, Falls 38%
The share price of the John Alden Financial Corporation, a fast-growing health insurer based in Miami, fell 38 percent yesterday after the company said late Thursday that unexpected medical claims would reduce last year's profit by nearly $10 million and would cut first-quarter profits below analysts' forecasts.
John Alden shares fell $11.125, to $18.50, in very heavy trading, and news of its problem caused the stocks of other health care companies to slide as well.


International Briefs; Maxwell Pension Funds Receive Large Settlement
Pension trustees said yesterday that $:276 million ($441 million) had been paid into pension funds once controlled by Robert Maxwell.
The settlement, reached last month and approved in court, called for financial institutions that did business with Maxwell to help replace missing pension funds.
Trustees have been working since Maxwell died at sea in 1991 on how to replace $:440 million ($710 million) missing from pension plans in Maxwell's old corporate empire and used as collateral for loans to prop up his ailing private companies.


The Great Hudson Divide
Leave well enough alone, New Jersey lawmakers insisted, asking the Pentagon to reject a request by New York legislators to reopen the Plattsburgh Air Force base in northern New York.
New Jersey's McGuire Air Force Base prospered with $130 million in new construction and an increase in personnel after the 1993 decision to close Plattsburgh.


BASEBALL: Woman in the News; Strike-Zone Arbitrator -- Sonia Sotomayor
In her two and a half years on the bench, United States District Court Judge Sonia Sotomayor has earned a reputation as a sharp, outspoken and fearless jurist, someone who does not let powerful interests bully, rush or cow her into a decision.
She lived up to that billing yesterday morning, when the fate of major league baseball was thrust upon her.
After a two-hour hearing in which she grilled both sides on the fine points of labor law, she took only 15 minutes to issue an injunction that could break the deadlock in the baseball strike.


Mr. October Is Unsettled by This March
Reggie Jackson watched his first replacement game with astonishment today and afterward looked as if he wanted to weep.
The Hall of Fame slugger characterized the game between the Yankees and the Rockies as sad and the state of baseball just as troubling.
"This just hurts me for the game," Jackson said.
"I can't believe the mess the game has put itself in. The mess is too big."


Business Digest
Players Ready to Return After Court Issues Order  Baseball players said they were ready to return to work after a Federal judge issued an injunction ordering baseball owners to restore salary arbitration, competitive bidding for free agents and the anti-collusion provision of the free-agency rules.
It was still not clear whether the owners would let the players return.
A hearing was set for Tuesday on the owners' request for a stay and an expedited appeal.
Page 1.
A Swap Plan for Educational TV  The F.C.C. wants TV stations to broadcast up to five hours of educational programming a week, but will propose that they be allowed to pay other stations to do the job for them. 38.
Health Systems Wins Contract  Health Systems International won a $2.5 billion contract to provide health coverage to 720,000 Government workers and is studying whether to renegotiate its $1.78 billion stock-swap deal with Wellpoint Health Networks. 36.
Horizon to Buy Continental Medical  Horizon Healthcare will buy Continental Medical in a $502 million stock swap. 36.
Medical Claims Hit Alden Stock  The stock of John Alden Financial, a health insurer, fell 38 percent after the company said that unexpected medical claims would reduce last year's profit by nearly $10 million and cut first-quarter profits. 36.
Strike Settled at Chrysler  Striking workers at Chrysler's only automatic transmission factory reached a tentative agreement.
The walkout had threatened to close the auto maker's car and truck assembly plants.
In Michigan, workers struck a G.M. truck plant. 7.
Revised G.D.P.
Up Surprising 5.1%  The Government said fourth-quarter G.D.P. rose 5.1 percent, an upward revision that took economists by surprise and indicated that the economy grew even faster in late 1994 than previously thought. 34.
No Bankruptcy for London Fog  London Fog averted bankruptcy after agreeing to convert $317.4 million of debt into a note and a loan totaling $211 million and preferred stock valued at $106.4 million. 36.
Christopher Urges Iran Trade Ban  Administration officials said Secretary of State Warren Christopher has recommended that the United States ban most trade with Iran, prohibiting American companies from buying Iranian oil and from investing in projects there. 5.
Higher Rates Worried Fed  Top Federal Reserve officials were unanimous in deciding to raise short-term interest rates at their meeting on Feb. 1, but some of them were concerned that the central bank was moving too quickly. 39.
Bank Derivatives Holdings Level Off  The Comptroller of the Currency reported that the derivatives holdings of banks have abruptly leveled off to $15.6 trillion after years of rapid growth, but that the holdings remain large in comparison with bank capital. 36.
Airlines Cut Summer Fares  American and United airlines are offering discounts of up to 50 percent on all domestic flights booked by April 14.
The offer came a day after Northwest Airlines announced a summer fare sale.
Tickets must be bought 30 days in advance and require a Saturday night stay. 38.
Japan to Relax Economic Rules  Japan disclosed a five-year plan to abolish or relax hundreds of economic regulations, including some that would ease the way for imports.
But Japanese, American and other foreign businessmen and officials criticized the plan as inadequate. 38.
Fewer Delays at New Denver Airport  The F.A.A. said Denver's new airport in its first 30 days handled 42,000 landings and takeoffs with only 245 delays. 7.
Use of Temporary Workers Soars  The number of temporary workers supplied to American companies soared to nearly 2 million last year, or 1.5 percent of the work force. 37.


H. L. Stevenson, 65; Reporter at U.P.I. Became Top Editor
H.
L.
Stevenson, a former editor in chief of United Press International who presided over the news service's coverage during the era of the Vietnam War and Watergate, died on Thursday.
He was 65 and lived in Rye, N.Y.
Mr.
Stevenson had been in poor health since suffering a heart attack in November, a family friend told U.P.I.
He died at St.
Joseph's Medical Center in Stamford, Conn.
Mr.
Stevenson spent 31 years working for U.P.I., becoming managing editor in 1965 and editor in chief and vice president in 1972.
He oversaw coverage of the Apollo moon landings, the Middle East and the energy crisis.
In 1972 and 1978, Mr.
Stevenson and other U.P.I. executives visited China to press for the reopening of Western news bureaus there.
He wrote widely published accounts of Chinese life under Communism and wrote articles on life in Cuba under Fidel Castro after similar visits there during the early 1980's.
Mr.
Stevenson was a trustee of the William Allen White Foundation, which supports activities of the school of journalism at the University of Kansas, and a Pulitzer Prize juror.
For more than 10 years, he wrote the U.P.I.
Reporter, a weekly newsletter.
In 1983, Mr.
Stevenson was promoted to executive vice president.
In 1984, he left the company and later became corporate editor of Crain Communications for six years.
Born Nov. 23, 1929, in New Orleans, Hubert L. Stevenson grew up in Picayune, Miss., where his first job in journalism was with the Picayune Item.
He was an infantry platoon sergeant from 1950 to 1952, and in 1953, he joined United Press as a reporter in Jackson, Miss.
In 1963, he became Southern Division news manager, responsible for much of the coverage of the civil rights movement.
Mr.
Stevenson is survived by his wife, the former LaVerne Harris, and a daughter, Jennifer, a reporter for The St.
Petersburg Times in Florida.


Russian Troops Take Last Chechen Cities
Russian forces fighting in secessionist Chechnya said today that the last urban center of resistance to Moscow had fallen, marking a new stage in a three-and-a-half-month war that has already left up to 20,000 dead and created 250,000 refugees.
In the last two days, Chechen fighters loyal to the president, Dzhokhar M. Dudayev, have abandoned their last two urban bases -- Gudermes, Chechnya's second-largest city, 25 miles east of the capital, Grozny; and Shali, 15 miles southeast of Grozny, which fell today.


Bigger Roles for Suppliers of Temporary Workers
As they have in every economic expansion, the ranks of temporary workers are swelling, but something is different this time.
Now the giants of corporate America -- companies like AT&amp;T, the Bank of America, Johnson &amp; Johnson and Hewlett-Packard -- are getting serious about managing them.
The number of temps supplied by agencies to American companies soared from 500,000 in 1983 to nearly 2 million, or 1.5 percent of the work force, last year.
Large temp firms have hundreds of job categories from traditional secretaries and assembly workers to computer programmers, robotics specialists and chemists.
Temporary professionals, from lawyers to accountants to surgeons, are also available.


Gas, Food, Laundry; Entrepreneurs Seeking Heavy Traffic in Light Starch on the Parkway
This is Paul McDonald's vision of the future of laundry: A car rolls to a stop in the southbound Hutchinson River Parkway service area in the Bronx.
A uniformed attendant scrambles.
Ten seconds later, the driver accelerates back into traffic and a dozen dirty shirts head for the wash, to be picked up that night across the parkway on the commuter's trip home.
If there is a business niche between the Daytona 500 and Botany 500, Mr.
McDonald has staked a claim to it with a proposal to open what cleaning industry experts say would be the first business of its kind: a laundry and dry-cleaning service at two vacant service areas on the parkway just south of the Westchester County line.


Burning Bright
Did the mob set the fire at New York City's Fulton Fish Market or was it an amateur, albeit highly effective arsonist?
The question has a certain romantic interest, but the Giuliani administration is right not to be diverted by it.
The Mayor and his chief of staff, Randy Mastro, have both said that their campaign to end corruption at the market will continue, regardless of who torched one of its two main buildings on Wednesday.
Mayor Giuliani and Mr.
Mastro, both former prosecutors, know that organized crime is their ultimate target.
They started their efforts to end the shakedowns at Fulton when Mr.
Giuliani was United States Attorney in the city.
Since moving into City Hall, they have used their knowledge of the place to push a licensing system that would end the thefts, shakedowns and illegal loading and security fees for which the market is renowned.


Bug Cocktails and Other Crimes
The party was over at more than a dozen bars in Newark, South Orange and here, after undercover state police made 71 arrests in vice raids early yesterday.
They turned up prostitution, under-aged drinking, illegal video poker machines and improper bookkeeping -- not to mention watered-down booze, fruit flies in the aperitifs and cockroaches in the vodka.


Accord on Dumping
Bowing to concerns of residents on both sides of New York Harbor, Gov.
George E. Pataki and Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani have agreed to dump 150,000 tons of contaminated sediment in an out-of-state landfill rather than into underwater pits off Coney Island and Staten Island.
Article, page 24.


Matsushita Is Said to Be Eager To Sell Off Its MCA Division
The Matsushita Electric Industrial Company is increasingly determined to sell MCA, its American entertainment operation, people close to the talks said yesterday, because of a deteriorating relationship with MCA's corporate management and MCA's relatively weak financial performance.
One of those people said that Matsushita would prefer to sell the whole company, rather than doing a joint venture, because it has found its relationship with MCA so difficult.


Aging of Glass Threatens America's Charter Documents
The sealed glass cases protecting the Declaration of Independence, the Constitution and the Bill of Rights are undergoing unexpected deterioration that could affect the condition of the nation's three most prized documents, experts told the National Archives today.
"We're not in an immediate crisis situation," said Norvell M. Jones, chief of the Archives Document Conservation Branch.
"But the glass deterioration will get worse, and we have to find a solution."


In America; Guns For Everyone!
The President, Ronald Reagan, had just raised his left arm to wave to the crowd standing on the rain swept sidewalk outside the Washington Hilton Hotel when John W. Hinckley Jr. opened fire.
It was March 30, 1981.
Mr.
Hinckley, a 25-year-old mentally disturbed gun enthusiast, fired six shots at the Presidential entourage.
Mr.
Reagan suffered a near-fatal wound to the chest.
His press secretary, James S. Brady, was hit above the left eye.
Two other men were wounded.
It was an old, old story.
The insanity of gun violence, a crippling and seemingly incurable American disease, had flared again.
Fourteen years later the National Rifle Association, a fanatical organization that is awash in the blood of homicide and suicide victims, is accelerating its never-ending fight to expand the arsenal of guns in America.
Weapons manufacturers in the U.S. are turning out more than 500 guns an hour, but the N.R.A. and its political henchmen are not satisfied.
With the leadership of the Republican Party in its pocket, the N.R.A. is fighting for the repeal of virtually all existing gun control laws, including the ban on assault weapons.


ITT Reported In $1 Billion Loan Sale to Transamerica
The ITT Corporation will sell its portfolio of roughly $1 billion in home equity loans to a subsidiary of the Transamerica Corporation, people close to both companies said yesterday.
The deal, the latest in a continuing effort at ITT to divest itself of businesses in its ITT Financial Corporation subsidiary, is expected to be formally announced on Monday, these people said.


Marriage Iranian Style
"Zinat" is a slow and earnest Iranian film about the dilemma faced by a health care worker contemplating marriage.
With only minimal medical training, Zinat (Atefeh Razavi), called a "health visitor," is still the only person in her village who can help the sick.
But her ability to do so is jeopardized once she becomes engaged to Hamed (Hassan Joharchi), who disapproves of his wife's working.
"Neither we are poor, nor Hamed is a man to expect contribution from his wife," Hamed's mother says.
"Zinat" is poorly translated into English throughout, but its sentiments are so blunt and uncomplicated that language scarcely matters.


Separate Is Never Equal
The continued segregation of Cornell University student housing is evidence that too many educators, when asked to demonstrate what they really believe and will stand up for, resort to double talk, expediency and outright duplicity.
As a result of a complaint by the New York Civil Rights Coalition, Cornell's racially oriented housing is being investigated by the State Education Department.
The investigation of the Native American dorm, called Akwe:kon, as well as the Latino Living Center are new.
But Ujamaa College, the mostly black student residence, is being examined for at least a third time.


J. Robert Moore, 69, Marine Geologist And Oceanographer
J.
Robert Moore, a geologist and oceanographer who was an expert on marine mining, died last Saturday at his home in Austin, Tex.
He was 69.
The cause was complications from colon cancer, said his wife, Dorothy Taylor Moore.


CHRONICLE
JON SECADA, the Cuban-American pop singer, will step into the starring role of Danny Zuko, the supergreaser, in the Broadway production of "Grease" on July 17.
Mr.
Secada, 32, will replace ADRIAN ZMED, who has filled the role for six months and is leaving to join the national tour, where he will replace Rex Smith.
BARRY WEISSLER, who produces the show with his wife, FRAN WEISSLER, said they had been courting Mr.
Secada, a 1993 Grammy Award winner, for more than a year.


Reeves Can Do Damage On Court
The Kingdome has had recent problems with falling tile. Today, it was falling glass.
Bryant (Big Country) Reeves announced his arrival at the Final Four this afternoon in a resounding and unprecedented manner when the 7-foot, 292-pound center shattered a backboard during Oklahoma State's practice session at the Kingdome.


Bank Business In Derivatives Leveling Off, Study Shows
The derivatives holdings of American banks have abruptly leveled off after years of rapid growth, but the holdings remain large in comparison with banks' capital, a Federal agency said today.
The study by the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, which is part of the Treasury, provided the latest indication of a slowdown in one of the fastest-growing and most profitable businesses for big banks in the early 1990's.


Up the River? Out the Door!
Go, they said.
You're making a big mistake, he said.
But they insisted, so Steven Baker, 24, shrugged and walked out of the state prison here in Burlington County with 50 years left on his sentence.
Now mortified authorities are looking for the punctilious prisoner, who was released after he completed an 11-month sentence for a parole violation -- but before he had begun to serve his sentence for armed robbery.
Court and prison authorities can not say how the mistake happened.


Grammy-Winning Singer Selena Killed in Shooting at Texas Motel
Selena, the 23-year-old reigning queen of the Tejano music world, was shot and killed today at a Corpus Christi motel.
Shortly after 9:30 P.M. a 32-year-old woman identified by the young singer's father as the former president of her fan club abruptly surrendered after keeping the police at bay for nearly 10 hours as she sat in a red pickup truck in the motel parking lot with a gun pointed at her temple.


The Snake in the Archives
ORIGINAL SIN By P. D. James. 416 pp. New York: Alfred A. Knopf. $24.


LOOKING OUT FOR NO. 1, 2, 3 . . .
In his article, "Looking Out for No. 1, 2, 3 . . . " (About Men, March 12) Steven Lewis hits the nail on the head when he writes: "You simply love every one of your children with all your heart." I am one of nine children, and that's precisely how my parents did it.
We never felt deprived or underloved, though materially speaking, we did have less than our peers in small families.
Now, in this sometimes lonely and often consumer-oriented world, it is clear to me that my four brothers and four sisters were the best presents my parents ever gave me.
Rather than over-consume the world's resources, being from a large family taught my siblings and me how to make the most of fewer things and enjoy each other more in the process . . . not a bad way of life.
MARIE T. OATES Boston


F.Y.I.
'Astor,' as in 'Castor'?
Q.
While trying to explain to some Parisian friends why there are reliefs of beavers in the Astor Place IRT station, it occurred to me that there was a suspicious similarity between the trapper John Jacob's family name and the French word for beaver: castor.
Have I stumbled across something?
Did old J. J. purloin his name from his favorite fur?


THE EMASCULATION OF SPORTS
BASEBALL HAS DONE US A FAVOR.
IT'S about time we understood that staged competitive sports events -- and baseball can stand for all the games -- are no longer the testing ground of our country's manhood and the theater of its once seemingly limitless energy and power.
As a mirror of our culture, sports now show us spoiled fools as role models, cities and colleges held hostage and games that exist only to hawk products.
The pathetic posturing of in-your-face macho has replaced a once self-confident masculinity.


ON THE TOWNS
MUSIC ZIMMERLI ART MUSEUM Russian avant-garde music of the early 20th century, performed by Russian emigres.
Next Sunday, 3 P.M.
Free admission.
Rutgers University, corner of George and Hamilton Streets, New Brunswick. (908) 932-7237.
NICHOLAS MUSIC CENTER Charlotte Mattax performs harpsichord music in the French style.
Today, 4 P.M.
Free.
Rutgers Arts Center, George Street at Route 18, New Brunswick. (908) 932-7511.
NEWARK MUSEUM The New Jersey Chamber Music Society offers an introduction to chamber music.
Today, 3 P.M.
Free. 49 Washington Street. (201) 596-6550.
WESTFIELD SYMPHONY Brad Keimach, music director, will offer preconcert remarks on Saturday at 7 P.M., and the Westfield Symphony will present "La Boheme," by Puccini, at 8 P.M.
Tickets: $21; the elderly, $18; students, $12.
Presbyterian Church, 149 Mountain Avenue, Westfield. (908) 232-9400.
THEATER AMERICAN STAGE COMPANY "Buried Treasure," by Rick Sordelet.
Wednesday through April 30.
Wednesday through Saturday, 8 P.M.; Sunday, 2:30 P.M.
Tickets: $19-$25.
Fairleigh Dickinson University, Teaneck campus. (201) 692-7744.
CENTENARY STAGE COMPANY An original musical, "In Bed With the Blues: The Adventures of Fishy Waters," written by and starring Guy Davis.
Today through next Sunday. 400 Jefferson Street, Hackettstown.
For tickets and performance times: (908) 852-1400, extension 348.
CROSSROADS THEATER COMPANY "Harriet's Return." Through next Sunday.
Tuesday through Saturday, 8 P.M.; matinees today, Saturday and next Sunday, 3 P.M.
Tickets: $22-35. 17 Livingston Avenue, New Brunswick. (908) 249-5560.
GEORGE STREET PLAYHOUSE "Off Key," a musical by Richard Adler and Bill C. Davis.
Tuesday through Saturday, 8 P.M.; Sunday, 2 and 7 P.M.
Through April.
Tickets: $30. 9 Livingston Avenue, New Brunswick. (908) 246-7717.
TWO RIVER THEATER COMPANY "The Heidi Chronicles," by Wendy Wasserstein.
Today and next Sunday, 3 P.M.; Wednesday through Friday, 8 P.M.; Saturday, 6:30 P.M.
Tickets: $15-$22; discounts available for students and the elderly.
Pollak Auditorium, on the campus of Monmouth College in West Long Branch. (908) 291-4114.
MUSEUMS AND GALLERIES BERGEN MUSEUM A series of photography exhibitions created by teen-agers of the area.
Opens today at 1 P.M.
Suggested admission: adults, $2.50, children, $1. 327 East Ridgewood Avenue, Paramus. (201) 265-1248.
COMMON BOUNDARIES Visitors to the gallery can pick up a brush and paint over someone else's painting.
It's all part of "Art Amok," an experiment in creative anarchy.
Through April 23.
Monday to Friday, 7 to 10 P.M.; Saturday and Sunday, 11 A.M. to 7 P.M.
Free admission. 68 Mercer Street, Jersey City. (201) 333-0949.
ZIMMERLI ART MUSEUM The Rutgers Collection of Original Illustrations for Children's Literature: "Riders Up! Preparing for a Pony Race," an exhibition of photographs and other materials by Barbara Beirne for her book about a young girl and her pony as they prepare for their first race.
Through July 31.
Free.
Rutgers, corner of George and Hamilton Streets, New Brunswick. (908) 932-7237.
MONTCLAIR ART MUSEUM "What Is a Print?" features the works of 60 artists and demonstrates the wide range of prints produced in America over the last 150 years.
Admission, $4; the elderly and students with ID, $3. 3 South Mountain Avenue. (201) 746-5555.
NEWARK MUSEUM "Protecting the Pinelands Through Art" illustrates the ecology of the New Jersey Pinelands.
Wednesday through May 21 in the Mutual Benefit Life Community Gallery.
"Gods and Goddesses in Indian Art" features paintings, cloth hangings and tiny brass icons dating from the 11th to the 19th centuries.
Through June in the Indian Gallery.
"The Arts of Nepal" includes sculptures and paintings of the Himalayan kingdom.
Through June in the Himalayan Gallery. 49 Washington Street. (201) 596-6550.
NEW JERSEY STATE MUSEUM "Echoes of Our Past: The Narrative Artistry of Palmer C. Hayden," an exhibition of 40 paintings chronicling African-American life.
"Keeping the Family History, 1650-1920: Collections of the Members of the National Society of Colonial Dames of America in the State of New Jersey" presents ceramics, furniture, household objects and family stories to bring history to life.
Tuesday through Saturday, 9 A.M. to 4:45 P.M.; Sunday, noon to 5 P.M.
Free general admission. 205 West State Street, Trenton. (609) 292-6308.
NOYES MUSEUM "Messages From the Planet: Artists Work to Save the Earth," two- and three-dimensional works by artists in the mid-Atlantic region.
Through June 18.
"Looking Due South: Paintings of South Jersey by Glenn Rudderow." Next Sunday through July 9.
Wednesday through Sunday, 11 A.M. to 4 P.M.
Admission, $3; the elderly, $1.50; students and children under 18, 50 cents.
Lily Lake Road, Oceanville. (609) 652-8848.
PATERSON MUSEUM "Transitions" are painting and computer photo constructions by Robert Anderson.
Saturday through April 23.
"Songs of My People," a photography exhibition featuring 31 African American photojournalists.
Through April 16.
Tuesday through Friday, 10 A.M. to 4 P.M.; Saturday and Sunday, 12:30 P.M. to 4:30 P.M. 2 Market Street. (201) 881-3874.
SPOKEN WORD RAMAPO COLLEGE The First Annual Mid-Atlantic Environmental Conference.
Friday through next Sunday.
Ralph Nader will be the keynote speaker on Saturday at 11 A.M.
Admission to the entire weekend of the conference is $60; single days are $40.
Students will receive a discount. 505 Ramapo Valley Road, Mahwah. (201) 529-7742.
RARITAN VALLEY COMMUNITY COLLEGE Sponsored by the Jewish Federation of Somerset, "An Evening With Elie Wiesel" will benefit the establishment of the Holocaust and Genocide Studies Institute at the college.
Next Sunday, 7 P.M.
Tax-deductible tickets: $36.
Route 28, North Branch. (908) 725-3420.
MONTCLAIR ART MUSEUM Dr.
Herbert Kraft discusses the Lenape Indians, a tribe indigenous to New Jersey and Delaware.
Today at 3 P.M.
Admission, $4; for the elderly and students with ID, $3. 3 South Mountain Avenue. (201) 746-5555.
SPORTS ICE HOCKEY Devils vs.
Tampa Bay, Tuesday; vs.
N.Y.
Rangers, next Sunday; vs.
N.Y.
Islanders, April 14; vs.
Hartford, April 16; vs.
Philadelphia, April 22; vs.
Pittsburgh, April 26; vs.
Florida, April 28; vs.
Quebec, April 30.
The Meadowlands. (201) 935-3900.
MINOR LEAGUE BASEBALL The Trenton Thunders begin their season vs. the Canton Akron Indians, Thursday and Friday at 7:05 P.M. and Saturday and next Sunday at 1:35 P.M.; vs. the Hardware City Rock Cats on April 10, 11 and 12 at at 7:05 P.M. and April 13 at 12:35 P.M.
Waterfront Park, 1 Thunder Road. (609) 394-3300.
PRO BASKETBALL Nets vs.
New York, today; vs.
Chicago, Wednesday; vs.
Miami, Saturday; vs.
Philadelphia, April 15; vs.
Atlanta, April 19; vs.
Washington, April 21; vs.
Boston, April 23.
The Meadowlands. (201) 935-3900.
CHILDREN AMERICAN STAGE COMPANY "Surprise, It's Magic!" with Jim Snack.
Saturday, 11:30 A.M. $8.
Fairleigh Dickinson University, Teaneck campus. (201) 692-7744.
BERGEN MUSEUM The annual egg decoration workshop will be held on Saturday at 11 A.M.
Reservations must be made by Friday at noon. $5. 327 East Ridgewood Avenue, Paramus. (201) 265-1248.
FORUM THEATER GROUP "Free to Be . . . You and Me," conceived by Marlo Thomas.
Saturday and April 19, 22 and 29, 1 P.M. $8. 314 Main Street, Metuchen. (908) 548-0582.
MEADOW THEATER Final performances of "The Velveteen Rabbit," next Sunday, 11 A.M. and 1 P.M. $6.
Galleria Atrium, Bridge Avenue and West Front Street, Red Bank. (908) 758-0099.
NEWARK MUSEUM "Cosmic Questions," for ages 6 to 10, at 1 and 3 P.M., and "Journey Through Time and Space," for ages 9 and older, at 2 and 4 P.M.
Saturday and Sunday through June 25.
Adults, $2; children under 12, $1. 49 Washington Street. (201) 596-6550.
PAPER MILL PLAYHOUSE The Shoestring Players present "Fire in the Snow," a collection of one-act plays, and the Audience Participation Adventure, featuring interaction with the cast.
April 11 at 10 A.M. and 12:30 P.M.
Ticket information: (201) 376-4343.
ETC.
DINNER AND THEATER COMBO The $42 ticket price includes a four-course meal and "Deep Space Noir," an interactive and futuristic detective story.
Saturdays. 8 P.M.
Il Giardino Restaurant. 41 Ridgedale Avenue, Cedar Knolls. (201) 301-0562.
NEW JERSEY FILM FESTIVAL "The Last Seduction," today; "Dead Calm," Friday; "1995 Experimental Film Marathon," Saturday; "Heavenly Creatures," next Sunday; "Dial M for Murder," April 14; "1995 T. Edison Black Maria Film and Video Festival," April 15; "North by Northwest," April 21; "Hoop Dreams," April 23, and "Green for Danger," April 28.
All show times 7 P.M.
Friday and Saturday tickets: $4.
Rutgers University in New Brunswick, College Avenue campus, Milledoler Hall, George Street and Seminary Place.
Sunday showings are at the State Theater, 19 Livingston Avenue, New Brunswick, and tickets are $7. (908) 932-8482.


New Zealand
To the Editor: The article "In the Mountains of the Gods" (Jan. 15) accurately describes the spectacular scenery and surreal landscape of the Tongariro National Park on the North Island of New Zealand.
However, your readers should be warned that the Chateau Tongariro, recommended for its "dramatic view," had little else to recommend it a year ago when we were there.
Our room was musty and none too clean.
The lobby was shabby, and scaffolding decorated the exterior.
The electricity was out for over an hour and the food at both dinner and breakfast was ordinary and uninspired.


Suozzi Can Fulfill His Campaign Pledge
In the late 1970's Donald DeRiggi, as a Glen Cove Councilman, opposed the building of the co-disposal plant, or incinerator-sewage-treatment facility, and submitted an alternative proposal, which involved connecting Glen Cove's sewer system into that run and maintained by Nassau County.
Nassau County approved the plan, and had it been enacted, the Glen Cove sewer system would have only needed a hookup and a pump station to force the effluent into the county system, where it would be treated and disposed of.


Daring Layups, a Big Country and a Widened, New Road at the Final Four
College basketball's annual fight for life didn't take place until yesterday afternoon, but there was a carnival atmosphere at the Kingdome on Friday as parents with children, teen-agers hanging out for the day and hard-core fans flocked to here to watch U.C.L.A., Arkansas, Oklahoma State and North Carolina go through their paces.
This pre-Final Four extravaganza has become a staple in one of most exciting weekends in college sports.
The fans always get their money's worth -- because the day is free.


Wide Review Is Planned for Airport Workers
Seeking to tighten security after more than 100 undocumented aliens were arrested at Newark International Airport, the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey said yesterday that it would review the records of all employees hired by private companies to work at its airports.
The detained workers, employed by a cleaning company, had been granted security clearances that allowed them to work in restricted areas of the airport, as well as on airplanes.


New &amp; Noteworthy Paperbacks
THE UNREDEEMED CAPTIVE: A Family Story From Early America By John Demos.
Vintage, $13.
Eunice Williams was only 7 years old in 1704, when her family was captured in an Indian raid on Deerfield, Mass.
Her father and siblings were ransomed; Eunice was adopted by Roman Catholic Iroquois.
When later given the opportunity to return to her home, she refused.
This is "a highly readable and appealing account" of her fate, Linda K. Kerber said here last year.


Stultifying Piety
To the Editor:
As William Gaddis states in his essay "Erewhon and the Contract With America: Wealth, Butler Knew, Was Virtue, Bad Luck a Crime" (March 5), "Erewhon" was published in 1872 at Samuel Butler's expense.
It wasn't, however, until a later edition that he put his name to it.
Coincidental with his mother's death, it provoked from his father the accusation that it had killed his mother.


Tinkerer, Bailer, Sculptor, Sailor, And Now What?
Nobuhiru Yamauchi prefers to be called simply Yama.
He likes simplicity -- every day for three years, he has been stepping off his 21-foot sailboat, which is laden with his sculpture and paintings and moored at the 79th Street docks, and walking the 10 feet to his workplace: the lineup of wooden sculptures against the fence.
But lately, things have been getting more and more complicated.
First, a former dockmaster had 20 of his pieces removed from the boat basin parking garage and dumped.
Then, he received a letter dated March 23 in which the Riverside Park administrator, Charles McKinney, gave him two weeks to remove his work -- or see it thrown out.


Bad Boss? Let Us Know!
Have you had a bad boss?
Send your story -- no longer than 500 words, please -- to On the Job, Money and Business, The New York Times, 229 West 43d Street, New York, N.Y. 10036.
Or by E-mail to onthejob@nytimes.com.
Names will be withheld upon request.
All submissions become the property of The Times.
They may be edited, and may be republished in any medium.


Q and A
London for Children  Q. We will be traveling to London this summer with our grandchildren, aged 9 and 11, and would like information on places of interest for youngsters in and around London. -- Irma Hyman, Providence, R.I.


Laura H. Curtiss, Warren S. Sutnick
Laura Hope Curtiss and Warren Sheldon Sutnick, both assistant district attorneys in Brooklyn, were married last evening in Verona, Pa.
Rabbi Jamie Gibson officiated at the Green Oaks Country Club.
Mrs.
Sutnick, 27, graduated from Boston University and received her law degree from Yeshiva University.
She is a daughter of Zelda and Dr.
Edward I. Curtiss of Pittsburgh.
Her father, a cardiologist, is the associate dean of admissions at the University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine, where he is a professor of medicine and the director of the central heart station at the university's heart institute.
Her mother is an assistant counsel at the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Resources in Pittsburgh.


Horse Is an Owner's Dream
IT is the dream of everyone who has ever thrilled to the beauty of a horse competing: you own one yourself, probably a modest purchase with equally modest credentials.
And then a miracle occurs. The horse starts winning and winning. And winning some more.


Land Sought for Golf Course
WESTCHESTER is considering adding a sixth golf course to its list of public sites, County Executive Andrew P. O'Rourke announced recently.
Noting that there was a strong demand from residents for another 18-hole course, Mr.
O'Rourke called the acquisition of the newest site -- a 194-acre tract owned by International Business Machines -- "a once-in-a-lifetime opportunity."
The county has agreed to pay $4.6 million to I.B.M. for the property in this northern suburb of rolling fields and woods, and it expects to spend another $5 million to develop it as a golf course.
Mr.
O'Rourke said the county may seek a nongovernmentalpartner, but the final decision to acquire the site rests with the county's Board of Legislators.


Thou Talkin' to Me? A Cabby's Poetic License
It was 1 P.M. on a breezy Sunday.
A weary New Yorker climbed into Marc Anthony Butcher's taxi.
"Good morning," the soft-spoken cabby said.
"East 78th Street," the passenger snapped.
Undaunted, the Flatbush cabby (hack license: 390460) began his low-key pitch: "May I ask you for an opinion of a poem that I wrote?"


Tea With Trotsky
To the Editor: The photographs of Frida Kahlo's kitchen on Feb. 19 ("Three Lives, Three Museums, Three Shrines" by Suzanne Slesin) reminded me of dawn on a September day in 1937, when I had a glass of tea with Leon Trotsky in that very same room.
Just out of college, two friends and I drove to Mexico City in our 1931 Packard limousine.
I had contacted another schoolmate who was a member of Trotsky's entourage in Coyoacan; this schoolmate then arranged for us to come out to meet "el Viejo" -- "the Old Man" -- as he was known.
We returned several times to the house in Coyoacan and listened raptly to Trotsky.


Where the Swells Still Strut
THE Atlantic City Easter Parade, said to be the oldest official Easter Sunday promenade in America, is still a class act, a proud pretension whose place on the Boardwalk and in popular culture is both welcome and undeserved.
Welcome because, in a city whose major industry has always been capturing tourists and their money, the Easter Parade remains delightfully uncommercial, free of charge and open to anyone who feels like dressing up and strolling.


Germans Debate Rites On War's End
A sharp debate has broken out in Germany over whom to invite to observances of the 50th anniversary of the end of World War II in Europe.
Behind the debate lies this country's uncertainty about what it should be observing on May 8.
Many Germans view the date as a joyous anniversary of liberation from dictatorship; others see it as a reminder of destruction and defeat.


LOOKING OUT FOR NO. 1, 2, 3 . . .
We've been hearing about "family values" for several years now and I suppose it was just a matter of time before a piece about the virtues of large families came around.
As the "baby" of a family of seven siblings, I had to laugh at the nostalgic look at life in a big family.
Twelve-step rooms are full of survivors of large broods where parents loved aplenty while they slogged through extreme fatigue, distraction and disappointment.
"It's never ever about you alone: it's about everyone" engenders annihilating mergence and extraordinary loneliness amid chaos.
ALI CARTER Austin, Tex.


Grab That Rake, Tackle Those Weeds
ROCUSES have bloomed.
So have the snowdrops.
Early tulips and the first daffodils are beginning to show their colors.
In short, the spring bloom parade has warmed up.
And gardeners who have not done the usual seasonal cleanup ritual had better get cracking.
Because from now on, things will start happening at a rapid pace.


INSIDE
MUTUAL FUNDS /Page 9  There are some new wrinkles in the arcane art of assessing the riskiness of mutual funds.
By Leslie Eaton.
SPENDING IT /Page 11  Do you like scuba diving?
Bashing the moguls on Al's Run at Taos?
When the insurance bill comes, it will cost you.
By Carol Marie Cropper.
SPENDING IT /Page 12  The latest in business books.
Plus a new feature: The New York Times Business Best Sellers list.
By Barbara Presley Noble.
VOICES /Page 15  There's gold lurking in the junk mail: How one man earns pocket money from those annoying credit card solicitations.
By Joseph Anthony.


U.C.L.A. and Arkansas Advance to N.C.A.A. Final


Factions Scramble to Contain Fighting on Israel-Lebanon Border
Israel, Lebanon and their allies struggled today to keep new border fighting from spinning out of control, even as they warned that they were ready to launch fresh military attacks if provoked.
The Israeli-Lebanese border was quiet today, a day after Israel and fighters of the pro-Iranian Party of God in Lebanon traded some of their heaviest blows in many months.


Sandra Lithgow, Pedro Ramirez
Dr.
Sandra Denise Lithgow, a resident in internal medicine at Columbia Presbyterian Medical Center in New York, is to be married today to Dr.
Pedro Ramirez, a resident in obstetrics and gynecology there.
The Rev.
William J. Bradley is to perform the Roman Catholic ceremony at the Church of Our Lady of Mercy in Port Chester, N.Y.
The bride, 26, graduated from Cornell University.
She and the bridegroom received their M.D. degrees from Albert Einstein College of Medicine.
She is a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Carlos A. Lithgow of Rye Brook, N.Y.
Her father is an internist in New York.


75 Years After His Death, a Composer's Originality Is Honored
IN the Musical Genius Died Young category there are some familiar bright lights: Mozart at 35, Schubert at 31, Bizet at 36 and Gershwin at 39 -- as well as those whose brilliance was just dawning on the world.
The American composer Charles Tomlinson Griffes falls into the latter group.
The Boston Symphony, Philadelphia Orchestra and Cleveland Orchestra all played premieres of his works the year before he died of pneumonia at 35.
Griffes was director of music at the Hackley School here from 1907 until his death in 1920.
Concertgoers know him best, if they know him at all, for works like "The White Peacock," "The Pleasure Dome of Kubla Khan" and "Poem for Flute and Orchestra," music composed in his time off from academic duties.


There'll Always Be an . . .
The conference was called "Britain in the World," and it was billed as an event for deep thinkers to come together and plot a course for Britain.
It ended up being a session in cheerleading and self-assertion, with speakers ranging from the Prince of Wales to an editorial writer for a German newspaper advising Britons to stop running themselves down and cheer up.


12 Highway Trouble Spots to Steer Clear of (if You Can)
Expect to encounter these trouble spots in the coming weeks.
1 ROUTE 208, southbound, in Fair Lawn. Left turns onto McBride Avenue banned.


March 26-April 1: Presidentially Yours; Latest Republican Aspirants Differ Over Abortion
The two latest entrants into the Republican Presidential competition -- Senator Arlen Specter of Pennsylvania and Alan L. Keyes, a radio talk show host -- occupy opposite ends of the political spectrum.
Both are seen as long, long shots.
Still, if successful, they would make history: Mr.
Specter would be the first Jew nominated and Mr.
Keyes the first black.
The candidates, who both officially announced last week, are both highlighting an issue that most of their opponents would just as soon forget -- abortion.


Business Best Sellers
HARDCOVER 1.
THE BEARDSTOWN LADIES' COMMON-SENSE INVESTMENT GUIDE (Godin/Hyperion, $19.95.) Tips for successful investing from 16 Illinois women.


Alexandra Booke and Joel Millner
Alexandra Jessica Renfra Booke, a vice president of Sandollar Productions, a movie production company in Burbank, Calif., was married last evening to Joel Mark Millner, a literary agent at the Broder Kurland Webb Uffner Agency in Beverly Hills, Calif.
Rabbi Sheila Russian performed the ceremony at the National Arts Club in New York.
Ms.
Booke, who is keeping her name, graduated from Yale University.
She is the daughter of Miranda de Kay of New York and the late Sorrell Booke.
Her mother is a senior editor of the Literary Guild in New York.
Her father was a television and movie actor.
Her stepfather, George de Kay, owns M. Evans &amp; Company, a book publishing company in New York.


Dolphins Sign Parmalee
Miami Dolphins running back BERNIE PARMALEE, a former UPS driver who became an National Football League starter last season, signed a two-year contract with the team.
Financial terms for the unrestricted free agent were not disclosed Friday.
The Dolphins reportedly tendered a one-year offer of $714,000 in February. (AP)


Mallory Prestlien, Steven Cangialosi
Mallory Anne Prestlien, a television producer, was married yesterday to Steven Donato Cangialosi, a sports anchor and reporter.
The Rev.
James Reynolds performed the ceremony at the Roman Catholic Church of the Holy Child in Richmond Hill, Queens.
The couple work at New York 1, the cable television news service.


Settling Suits For Brutality Rises in Cost
In the last five years, police brutality cases have cost New York City $87 million in court judgments and settlements of lawsuits, and the numbers are rising sharply, according to figures from the City Comptroller's office.
The increase could be due to a number of factors.
Some say the figures show how the department has failed to deal with the problem of police brutality; others say it reflects a greater awareness of the problem, leading to more lawsuits.
The city, however, says that in an increasingly litigious society, it is cheaper to settle some cases than go through costly court battles.


Clinton and Dole Spar Over Who Is to Blame for Delaying Money for Military
Senator Bob Dole of Kansas admonished President Clinton today to show some leadership in resolving an impasse in Congress that is holding up several billion dollars in emergency spending for the military and contributing to what Mr.
Dole termed a readiness crisis.
In a letter to Mr.
Clinton, Mr.
Dole, the Republican leader, took issue with the President's "decision to blame the Congress" for the delay over a supplemental defense bill sought by the Administration to cover the costs of peacekeeping operations in Haiti, Somalia and elsewhere as well as caring for Haitian refugees in Cuba.


Denver Art Museum Redoes Two Galleries
The Denver Art Museum has renovated two of its galleries to house collections that include many new works, as well as objects that the museum has been unable to display because of space restrictions.
An exhibition titled "Options: 1" marks the opening of the modern and contemporary collection in the reconfigured 9,718-square-foot Stanton Gallery.
Ten rooms were built to allow for changing displays.
Entire rooms are devoted to the works of Lucas Samaras and Jim Dine; a corridor gallery houses face and figure drawings by Matisse, Modigliani, Dubuffet, Abraham Walkowitz and Larry Rivers.


Buried Treasure? The Sindia May be Just Your Wreck
Treasure hunters have been dreaming about the merchant bark Sindia, a 330-foot square-rigged windjammer, ever since she ran aground 150 yards off this summer resort in 1901.
Soon they may get a chance to see what lies inside.
Early salvagers recovered only part of the Sindia's cargo before pounding surf and coastal storms swept away her four great masts and finally buried her under layers of sand.
But in 1991, an Army Corps of Engineers sand-replenishment project extended the beach more than 100 feet past the wreck site, and the ocean was no longer a barrier.


For Women Only
To the Sports Editor,
I would like to comment on Bill Koch's announcement that J. J. Isler, the team's tactician, was being replaced by a man ("The Women of America  Are on Board for Now," The Times, March 21).
Wait just one minute here!
What's Dave Dellenbaugh doing on the women's boat?
Are you implying that because the America
team is not in the lead and may lose, it has to be bailed out by a man?
The women's team concept was a new idea and terribly exciting to female sailors everywhere.


If You're Thinking of Living In/East End Avenue; Suburban Lifestyle in Upscale Manhattan
TWIN lanes of cars pass along the Franklin D. Roosevelt Drive and disappear beneath the wedge of the elevated John H. Finley Walk that curves close to East End Avenue.
John Marshall's seventh-floor window looks out toward Astoria's low-level terrain to the east, the Queensboro Bridge to the south.
He is unhappy about the lights on Roosevelt Island that dim the skies for his terrace telescopes, but Mr.
Marshall, a widower retired from his job as a supervisor with the Singer Company, is otherwise pleased with his accommodations: a two-bedroom apartment he and his wife, Anna, rented in 1954 and bought, for a fraction of its current value, in 1960.


Mexican Peso's Wake Makes Mideast Waves
To the Editor:
The Mexican monetary crisis appears to have foreign policy reverberations that have reached the Middle East.


Day-Care Choice: Cost Or Quality
WHEN her son was born three years ago, Diane Charton Karsch set out to find the best child care that money could buy.
"It's not that the dollars didn't matter," said Mrs.
Karsch, a Mount Kisco resident who is an account executive for a public relations concern.
"And it wasn't like I was going back to work for pin money, because we had a mortgage to pay. But even though some options were cheaper, I wouldn't consider them."


In the New Russia
To the Editor:
I was upset and somewhat perplexed by John le Carre's remarks about me in his essay "My New Friends in the New Russia: In Search of a Few Good Crooks, Cops and Former Agents" (Feb. 19).


Tea With Trotsky
To the Editor: Susanne Slesin's description of the Frida Kahlo museum in Mexico City was thorough and enjoyable, and commendably complete with mention of the fact that the few Kahlo paintings displayed include none of her major ones.
However, there was another disappointment my wife and I experienced when we visited the museum recently.
We were required to check our cameras upon entry, and were unable to retrieve them until after passing through the outdoor patio.


Europe's Ethnic Minorities Test a Truce
To the Editor:
In a poignant juxtaposition to the usually bad news from the Balkans, "We Can Work It Out" (Week in Review, March 26) praises the Central Europeans for taking the road to "conciliation."


Franchise Fervor in the Ivory Tower
They stood eye to eye and nose to nose for almost 40 minutes, exchanging heavy talk, soulful looks and angry glares outside Mrs.
Fields Cookies at the food court entrance, he a brooding Ethan Hawke in leather jacket with white fur collar, she a waiflike Wynona Ryder in black.
It was the kind of minor mall world melodrama that plays out all the time whenever kids gather over their Whoppers, Pizza Hut personal pan pizzas and Freshens Premium Yogurt -- everywhere from Tysons Corner Center in suburban Washington to the Galleria in Dallas and Phipps Plaza in Atlanta.
The only difference was that this was no shopping center, it was the student union at Boston University.


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: April 2, 1995
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
1
THE CHAMBER, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $7.50.) A lawyer represents a racist who is on death row for his part in a 1967 bombing.
2
1
UNTIL YOU, by Judith McNaught. (Pocket, $6.50.) An American woman who is a chaperone in Georgian England finds romance.
3
10
TOM CLANCY'S OP-CENTER, created by Tom Clancy and Steve Pieczenik. (Berkley, $6.99.) The operations of a secret Government agency.
4
7
ACCIDENT, by Danielle Steel. (Dell, $6.99.) A car collision alters the lives of five families.
5
2
DECIDER, by Dick Francis. (Jove, $5.99.) An architect gets caught between the warring factions of a clan that owns a racecourse.
6
5
INCA GOLD, by Clive Cussler. (Pocket, $6.99.) Dirk Pitt contends with a ring of thieves.
7
3
MISTRESS, by Amanda Quick. (Bantam, $5.99.) A former schoolteacher's efforts to unmask her aunt's blackmailer in London.
8
10
THE DAY AFTER TOMORROW, by Allan Folsom. (Warner Vision, $6.99.) A doctor stumbles into a tangle of conspiracies.
9*
1
DAYBREAK, by Belva Plain. (Dell, $6.99.) Two families are divided and then united by a series of surprising developments.
10
1
ANGEL, by Barbara Taylor Bradford. (Ballantine, $6.99.) The reunion of four people is transformed by two celebrated men.
11
42
THE SHIPPING NEWS, by E. Annie Proulx. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $12.) A man mourns his adulterous wife in Newfoundland.
12
5
THE ROBBER BRIDE, by Margaret Atwood. (Bantam, $6.50.) A woman who long manipulated three friends suddenly reappears.
13
23
CONGO, by Michael Crichton. (Ballantine, $6.99.) Why did archeologists die among ruins?
14
1
MURDER ON THE POTOMAC, by Margaret Truman. (Fawcett, $6.99.) A law professor discovers a corpse in the Potomac River.
15
6
HEARTSTONE, by Phillip Margolin. (Bantam, $6.50.) Probing a seven-year-old murder.
16*
6
THE CAT WHO CAME TO BREAKFAST, by Lilian Jackson Braun. (Jove, $5.99.) Jim Qwilleran and his cats investigate catastrophes.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
NonFiction
1
28
EMBRACED BY THE LIGHT, by Betty J. Eadie with Curtis Taylor. (Bantam, $5.99.) A woman's near-death experience.
2
64
CARE OF THE SOUL, by Thomas Moore. (Harper Perennial, $12.) A psychotherapist discusses spirituality and everyday life.
3
5
THE HIDDEN LIFE OF DOGS, by Elizabeth Marshall Thomas. (Pocket, $5.99.) An analysis of canine behavior.
4
4
SAVED BY THE LIGHT, by Dannion Brinkley with Paul Perry. (Harper Paperbacks, $5.99.) An account of two near-death experiences.
5
10
HOW WE DIE, by Sherwin B. Nuland. (Vintage, $13.) A physician and surgeon reflects on "life's final chapter."
6*
16
SOUL MATES, by Thomas Moore. (Harper Perennial, $13.) Love and relationships.
7
595
THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $10.95.) Inspiration.
8
27
HAVING OUR SAY, by Sarah L. Delany and A. Elizabeth Delany with Amy Hill Hearth. (Dell, $5.99.) The reminiscences of two black sisters, both of them over 100.
9
1
REVIVING OPHELIA, by Mary Pipher. (Ballantine, $12.50.) The everyday dangers that beset teen-age girls.
10
15
SEINLANGUAGE, by Jerry Seinfeld. (Bantam, $5.99.) Observations on life's pleasures and ordeals by the star of "Seinfeld."
11*
6
MAKES ME WANNA HOLLER, by Nathan McCall. (Vintage, $12.) The life of a young black man in America: the memoirs of a Washington Post reporter.
12
23
WOULDN'T TAKE NOTHING FOR MY JOURNEY NOW, by Maya Angelou. (Bantam, $5.50.) Essays on life and death, good and evil.
13*
31
A HISTORY OF GOD, by Karen Armstrong. (Ballantine, $14.) The development of monotheism over the past 4,000 years.
14*
109
I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS, by Maya Angelou. (Bantam, $4.99.) The poet's depiction of her childhood and adolescence.
15*
37
REENGINEERING THE CORPORATION, by Michael Hammer and James Champy. (Harper Business, $13.) Innovation in business.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Advice, How-To and Miscellaneous
1
27
CHICKEN SOUP FOR THE SOUL, compiled by Jack Canfield and Mark Victor Hansen. (Health Communications, $12.95.) Stories meant to "open the heart and rekindle the spirit."
2
205
THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE, by Stephen R. Covey. (Fireside/S&amp;S, $12.) Principles for success.
3
7
THE CELESTINE PROPHECY: An Experiential Guide, by James Redfield and Carol Adrienne. (Warner, $8.99.) Ways to apply the inspirational message of the novel "The Celestine Prophecy."
4
1
DRIVEN TO DISTRACTION, by Edward M. Hallowell and John J. Ratey. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $12.) Coping with attention deficit disorder.
Rankings reflect sales, for the week ending March 18, at 3,050 bookstores plus wholesalers serving 38,000 other retailers, statistically weighted to represent sales in all such outlets nationwide.
An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.


Corrections
The Frugal Traveler column on March 12, about Boston, misidentified a railroad terminus and a shopping mall.
The terminus is South Station, not South Street Station; the mall is Copley Place, not Copley Plaza.


Julie B. Fellows, Jeffrey A. Crow
Julie Beth Fellows, a daughter of Maxine Fellows of Monsey, N.Y., and George Fellows of Saddle River, N.J., was married last evening to Jeffrey Alan Crow, the son of Marilyn and Dr.
Robert Crow of Atlanta.
Rabbi Mark Kiel officiated at Tappan Hill in Tarrytown, N.Y.
The bride, 25, is an associate product manager at Colgate-Palmolive in New York.
She graduated from Boston University.
Her mother is a social worker and psychotherapist in Monsey.
Her father is the president of Revlon Consumer Products Worldwide in New York.
The bride's stepmother, Diane Fellows, is the principal of the Woodland Avenue School in Franklin Lakes, N.J.


QUICK BITE/Ridgewood; Springtime, and the Ice Cream Line Is Already Out the Door
Capistrano has its swallows to herald spring. Ridgewood has Van Dyk's.
"When the weather goes above 50, the line goes out the door and down the driveway," said Jennifer Cassidy, 17, dishing out ice cream to platoons of customers last Sunday as fast as she could scoop.


U.S. Has to Try Harder to Woo Japanese Buyers
To the Editor:
Thomas L. Friedman couldn't be more right in "Only 88 More to Go" (column, March 26): we have to get tough with the Japanese.
But his solutions couldn't be more wrong.
The coercive methods he outlines will not produce the desired results.


Fashion's TV Frenzy
IN a blast of fast-paced music, the model will prance down the fashion runway into the eye of the camera -- and straight out onto the Sony Jumbotron screen in Times Square.
The live transmission of Cynthia Rowley's show next Thursday -- the first on the megascreen since New York's shows have been grouped in Bryant Park in Manhattan -- is the ultimate in fast fashion.
As with the live European television coverage in Paris last month of the Mad Max show by Jean-Paul Gaultier and the celebrity-packed spectacular from Thierry Mugler, the video camera is now bringing raw fashion from the runway direct to the public.


The Trouble With Angels is Averted At Vassar
Their wings may have been clipped a bit, but the "white angels" haven't flown away from VASSAR COLLEGE forever, as students and alumni once feared.
The white angels, officially known as messengers, are the desk attendants who have traditionally kept watch over students living in the nine dormitories on the Poughkeepsie, N.Y., campus.
Their nickname refers to the white uniforms -- and sometimes white hair -- that distinguished the women and to the care that they dispensed to their charges.


Grad Students Plan Walkout To Seek Recognition as a Union
In a move that could disrupt humanities and social science classes, hundreds of Yale University graduate students say they plan to walk off their jobs as teaching assistants on Monday to press their demand for the right to unionize.
University administrators say they will never accept a graduate student union.
The graduate teaching assistants lead weekly discussion sections for lecture courses and teach introductory foreign language and freshman English classes.


Northern Variations on Southern Themes
From the verdant pastures of Warren County in the northwest to the jangling casinos of Atlantic City, you can find just about anything you desire in New Jersey.
Wineries?
Sure.
Gorgeous beaches?
Of course.
Rock bands?
Lighthouses?
Factory outlet stores?
No problem.
Barbecue?


Former Newsday Publisher Seeks to Remain Force on Long Island
A few weeks after Robert M. Johnson was pressured to resign as publisher of Newsday and his name disappeared from the masthead, it began showing up in the Long Island-based paper's news pages.
Liz Smith, Newsday's lead gossip columnist, dropped her former boss's name in a January item: "Johnson for governor? I like it," she wrote.
Then came a story about his possible appointment to the State Board of Regents, an unpaid post to which he was later named.
That was followed by an article that mentioned that Mr.
Johnson had been retained as a consultant by one of Long Island's biggest developers.
Then came an opinion piece by Mr.
Johnson himself, advocating the construction of an indoor swimming complex for the 1998 Goodwill Games, an event for which he serves as chairman on a voluntary basis.


2 Ex-Stars Enmeshed In Injury Grievances
Sterling Sharpe, the former Packer receiver, and Richard Dent, the former defensive end with the Bears and 49ers, are involved in a huge fight with their former teams over injury grievances the All-Pro players have filed.
Both claims have major impact on the teams' salary caps.
Under Article X of the National Football League collective bargaining agreement, an injured player who is terminated can file a claim for his unpaid salary as long as the player is still physically unable to perform.
However, Article XXIV, Section 6(e) of the agreement says that one half of the salary amount in dispute counts against the salary cap until the grievance is resolved.


In Lincoln Park, the Symbolism of the Siren
IN TOWNS with volunteer fire departments, the cricket chirp of the electronic beeper has decisively replaced the primal howl of the municipal siren.
Yet in Lincoln Park, in the northeast corner of Morris County, those Cold War-vintage sirens came wailing back full force last week, even though all 60 of the town's volunteer firefighters carry beepers.


Four Parties
Benefits for children's causes and people with AIDS, and a magazine celebrating an anniversary.


Deal to Bring Walker Back To Giants Stadium Is Near
The Giants were close to reaching an agreement with the former Eagles running back Herschel Walker yesterday, and a deal could come as early as today.
For the Giants, Walker would become a larger version of running back David Meggett, who left the team to sign as a free agent with the Patriots in February.
Pat Hanlon, the Giants' director of public relations, said he could not comment on the team's negotiations with Walker.
Walker could not be reached for comment.


Modem, I'm Odem
WE CAN LEARN from sitcoms.
In a new NBC series titled "Hope and Gloria," Hope asks Gloria's ex-husband, Louis, for advice on what men want.
Louis says he can respond only for himself: "A big-screen TV, 800 pixels to the inch."


One of a Kind Real Survivor, Seeks Same
While other English majors are poring over Shakespeare or trying to keep their infinitives together, SHANNAH ANDERSON is doing detective work in a secret garden.
This modern-day Sherlock Holmes is investigating the Raven's manzanita, believed to be the last plant of its kind on earth.


Newborn Is Found On Brooklyn Roof
A newborn was found yesterday on the roof of a two-story building at a housing project in East New York, Brooklyn, and detectives were searching last night for the infant's mother.
The baby boy, who was suffering from a skull fracture, was found wrapped in a blood-soaked blue towel, with a paper shopping bag and a plastic sheet around the towel, on the roof of a community center behind the Cypress Houses at 710 Euclid Avenue, said Carl Pelleck, a spokesman for the housing police.


Hartford Mulls Stadium for All Seasons
STATE legislators, who agreed to build a $251 million stadium in an effort to lure the New England Patriots football team to Hartford -- only to have the Patriots decide to stay in Foxboro, Mass. -- may now be asked to help back a scaled-down complex with tenants that might include UConn football and basketball teams.
Though considerably smaller than the previously proposed stadium, the complex would have at least one additional feature: a dome that would enable it to house hockey and basketball games, concerts, circuses and other indoor events, in addition to football.


Foreign Affairs; Round and Round
As President Clinton strode onto the makeshift stage to address U.S. troops in Haiti before they handed off their mission to the U.N., music started to blare through loudspeakers.
Only it wasn't "Hail to the Chief" with which U.S. soldiers greeted their commander.
It was the rock-and-roll song "Round and Round." There was a celebratory, high-fives feel to the ceremony, as both the President and the troops savored the moment: they had defied the critics, made the Haiti mission something to be proud of and given this sad, dirt-poor nation a second chance to climb out of the abyss of military rule in which it had wallowed for the last three years.
But on the edges of the ceremony there were whispers -- allegations that Haiti's Interior Minister was involved in the murder of a leading opposition figure.
Those whispers were a reminder that the habits of violence here die hard, and that while the U.S. has succeeded in stabilizing Haiti, no one knows for how long.
The uncertainty gnaws at everyone here.
It might also explain why the U.S. troops greeted Mr.
Clinton with "Round and Round." It was a warning.
The main verse is: "Another day, another way, what comes around goes around."


EVENING Hours; A Runaway Runway
Alternative fashion as a prelude to Fashion Week, March 29.


Litmus Test For Fund Managers
ADD one specific set of credentials to the long list of desirable qualities in a fund manager.
That is C.F.A., or chartered financial analyst.
Stock fund managers with that designation have turned in superior performance, according to a study by Ravi Shukla and Sandeep Singh, assistant professors of finance at Syracuse University and the State University of New York at Brockport, respectively.


March 26-April 1; E-Mail
The Week in Review's electronic mail address is review@nytimes.com.


SUNDAY, April 2, 1995; INVENTIONS
Necessity is not always what spurs invention.
Witness the four inventions above (with names supplied by the editors).
The Barbie (Pat. 5,333,406, David Wylie of Devine, Tex.) can switch outfits, so the fisherman doesn't have to switch lures.
Stretchy fabric slips over the body of the lure.
It's not a doll; it's an action figure.
The Caged Bug (Pat. 5,319,875, Giuseppe Brandolino, Brampton, Ontario) sings.
Well, at least the grasshopper, or frog, or worm may "emit distress signals." And since the bait is not impaled on a hook, it lives longer.
The Lip Lock (Pat. 5,339,562, Ricardo Guerra of Hardwood Heights, Ill., and Alfred Salazar of Bixby, Okla.) has a "hinged lever that closes over the lure, driven by the biting force of the fish." That solves the release part of catch-and-release fishing.
The Skipper (Pat. 5,309,665, Mark Franciskovich, Wheaton, Ill.) is the editors' choice.
It pops in and out of the water like a flying bug.
In New York, trout season opened yesterday; bass season opens the third Saturday in June.


Goldilocks Settles In, but Will Bears Be Back?
THIS bull market has left some investors ecstatic, and many unhappy.
The bears scornfully call it the "Goldilocks market," their way of sneering at the conventional wisdom that the economy will grow just right -- not too fast, setting off inflation, and not too slow, damaging corporate profits.
But the cash keeps pouring in, and prices keep rising.
This year's rise, after a lackluster 1994, is a continuation of the bull market that began in 1990, as that year's recession was ending, and can be dated as far back as 1975.
It has been fueled by factors as immediate as rapidly rising profits and as long-term as the baby boom generation's growing concern with retirement.


Building on the Ruins Of Temples to Nuclear Power
TALK ABOUT REARRANGING the deck chairs.
A year ago, four teams of architects, designers and engineers were invited by a BBC-sponsored television producer to come up with ideas for remodeling a decommissioned nuclear power plant in northern Wales, to be featured on a documentary series.
For one of the firms, the New York design group Site, the invitation launched an epic voyage through time and space that led from Stone Age Britain to the end of the world.
It also led the group into the moral quandary that often confronts architects who try to take an active role in addressing social issues.
Trawsfynydd (pronounced Traus-VEN-ith) Nuclear Power Station is a landmark of the atomic age.
When completed in 1959, the plant's stark design, by the distinguished architect Sir Basil Spence, was regarded as a suitably awesome symbol of technological power.
Today, after decades of increasing public awareness of ecological issues, a visitor is more likely to see the 20-story plant as a monstrous intruder in an Arcadian setting.
But in the postwar years many were eager to regard the plant and its lush green surroundings as a natural fit.
Nuclear power, so the reasoning went, tapped into the innermost mysteries of nature.
Why couldn't it coexist harmoniously with forests and lakes?


No Headline
"It's almost as incomprehensible as adjusting from Fahrenheit to Celsius." DELSIE Z. PHILLIPS, Haverford College admissions director, on the new S.A.T. scores.  [ 22:1. ]


Accessible Broadway: The Cheap Seats
Tickets to Broadway shows may cost more than $65 apiece these days, but reduced-price tickets for many shows are available at the two TKTS booths -- the main one in Duffy Square at 47th Street and Broadway, and the satellite booth at 2 World Trade Center.
Tickets for selected shows are sold at Duffy Square beginning at 3 P.M. on the day of performance for evening shows and at 10 A.M. for Wednesday and Saturday matinees, noon for matinees on Sunday.
The World Trade Center booth opens at 11 A.M. and also sells matinee tickets for the next day.
Tickets cost either 50 percent or 75 percent of box-office prices, determined by the producers, plus a $2.50 service charge per ticket.
Only cash and traveler's checks are accepted.
Information: (212) 768-1818.


POSTINGS: A New Celebrity for a New York 'Power Block'; Versace Picks House On East 64th Street
Gianni Versace, the fashion designer known for his flamboyant residences in Miami and Italy, has joined the roster of celebrities who have chosen to buy homes on the block of East 64th Street just off Fifth Avenue.
"It's the power block right now," said Kathleen Burns Hoffman, the William B. May agent who brokered the $7.5 million Versace deal at 5 East 64th Street, an estate purchase made through the Bank of New York.


How a New Market Ruined Life on Joralemon Street
To the Editor:
Thank you for "Brownstone Warriors," the March 12 article about the Brooklyn Heights Association.
The association's work contributes greatly to keeping Brooklyn Heights from deteriorating into a morass of individual preferences.
But there are lapses.


U.N. Force Takes Up Duties in Haiti
The United Nations began its first full day of formal peacekeeping here today, with nearly 6,900 soldiers and police officers from more than 30 countries donning blue berets and moving in to replace the American-led military force that has been responsible for Haiti's security since last fall.
The mood in the capital was calm as the troops took up their mandate, which is to maintain order as this poor and volatile nation struggles to build a democracy and a functioning economy.


Correction
Because of an editing error, a brief article last Sunday about the killing of four people in a Montclair, N.J., post office and the sentencing of Colin Ferguson, the Long Island Rail Road gunman, misstated the date of the sentencing.
Mr.
Ferguson was sentenced on March 22, the day after the Montclair shootings, not on the same day.


Parking Enforcers to Ease a Ticketing and Towing 'Blitz'
It is not one of the world's more momentous peace accords, but for residents of two Brooklyn neighborhoods it is a meaningful, if temporary, cessation of hostilities.
The city's Department of Transportation, besieged by complaints about excessive automobile towing and accusations that certain neighborhoods are being made targets for overly aggressive ticketing, has agreed to what it calls a 60-day "experiment in focused enforcement."


On the Red-Hot Trail of 'Red Rock West'
LAST YEAR, A MODEST LITTLE noir thriller called "Red Rock West" came out of nowhere, brought almost instant fame to its director, John Dahl, and proved, critically and commercially, to be far more successful than anyone had anticipated. (It made $2.5 million at the box office -- not bad for a film that had already been shown on television and was available on videotape.)
"Bulletproof Heart," a no-budget noir thriller opening on Friday, may turn out to be another "Red Rock West." It tells the story of a New York hit man (Anthony LaPaglia) who falls in love with a mysterious woman (Mimi Rogers) he is supposed to murder.


In Short/Baseball
Think of it as a long seventh-inning stretch, with publishers doing their bit to occupy your time until the next batter is up.
This season's lineup of baseball books includes fiction, biography and history, so no reader should feel the need to go on strike.
STRIKEOUT  A Celebration of the Art of Pitching.
By William Curran.
Crown, $23.


Kathryn Joscelyn, Nelson Sheingold
Kathryn Anne Joscelyn, a daughter of Kent Joscelyn and Mary Joscelyn, both of Ann Arbor, Mich., is to be married today in Great Neck, L.I., to Nelson Randolph Sheingold, the son of Bernard and Audrey Sheingold of Wantagh, L.I.
Justice Alfred D. Lerner, the administrative judge of the State Supreme Court in Jamaica, Queens, is to perform the ceremony at Leonard's of Great Neck, a catering establishment.
The bride, 25, was until recently an assistant attorney for the Appellate Division of the State Supreme Court in the Bronx.
The bridegroom, also 25, is an assistant district attorney for New York County.
The couple graduated magna cum laude, she from Union College in Schenectady, N.Y., and he from the University of Delaware.
They were elected to Phi Beta Kappa.
The couple received law degrees from Yale University.


March 26-April 1: 'Gospel of Life'; John Paul II Stands Fast In a Changing World
It is doubtful that Pope John Paul ever intended to say anything new or startling in his long-awaited encyclical letter Evangelium Vitae ("Gospel of Life"), issued last week by the Vatican.
Yes, he shifted the Catholic Church's position on the death penalty, now acceptable in cases so rare as to be practically nonexistent.
But as the Church knows well, once the case can be made for even a rare exception, then the case for a moral absolute crumbles.
Thus the encyclical's move toward a condemnation of capital punishment is significant more in terms of doctrine than in terms of death row.


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
DISCUSSION ON ISLAM
"Islam: Faith, Culture or Terrorism" is the title of a program Wednesday at 4 P.M. at Sarah Lawrence College in Yonkers.
Intended to throw some light on a religion and political agenda that are widely perceived as a prime source of worldwide terror, the forum is open to the public free of charge.
Malika Zeghal will be the guest speaker.
Currently a visiting fellow at Princeton University, she holds a bachelor's degree in comparative literature from the Sorbonne and master's and doctoral degrees in political science from the Institut d'Etudes Politiques in Paris.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball American League  MINNESOTA TWINS -- Released Joe Lynch, Tom Traen and Barry Wohler, pitchers.
Assigned Russ Fandel, Steve Spurgeon and James Wray, pitchers; Jeff Wedvick, catcher; and Tom Houk and Chris Malinoski, infielders, to their minor-league camp.
Hockey  National Hockey League  HARTFORD WHALERS -- Returned Kevin Smith, left wing, and Robert Petrovicky, center, to Springfield of the American Hockey League.
WINNIPEG JETS -- Returned John LeBlanc, right wing, to Springfield of the American Hockey League.
College
TENNESSEE STATE -- Named Nicholas Calcutta offensive line coach.


New Jersey, Dateline America
OLD-TIMERS in New Jersey like to tell the story of the former Newark mayor who used to say that wherever American cities were going, Newark would surely get there first.
These days, though, as the millennium looms, that principle may apply best to New Jersey's place in the nation.
Wherever America is heading, New Jersey appears to be on the cutting edge.
People in New Jersey may have known all along that the jokes missed the point (that the mosquito was not, in fact, the state bird).
But the truth is getting harder for everyone else to deny: New Jersey has become the nation's laboratory -- the field station where political and social solutions are tested, a barometer for our psychic weather, a prototype-in-progress for what America may become.


SUNDAY, April 2, 1995; A QUESTION FOR: Julia Child
Q: If you were going to be executed, what would you want as your last meal?


Step Right Up to Broadway's Revivals Museum
RIGHT NOW MUCH OF broadway is a Museum of the American Musical staffed by busy curator-directors eager to put their stamp on every show they mount.
Their handiwork includes the "revisal," as in the brand-new "How to Succeed in Business Without Really Trying"; treatments of pre-existing musical texts, as in "Tommy" and "Smokey Joe's Cafe"; arduous restorations, like "Show Boat," and meticulous concert versions like "Call Me Madam."


Fire Dept. Confirms: Arson
It is not hard to imagine how beautiful a scene this once was: Water washing against the rocks.
The beach.
The shadow cast by a magnificent bridge.
And, just a few steps away, the elegance of a 15-room Tudor house.
The natural scenery remains.
And so does the house, but only barely.
The brown bricks are covered by graffiti.
The window frames are glassless.
The center of the roof is missing as a result of a fire on March 12.


Men Against Misogyny
Throughout the last year, Black Men for the Eradication of Sexism at MOREHOUSE COLLEGE has issued an all-points bulletin against misogyny, date rape, sexual harassment, paternalism and other affronts to women.
And they're prodding their peers to do some real soul-searching -- from small, emotional biweekly discussion groups on the college's Atlanta campus to large-scale conferences.
The men are also taking on strip clubs, sexist music videos and pornography.
"The overall response is positive; I was surprised, actually," said Omar Freilla, the group's founder and a senior majoring in biology.


Pataki's April 1 Turns Cruel As Budget Deadline Passes
In the campaign of 1994, George E. Pataki enjoyed the good fortune of running against a deeply unpopular opponent, a three-term incumbent who was easily caricatured as a long-winded tax-and-spend liberal.
But in his 1995 campaign to enact an austere budget and to do it on time, Governor Pataki has discovered that it is much harder to build a positive case for change than a negative one.
With the passing of midnight, New York preserved its most enduring symbol of the status quo: the late budget.
Mr.
Pataki had vowed during the campaign that he would reverse Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo's 10-year record of tardiness, and his failure to do so reflects his inability to generate widespread public support for his agenda.


A Pair of Presidents Keep It All in the Family
As Fraternal Twins, the Shapiro brothers grew up sharing the same room and the same schoolteachers, but not the same interest.
Harold was the athlete, two championships, played basketball, loved soccer.
Quieter, more studious Bernard got better grades and showed a marked lack of interest in sports.
"My parents were very careful not to treat us as if we were the same person just because we were the same age," Bernard Shapiro recalled, sipping tea in his wood-paneled office at McGill University in Montreal.


Prize Pigs and Pies Are Moving Indoors
By any measure, George Hamid Jr. is Mr.
State Fair in New Jersey.
He owns and runs it, as his father did before him.
"I was brought up in this business," Mr.
Hamid said.
"That means I was brought up to hate the rain." This year, he won't have to worry.
When the New Jersey State Fair opens on Aug. 3, it will be under the roof of the South Jersey Expo Center in Pennsauken.
The new location is 10 miles from Garden State Park in Cherry Hill, the race track where the fair has been held since 1985.
The fair has been run by Mr.
Hamid's family since the 1930's.
Waiting in the wings are his three sons and a grandson.
Admission, $7 for adults and $5 for children, is the same as last year.
THOMAS J. LUECK


Just Superheroes Sticking Up for the Homestead
Ballet  Through April 4 at Film Forum, 209 West Houston Street, Manhattan Principals and company of the American Ballet Theater Directed by Frederick Wiseman No rating 170 minutes


Model AIDS Center Plans to Shut Down, And Patients and Town Wonder What's Next
Screaming townspeople, wearing surgical masks and carrying "Keep AIDS Out of Wanaque" signs, picketed the local nursing home when it began accepting AIDS patients seven years ago.
A dozen of the nurses who had taken care of the home's elderly people and sick children chose to quit rather than care for the new residents on the top two floors.
The AIDS patients stayed (along with the home's other residents), and more came, from all over New Jersey -- most of them on Medicaid, many of them without families.
State officials and advocates for people with AIDS call the Wanaque Convalescent Center a model for long-term health centers for people with AIDS or H.I.V.
And this blue-collar town in northern Passaic County eventually welcomed the center and its patients.


Ersatz Opera In 'Citizen Kane'
To the Editor:
Alex Ross's essay "An Unequal Partner Raises Its Lovely Voice"  [ March 12 ]  provided much food for thought, especially on what in opera attracted (and still attracts) me.
Mr.
Ross wrote that "Bernard Herrmann, the greatest of Hollywood film composers, created some splendidly clamorous music in a French verismo style" for the character Susan Alexander to sing in the Orson Welles film "Citizen Kane."


A Play's Invisible Character
WHEN "Having Our Say" opens at the Booth Theater on Thursday, one of the play's main characters will be off stage.
She is Amy Hill Hearth of Ossining, a former contributor to The New York Times who was the co-author of the best-selling book on which the play is based.
The other authors, possibly the oldest first-time authors in history, are Dr.
A.
Elizabeth Delany, known as Bessie, and her sister Sarah Delany, known as Sadie, the now world famous centenarians of Mount Vernon.


New Los Angeles Police Chief, Like the Old One, Comes Under Heavy Attack
Ever since Willie L. Williams took the reins of the Los Angeles Police Department two years ago, friends and foes have agreed on one thing: he is no Daryl Gates.
That was among his prime qualifications for the job, and, paradoxically, it is proving among the greatest obstacles to his success.
Nowhere have the differences between Mr.
Williams and Mr.
Gates, whom he succeeded as Chief, been projected more starkly than in their respective postures in two racially charged cases: Mr.
Gates's ferocious defense of his department in the case of Rodney G. King, the black motorist beaten by white officers, and Mr.
Williams's more measured -- and what some see as belated -- defense of the department's handling of evidence in the O. J. Simpson murder case.
The larger-than-life Mr.
Gates, Chief of Police for 14 years, was an intense, hands-on leader, an implacable foe of crime.
He was also unpredictable and abrasive, his style ultimately deemed out of synch with a highly diverse city where police work is often equal parts criminology and sociology.
He was forced from his job by the beating of Mr.
King and his department's ineffective response to rioting that erupted when four officers charged in that beating were acquitted in state court.
Mr.
Williams, then the Police Chief in Philadelphia, was recruited as the would-be savior of the Los Angeles force.
His supporters described him as compassionate, articulate and an energetic supporter of initiatives like community policing.
Once hired, the new Chief immediately vowed to end what he called the "paramilitary mentality" of the department.
Yet the very traits that seemed so appealing in the wake of Mr.
Gates's often divisive tenure have brought the 51-year-old Mr.
Williams conflict with other police brass, resentment from the rank and file, and concern among the city's business and political leaders, some of whom see the department as once again lacking direction.
Now, with three years left on his contract, he is already struggling to keep his job.
Some call him aloof, distant and indifferent to gritty details whose mastery is essential to management of a large organization; others say that although he continues to enjoy broad support among community groups, he has failed to build constituencies and alliances within the police force and among elected officials.
"There's no doubt that Willie Williams is in deep trouble with the rank and file," said Gary Fullerton, director of the Los Angeles Police Protection League, the leading union of the city's officers.
"He's a nice guy, but people just don't see him as a leader.  He's looked upon by the officers as being more concerned with the public than with his subordinates. And he's definitely not a detail-oriented person."
Stephen Yagman, a civil rights lawyer who specializes in police misconduct cases, said, "The only positive thing about him is that he is not Daryl Gates." Mr.
Yagman, initially a strong Williams supporter, added: "He has no dynamism, no zest, no verve, no panache. He seems like a nice guy, but he's simply not up to the job."
And Mr.
Gates, who was long silent about his successor's performance, has in recent weeks become one of the leading critics.
"Morale is in terrible shape," Mr.
Gates said in an interview.
"They are losing people left and right. It used to be that the L.A.P.D. was the department that everyone wanted to go to. Now they're leaving, and he's a principal reason."
In addition, there are ethical questions.
Last month the Police Commission, the civilian body that oversees the department, undertook an investigation into reports that Mr.
Williams and his family had used for private purposes cars, drivers and cellular phones paid for by the public and that he had improperly solicited perquisites that included free rooms at casino hotels in Las Vegas, whose longtime popular perception as a haven for underworld investors has only added to the concern surrounding the reports.
The accusations first surfaced in December, when Stephen Downing, a retired deputy chief, citing what he called widespread rumors of misconduct by Mr.
Williams, wrote a letter advising the commission that they "should be investigated and put to bed one way or the other."
Chief Williams, who declined repeated requests for an interview, has said only that he did nothing wrong, and the Police Commission so far has found no wrongdoing.
But its formal inquiry into what its president, Enrique Hernandez Jr., calls "serious charges" continues.
Many rank-and-file officers, and even some of the Chief's supporters, complain that he has compounded his problems by his choice of a lawyer to represent him in the investigation: Melanie Lomax, who was the Police Commission's acting president when she played a leading role in forcing Mr.
Gates from office.
"For the Chief to choose her as his representative was peculiar, to say the least," said Mr.
Fullerton, the director of the Police Protection League, "because the vast majority of officers have traditionally seen her as an enemy of the Police Department."
Mr.
Gates called his successor's hiring of Ms.
Lomax "another bit of absolute total stupidity on his part."
Mr.
Williams's supporters, noting that Los Angeles brought in to run its Police Department not only an outsider but a black outsider at that, describe much of the criticism as inevitable.
"There is no way the first black Chief of Police is not going to have trouble, especially because there is a racist element that remains in the department," Ms.
Lomax, who is black, said in an interview.
"All of Gates's loyalists are still there, and the chief command staff is still there. They will never forgive Williams for being an outsider."
At the Oscar Joel Bryant Foundation, the largest union of the department's black officers, the president, Sgt.
Leonard Ross, agreed that race was a major factor in some of the criticism.
"Before he was ever sworn in, he was being criticized," Sergeant Ross said.
"He was never given an opportunity to demonstrate ability or style; the critics met him at the door. There are two reasons for this: one, because he's from the outside, and two, because he was black."
Sergeant Ross added that Mr. Williams's "public support is as strong as ever."
Laura Chick, a white City Councilwoman, agreed that support for Mr.
Williams among the general public was strong.
"He has rebuilt the public trust and confidence," she said, "and is very much on his way to rebuilding a positive rapport and the kind of support that a law-enforcement agency has to have."
Even so, what the critics describe as poor political skills have become a liability that has cost him many potential allies in his current struggles.
For one thing, although Mayor Richard J. Riordan has voiced support for Mr.
Williams's continuing to head the department, that support has been lukewarm at best, leading to speculation that the Mayor is backing him mostly to avoid a divisive search for a new Chief.
Mr.
Riordan recently appeared at a rally that community leaders had called in support of the job being done by Chief Williams and to urge the Police Commission to conclude its investigation rapidly.
But one of the rally's sponsors, Henry Dotson, president of the Los Angeles chapter of the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People, said Mr.
Riordan's appearance had been just "for public consumption." The Mayor, Mr.
Dotson said, "doesn't wholeheartedly give Chief Williams the support that he really needs."
Mr. Riordan declined to be interviewed.
Perhaps most disconcerting to many officers is what they perceive as the Chief's tepid response to the barrage of attacks on the police force during the Simpson trial.
Mr.
Simpson's lawyers have argued not only that the police were incompetent in their handling of evidence but also that at least one of their number is a bigot who may have tampered with the crime scene and planted a bloody glove behind Mr.
Simpson's house.
Mr.
Williams has defended the department's performance and asserted, most forcefully at a public rally last month, that the attacks are merely the hyperbole of a Simpson legal team handsomely paid to cloud the minds of jurors.
But his support for his officers has not been nearly enough -- and has come far too late -- to satisfy many of them.
For months, the Chief largely refrained from discussing the police performance in the Simpson case, saying that to do so while the trial was still under way would not be proper.
Whereas Mr.
Gates was often accused of blindly defending the department, right or wrong, Mr.
Williams is perceived by many officers as afraid to offend his supporters, some of whom have long been critics of the police.
Not surprisingly, Mr. Gates agrees with his former subordinates.
"Everyone knows that I would have defended those police officers," Mr.
Gates said.
As for Mr.
Williams's chances of eventually winning the trust of his officers, the former Chief said: "No matter what he says now, he has lost it. No way he can recover."


Just Superheroes Sticking Up for the Homestead
Jefferson in Paris  Nick Nolte, Greta Scacchi, Thandie Newton, Gwyneth Paltrow Directed by James Ivory PG-13 144 minutes


Chaminade Club Marks Its 100th Anniversary
GREATEST Woman Composer Tells of Her Dreams," read The Washington Post headline when Cecile Chaminade toured the United States in 1908, and such was the distinction of the French pianist and composer, so strong her status as a role model for women, that 200 or so clubs around the country had taken her name in homage.
Most of the clubs have faded away, but the Chaminade Club of Yonkers has not only stayed the course but is also ready to celebrate its centennial with a gala concert today at 3 P.M. at the Racquet Club on Park Hill (Van Cortlandt Park Avenue at Lakeside Drive) in Yonkers.


Report From Stockton, a Sandstone Relic on the Delaware
We're chatting with 68-year-old Carl Cathers, a retired restaurant manager who can survey the confluence of the Delaware River and the Raritan Canal from the window of his home in Stockton, in Hunterdon County.
Mr.
Cathers, say those who've lived in Stockton a very long time, knows the village better than anybody.
He agreed to answer a few questions.
Q. What's it like living in Stockton?


Mega-Kim's Video To Fill Old Site Of St. Marks Baths
Nine years after the City Department of Health closed the St.
Marks Baths, the dilapidated building, at 6 St.
Marks Place, is being renovated to house a multilevel, multimedia store.
The Health Department closed the popular gay bathhouse in December 1985 in response to the city's AIDS crisis, saying that customers engaged in unsafe, or high-risk, sex acts.
The building's new owner, Yongman Kim, head of Kim's Video, a chain of video stores in the East and West Village, said the long-derelict five-story building will require extensive work, but he declined to say how much he expected to spend on renovations.


Q. &amp; A.
Suing The Board Of a Co-op Q My co-op apartment is in one of the first buildings to go co-op in Brooklyn.
The co-op's financing is sound and the original mortgage is almost paid off.
We were hoping to lower the maintenance payments for shareholders as a result.
Last summer, the board got into an argument with shareholders who are renting out their two units.
The absent shareholders have sued and will most certainly win, because the board is at fault.
The minimum amount of damages acceptable to the plaintiffs is $15,000, which is the cost of the lawsuit so far.
Can the board members pay for the lawsuit with funds from the shareholders' maintenance payments or must they use their personal finances first? . . .
Caroline Ponticelli, Brooklyn.
A Marc Luxemburg, president of the New York Council of Cooperatives, said that in most cases, a board member or officer would not be personally liable for actions taken on behalf of the corporation "so long as the member or officer acted in good faith and for a purpose reasonably believed to be in the best interest of the corporation."


Discussion; The Commissioners on Police Corruption
Police Commissioners come and go, but corruption in New York City's Police Department hangs on.
Commissioner William J. Bratton and three of his predecessors, Patrick V. Murphy, Benjamin Ward and Richard J. Condon, spoke at New York Law School on Friday about how best to fight the perennial problem.
They discussed Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani's battle with the City Council over having an independent monitor oversee the force, what kind of monitor is most effective, how its members should be chosen and whether it should have subpoena powers.
The discussion, part of a daylong seminar, drew on experience dating to the days of the Knapp Commission and before.
GEORGE JAMES Commissioner Benjamin Ward, who wants to make commanders at the precinct level more accountable by giving them more power to fight corruption.
"When you ask the Mayor to be totally responsible, you either have to have this very naive Mayor that we have today, if he is, or someone that just thinks he can conquer all and is willing to take on the kind of pressure that will come to him if his commission fails to control corruption. Because what is he going to investigate? What is Nick Scoppetta  [ the head of the Mayor's oversight committee ]  and his committee going to be looking at?
They're going to be looking at Bill Bratton and  [ Internal Affairs Chief Patrick ]  Kelleher's attempts to control and suppress corruption.
When they find it, who's going to be sitting in the driver's seat, when they find it?
His police commissioner, Bratton.
How did it start?
How long was it going on before Bratton learned about it?
Where did he learn about it?
Did he find out about it from some Suffolk County policeman who stumbled accidentially on some city cop engaged in corruption, and so when the arrest comes down, it makes the New York City Police Department look inept and in competent because they didn't find it themselves and it was found in East Cupcake and not in the big city?
And is the Mayor going to be up there in the Blue Room saying, "I picked Bratton," as Koch said the other day when he criticized Giuliani, said, 'You want praise?
Stand next to Ben Ward and say, 'I picked Ben Ward.' Well, is he going to stand next to Bratton and say, 'I picked Bratton and this is what happened?' Because Bratton can't control all the corruption that occurs in the city."  Patrick V. Murphy, commissioner from 1970 to 1973, who replaced 90 percent of the top officers in the department and incorporated many Knapp Commission recommendations, including creating a central internal affairs division.
"If you have someone whose sole focus is on corruption, you should be more successful in ferreting out that corruption. And I think however the Mayor and the Council resolve the independent commission, however it turns out, I think that it will be very helpful for the Police Department."  Commissioner William J. Bratton, who wants to make commanders at the precinct level more accountable by giving them more power to fight corruption.
"Information is also now in the process of being shared extensively with the precinct commanders. Why? to get them into the game. To include them. To empower them. To get them into the game. This is being done at great risk, because it's common wisdom -- traditional wisdom relating to internal affairs corruption issues is the fewer people in the know the better, because you might lose a case.
Well, that exclusion type of activity certainly doesn't seem to have worked in the sense that we have in 20-year cycles, whether we had a three-oh type of precinct situation or other precincts like the three-oh . . . .
And I think the time has come to try something different.
I think it's radically different, something that is risky.
I believe it's worked in dealing with crime.
I believe it will work in dealing with the issue of corruption.
Time will tell.
Will I lose a few cases because somebody has a loose lip?
Possibly.
But will I win a lot more?
Will you as citizens in New York win a lot more?
I think so.
What will you win?
By having those precinct commanders coming into the game, by giving them authority to deal with this, we can begin to deal with the new insidious type of corruption."


Where Schooling Happens on Location
WANTED: Teachers.
"The company is actually an outgrowth of my own interests: acting and teaching," said Alan Simon of Chappaqua, who founded On Location in 1982.
"I'm a former teacher who always wanted to be an actor. Finally, I left teaching to act full time, and I worked on the summer circuit and in Off Off Broadway shows for a number of years."


Without Fear or Favor
BEYOND THE DOUBLE BIND Women and Leadership.
By Kathleen Hall Jamieson. 283 pp.
New York: Oxford University Press. $25.


Corrections
A report in the Travel Advisory column on March 12 about a bird park near Iguacu Falls in Brazil misstated its size and the location both of its entrance and that of a hotel in the area.
The park is 7 acres, not 10; the entrance is about 1,000 feet from the main entrance to Iguacu National Park, not right next to it.
The Hotel das Cataratas is in the national park, not across the street from the entrance.


Miss MacTaggart And Mr. Saraceno
Susan Margaret MacTaggart, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Barry MacTaggart of Vero Beach, Fla., was married yesterday to Kurt Werner Saraceno, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Dominic Saraceno of Newton, Mass.
The Rev.
Jeffrey Walker performed the ceremony at Christ Episcopal Church in Greenwich, Conn.
Mrs.
Saraceno, 31, graduated cum laude from Fairfield University.
Until recently she was an international marketing manager for Pfizer International, the pharmaceutical company, in New York.
Her father, now retired, was the chairman and president of Pfizer from 1981 to 1991.


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
'SHLEMIEL THE FIRST'
A pre-Broadway engagement of "Shlemiel The First" opens at the Rich Forum in Stamford on Tuesday and will run through April 16.
The performance is produced by the American Repertory Theater and the American Music Theater Festival.
The concept for adapting the folk tales of Isaac Bashevis Singer, the Nobel Prize-winning author, and merging them with klezmer music was Robert Brustein's, artistic director of the American Repertory Theater in Cambridge and author of the adaptation.
The work received favorable reviews at its premiere in Cambridge and at the Serious Fun Festival in Manhattan last year.


A Sense of Loss
To the Sports Editor:
Has a dream, a momentum, a raison d'etre been sacrificed along with J. J. Isler?


From Barflies to 'Uncle Vanya'
LEN JENKIN'S theater world consists of derelicts, pimps and barflies who hang out around motel parking lots and carnival sideshows in towns like Chump Junction.
None of them has a samovar.
Mr.
Jenkin arrived at Yale Repertory as an associate artist in residence at the beginning of the season to study technical theater and to develop an experimental work -- in his words, "A vast traveling carnival, a dream extravaganza, a Utopian thing." Chekhov had nothing to do with any of it.


At Stanford, a New Grind
At STANFORD UNIVERSITY, Students pulling all-nighters can now drink a coffee that bears the name of their beloved Cardinals and comes in flavors named for their dormitories.
Stanford, you see, has its own brew.
Its Cardinal Coffee line comes in 11 flavors, ranging from Florence Moore French Vienna to Escondido Sumatra.
The most popular is Lagunita Mocha Java, said Jane H. Williams, Stanford University Central Stores marketing manager.


Where Schooling Happens on Location
WANTED: Teachers.
"The company is actually an outgrowth of my own interests: acting and teaching," said Alan Simon of Chappaqua, who founded On Location in 1982.
"I'm a former teacher who always wanted to be an actor. Finally, I left teaching to act full time, and I worked on the summer circuit and in Off Off Broadway shows for a number of years."


Interlude in Manila
THE BLUE AFTERNOON  By William Boyd. 367 pp. New York: Alfred A. Knopf. $23.


Corrections
A picture caption on March 12 with a listing of music festivals in Europe misspelled the surname of a conductor and the name of the orchestra he was leading.
He is Michel Plasson; the orchestra is the Capitole de Toulouse.


Love Now a Cardinal
The Phoenix Cardinals, trying to strengthen a line that was held partly responsible for the team's lack of offense, signed DUVAL LOVE on Friday.
Love, who made the 1994 Pro Bowl and spent the last three seasons with Pittsburgh, is expected to start at left guard. (AP)


Boston University's Best Team Is the Best in the Country
Boston University intercepted a blind pass and quickly converted it into the game's key goal, and the team the coach called the best in the school's history went on to win college hockey's national championship today by defeating Maine, 6-2.
"Don't tell Mike Eruzione or Jack O'Callahan I said that," Coach Jack Parker said of his declaration that this Terriers team is "the greatest we've had." O'Callahan was captain of the 1978 Terrier team, the last from B.U. to win the national title, and Eruzione was a star in the 1970's.


Residential Resales
In the following reports, the "listed at" price is the asking price when negotiations began that ended in the sale.
Time on market is from most recent listing to contract.
MANHATTAN
FLATIRON DISTRICT  $1.015 million
20-24 East 20th Street  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 7,000-sq.-ft. co-op in a loft building; elevator, eat-in kitchen, 12-ft. ceilings, oak-frame windows; maintenance $3,075, 45% tax-deductible, listed at $1.1 million, 26 weeks on market (Brokers: Ambrose Mar-Elia; Corcoran group)  MADISON SQUARE  $288,000
5 East 22d Street  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,000-sq.-ft. postwar condo; 24-hr. doormen, gym, north exposure, Madison Square Park view; common charge $483; taxes $4,200, listed at $288,000, 1 year on market (Broker: Newell &amp; Associates)  UPPER EAST SIDE  $177,000
301 East 79th Street  (Continental Towers)  1-bedroom, 1-bath, 618-sq.-ft. postwar condo; 24-hr. doormen, dining alcove, north exposure, roof garden; common charge $301; taxes $3,600, listed at $195,000, 26 weeks on market (Brokers: Elias Bernstein; City Living)  WEST VILLAGE  $405,000
165 Perry Street  2-bedroom, 1-bath, 1,350-sq.-ft. co-op in a converted prewar factory building; elevator, fireplace, jacuzzi, 500-sq.-ft. terrace, 16-ft.-ceilings; maintenance $907, 50% tax-deductible, listed at $440,000, 1 week on market (Brokers: Patton-Young Properties; Debra Kameros Co.)  BRONX
FIELDSTON  $630,000
416 Indian Road  3-bedroom, 3-bath, detached brick ranch; maid's room, den, dining room, eat-in kitchen, rear deck, c/a, 2-car garage; taxes $6,200, listed at $709,000, 2 years on market (Broker: ERA/Susan Goldy &amp; Co.)  PELHAM PARKWAY  $155,000
2712 Holland Avenue  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 60-year-old attached brick house; dining room, eat-in kitchen, h/w floors; taxes $1,130, listed at $165,000, 39 weeks on market (Broker: Century 21/Metro Star)  BROOKLYN
KENSINGTON  $199,000
133 Vanderbilt Street  2-family, 2-story, 100-year-old semi-attached brick house; 3 bedrooms in primary unit; 2 bedrooms in other; dining room, 1 bath in each; 25- by 150-sq.-ft. lot; taxes $1,500, listed at $225,000, 2 weeks on market (Broker: Brooklyn Properties of 7th Avenue)  PARK SLOPE  $325,000
373 Second Street  2-family, attached, 3-story brownstone; 3 bedrooms, 2 baths in primary unit; 2 bedrooms, 1 bath in other; landscaped garden; taxes $1,480, listed at $339,000, 3 weeks on market (Broker: Warren Lewis Realty)  WINDSOR TERRACE  $270,000
19 Fuller Place  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 85-year-old attached brick house; dining room, eat-in kitchen, stained-glass windows, parquet floors; taxes $1,200, listed at $285,000, 1 week on market (Broker: Warren Lewis Realty)  QUEENS
FOREST HILLS GARDENS  $458,000
35 Bow Street  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 3-story fieldstone town house; dining room, solarium, 2 fireplaces, 1-car garage; taxes $2,200, listed at $539,000, 12 weeks on market (Broker: Terrace)
STATEN ISLAND
TOTTENVILLE  $167,000
358 Craig Avenue  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 60-year-old detached colonial; dining room, eat-in kitchen, full basement, 1-car garage; taxes $1,100, 26 weeks on market (Broker: Kingsley Real Estate)  WOODROW  $310,000  10 Mallow Street  4-bedroom, one full-, one three-quarter- and one half-bath, 9-year-old frame house; dining room, eat-in kitchen, family room, office, fireplace; taxes $4,188, listed at $349,500, 1 week on market (Broker: Salmon)
LONG ISLAND
ALBERTSON  $202,000
21 Park Lane Drive  5-bedroom, 2-bath, 39-year-old Cape Cod; dining room, eat-in kitchen, den, fireplace; taxes $5,000, listed at $229,000, 12 weeks on market (Broker: Atanas)  FORT SALONGA  $260,000
2 Ridgewood Lane  5-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, 26-year-old ranch; dining room, eat-in kitchen, family room, fireplace, pool, 2-car garage; taxes $8,600, listed at $299,000, 40 weeks on market (Brokers: Prudential Long Island; Coach)  GLEN COVE  $160,000
16 Poplar Place  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 40-year-old ranch; dining area, eat-in kitchen; taxes $3,600, listed at $179,000, 4 weeks on market (Broker: Harmonious Homes)  KINGS POINT  $900,000
2 Romola Drive  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 38-year-old contemporary; dining room, eat-in kitchen, den, family room, maid's quarters, 2-car garage, 155- by 315-foot waterfront property; taxes $15,500, listed at $1.2 million, 5 weeks on market (Broker: Great Neck Realty, Better Homes and Gardens)  CONNECTICUT
DANBURY  $177,000
12 Boulevard  (Lake Place)  2-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 1,468-sq.-ft. condo in a 9-year-old building; dining room, family room, large cedar closet, pool and tennis courts, 1-car garage; common charge $168; taxes $2,736, listed at $186,900, 17 weeks on market (Brokers: William Pitt; Prudential Connecticut)  FAIRFIELD  $225,000
76 Beaumont Street  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 49-year-old Cape Cod; dining room, eat-in kitchen, new bath and kitchen, front porch, new furnace, finished basement; taxes $2,805, listed at $236,900, 13 weeks on market (Brokers: William Pitt; Laufer)  GREENWICH  $1 million
565 Indian Field Road  6-bedroom, 3-bath, 68-year-old Tudor; dining room, Florida room, 2-car garage, needs repair, .89-acre lot; taxes $10,327, listed at $1.195 million, 32 weeks on market (Broker: William Pitt)  NORWALK  $50,000
29 Van Buren Avenue  (Highview East)  1-bedroom, 1-bath, 17-year-old condo; c/a, laundry room; common charge $75; taxes $1,799, listed at $57,900, 75 weeks on market (Broker: Preferred Properties)  WESTCHESTER
BEDFORD  $1.0275 million
6 Train Band Road  6-bedroom, 4 1/2-bath, 7-year-old contemporary; family room, fireplace, den, attached 3-car garage, 4 acres; taxes $18,500, listed at $1.125 million, 13 1/2 months on market (Brokers: Preferred Realty; Houlihan/Lawrence)  KATONAH  $370,000
75 Allison Road  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 35-year-old colonial; fireplace, den, patio, dining room, eat-in kitchen, 1 acre; taxes $7,341, listed at $395,000, 3 months on market (Brokers: Houlihan/Lawrence; Coldwell Banker Schlott)  MAMARONECK  $210,000
515 Carroll Avenue  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 63-year-old Tudor; entry hall, fireplace, modern eat-in kitchen, dining room, deck; taxes $5,001, listed at $239,000, 5 1/2 months on market (Broker: Houghton &amp; Banks)  WHITE PLAINS  $263,000
6 Newcomb Place  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 9-year-old colonial; cathedral ceiling, skylights, family room; taxes $5,430, listed at $269,950, 4 1/2 months on market (Brokers: Prudential Rita Cohen; ERA Exactly)  NEW JERSEY
MIDDLETOWN  $235,000
56 McClellan Drive  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 30-year-old raised ranch; 2-car garage, fireplace, fenced yard, eat-in-kitchen; taxes $4,749, listed at $239,900, 14 weeks on market (Broker: Prudential New Jersey)  OCEAN CITY  $255,000
307 Seabright Road  3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 50-year-old center hall colonial; deck, 1-car garage, 1 block from beach, dining room; taxes $3,458, listed at $279,900, 4 weeks on market (Broker: The Richards Agency)  PARK RIDGE  $283,000
243 Ellin Drive  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 32-year-old colonial; fireplace, 2-car garage, C/A, finished basement; taxes $5,698, listed at $289,000, 3 weeks on market (Brokers: Prudential Higgins; Gold Star)  TITUSVILLE  $125,000
1474 River Road  2-bedroom, 1-bath, 42-year-old ranch; h/w floors, fireplace, 2-car garage, full basement, taxes $3,028, listed at $149,000, 8 weeks on market (Broker: Richard A. Weidel)


INSIDE
Fans Mourn Pop Singer
Thousands went to Corpus Christi, Tex., to mourn Selena, the 23-year-old diva of Latin pop music, who was shot to death on Friday.
Page 18.
A Trip Forward in Time
For some, Daylight savings is more than an annoyance.
Watch sellers, for one, would rather just take the day off.
Page 37.
A Reminder
Daylignt saving time resumed at 2 A.M. today. Clocks were set ahead one hour.


Offbeat Types


March 26-April 1; On the Road in Hillaryland
HERE in the shadows of Mount Everest this weekend, the burning questions are these: Will the world see America's No. 1 Democratic woman on that Republican icon, the elephant?
And when Hillary Rodham Clinton sets out on a safari, who will win -- the First Lady or the tiger?
Halfway through her 12-day official visit to South Asia, Mrs.
Clinton has paused below the peak conquered by that other Hillary in search of a vanishing breed.
So far, the view isn't bad.
Mrs.
Clinton's good will tour has been animated by an air of high moral purpose as she stresses the importance of educating women in a region that is home to some of the most oppressed, and most resourceful, women in the world.
She has visited families, schools, a worker's union, government officials and even one of Mother Teresa's orphanages (yes, an orphanage).


U.S. to Cut Food Aid Going Abroad
Responding to strong domestic pressure to reduce foreign aid, the Administration has cut nearly in half the nation's annual pledge of overseas food aid, which had remained unchanged for two decades.
Noting that the developing world's food demands are rising every year, the 15-nation European Union has criticized the American move, suggesting that the United States is breaking its commitments.


6 Young Neurotics Talking Really Fast . . .
A STAGEHAND WALKED up to the gleaming new gold Saturn, parked at an ersatz curb on an urban street set inside Stage 17 on the Warner Brothers lot.
He began spraying it with filthy water from a pail until the car, streaked with grime, looked as if it had just completed a scene from "Road Warrior."
"This is how we make this look like a car in New York," said Marta Kauffman, executive producer of the NBC comedy series "Friends."


The Nation; The Price Can Be High For Talk That's Cheap
FEDERAL law enforcement agencies spend about $100 million a year on informers.
Defense lawyers are spared that expense altogether.
What for investigators and prosecutors is a paid informant would be a corrupted witness for the defense.
"If I paid a witness $45,000, you know what would happen to me? I'd go to jail," said Gerry Goldstein, president of the National Association of Criminal Defense Lawyers.
"If it's fair to pay witnesses, then both sides should be able to pay them. Why is it that only one side can pay witnesses and that's called getting at the truth, while the other side can't?"


When Hollywood Is the Draw
Guests gathered for dinner at Planet Hollywood and Elaine's to watch the Academy Awards and support Childhelp U.S.A., March 27.


Celia M. Loneragan, Scott C. Clark
Celia Mary Loneragan, a daughter of Susan and John Loneragan of Lue , New South Wales, Australia, was married yesterday to Dr.
Scott Cameron Clark, a son of Joan and Cameron Clark of Haddonfield, N.J.
The Rev.
Hugh Walsh performed the ceremony at the Roman Catholic Chapel of the Convent of the Sacred Heart at Rose Bay in Sydney, Australia.
The Rev.
Dr.
Victor Roberts, an Anglican priest, took part.
Mrs.
Clark, who is a psychologist, is a psychiatric researcher at New York University.
She graduated from the University of Sydney, from which she also received a master's degree in psychology.
Her father, who is a grazier, is also a partner in Dear &amp; Loneragan, a law firm in Mudgee, New South Wales, of which her mother is an associate.


THE TRASHING OF PROFESSIONALISM
Much of Louis Menand's argument against term limits for political officeholders rests upon the notion of lack of transferability of skills from one profession to another ("The Trashing of Professionalism," March 5).
Yet, the very idea of education is to transfer skills.
Moreover, corporations frequently have programs to rotate workers from one position to another to cross-fertilize the organization with fresh ideas and to impart new skills to employees.
In an outstanding example of skills transferability, Adam Smith transformed himself from professor of moral philosophy to become the "father of economics"!
Smith never seemed to believe in "disinterestedness" either; for he said, "it is not from the benevolence of the butcher, the baker, or the candlestick maker that we get our daily bread, but rather from their greed."


Crackdown Targeting Tide of Brothels
The Mayor's Office of Midtown Enforcement is cracking down on brothels in the Madison Square area.
Two weeks ago, Midtown Enforcement, in conjunction with the 13th Precinct and the Manhattan South vice squad, used a nuisance abatement statute to padlock a brothel at 35 East 28th Street, the third such closing in the area in the last few months.
In January, a brothel that had masqueraded as a nail salon, at 350 Park Avenue South, was shut down.
Later that month, another brothel, at 154 East 28th Street, was padlocked.
Authorities say two other recent attempts to open on East 28th and East 29th Streets were thwarted.


CD-ROM's Hitch a Ride With a Man on a Spider
HOW DID DAVID KIRK GET SO HOT?
Just a year ago Mr.
Kirk, an unassuming artist with a penchant for being broke, was working away in his upstate New York workshop, producing one-of-a-kind toys and struggling to write and illustrate his first children's book.
But suddenly Madonna has declared him the author of her favorite bedtime story and, in perhaps the most important form of recognition today, the multimedia business is throwing money and opportunities at him.
The story of how zestfully the multimedia world has embraced Mr.
Kirk -- or at least his soulful spiders -- points up the most glaring shortcoming in this nascent, intensely hyped business and the lengths to which CD-ROM publishers are going to fill the gap.


Victims' Kin Get Mementos From Crash
About 80 people who lost relatives in the September crash of a USAir jet near here were able this weekend to sift through recently discovered personal effects and to see a reconstruction of the wrecked plane.
Federal officials allowed the relatives to take home any of the 139 personal items that looked familiar, like a shattered calculator, hairbrushes, a rosary, a Purdue University sweatshirt, even a silky nightgown.


Tired of Chinese? Try Vietnamese
ERIC J. ZETTERQUIST, A 32year-old art dealer, may be on to something with "Vietnamese Ceramics," the current show at his Manhattan gallery.
Eager for trade with the West, Vietnam is becoming a hot destination for tourists with an appetite for the exotic.
Devotees of Asian art are also discovering an alternative to the better known and more costly works from China, Japan and Korea.
Mr.
Zetterquist is by no means alone in his interest in Vietnamese artifacts.
As a part of its auction on June 5, Christie's in London will sell 50 pieces of Vietnamese stoneware from a European collection.
And a book, to be published next year, will document examples of these ceramics in public and private collections worldwide.


Alan Hugh Nadel, Karen Anne Rich
Karen Anne Rich, an associate at the New York law firm of Stroock &amp; Stroock &amp; Lavan, is to be married this evening to Alan Hugh Nadel, a commodities trader.
Rabbi Martin Rozenberg is to officiate at Temple Israel in Lawrence, L.I.
The bride, 26, graduated cum laude from the University of Pennsylvania and received her law degree from Fordham University.
She is the daughter of Michael and Lisa Rich of Forest Hills, Queens.
Her parents are real estate developers in Forest Hills.


Land Sought for Golf Course
WESTCHESTER is considering adding a sixth golf course to its list of public sites, County Executive Andrew P. O'Rourke announced recently.
Noting that there was a strong demand from residents for another 18-hole course, Mr.
O'Rourke called the acquisition of the newest site -- a 194-acre tract owned by International Business Machines -- "a once-in-a-lifetime opportunity."
The county has agreed to pay $4.6 million to I.B.M. for the property in this northern suburb of rolling fields and woods, and it expects to spend another $5 million to develop it as a golf course.
Mr.
O'Rourke said the county may seek a nongovernmentalpartner, but the final decision to acquire the site rests with the county's Board of Legislators.


Allison Schwartz And David Zales
Allison Dana Schwartz, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Daniel J. Schwartz of Randolph, N.J., was married last evening to David Bennett Zales, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Jerome J. Zales of Allentown, Pa.
Rabbi Eugene Wernick officiated at the Headquarters Plaza Hotel in Morristown, N.J.
Mrs.
Zales, 26, is a lawyer for the Federal Trade Commission in Washington.
She graduated from Wellesley College and received her law degree from Boston College and a master's degree in public health from Harvard University.
Her father, an obstetrician and gynecologist, is a senior vice president and the medical director of Morristown (N.J.) Memorial Hospital.


BENEFITS
Ecumenical Honors  MONDAY -- A black-tie dinner for the nationwide anti-bias and anti-bigotry programs of the National Conference of Christians and Jews will begin at 6:30 P.M. at the New York Hilton.
Senator Christopher J. Dodd, a Democrat from Connecticut, and William H. Gray 3d, the president of the United Negro College Fund, are among those to be honored.
The event begins with a cocktail reception.
There will be a reading by Victor Borge and a performance by the Professional Performing Arts School Choir.
Tickets, $400, from (212) 838-6033.
Wilde for Irish Rep  MONDAY -- The Irish Repertory Theater company will present "A Wilde Night on Broadway" to raise money for its theater-building project at 132 West 22d Street.
The performance, featuring Claire Bloom, Brian Dennehy, Lynn Redgrave, Christopher Reeve and others, begins at 7 P.M. at the Golden Theatre, 252 West 45th Street, and will be followed by a supper at Sardi's, 234 West 44th Street.
Tickets, $100, or $40 for the performance alone, from (212) 255-0270.
Broadway Songs at City Center  MONDAY -- A black-tie evening of show tunes for the benefit of City Center at the Plaza Hotel will begin at 7 P.M.
Joanne Woodward and Alec Baldwin will be co-hosts.
After cocktails and dinner, Philip Bosco, Faith Prince and others will offer selections from Broadway shows including "Fiorello!" and "Call Me Madam." Black tie.
Tickets, $500, from (212) 921-9070.
Hampton, Scott &amp; LaMott  MONDAY -- An evening of jazz led by Diva, an all-woman big band, will feature performances by the vibraphonist Lionel Hampton, the singers Jimmy Scott and Nancy LaMott and other musicians at Tavern on the Green.
The event will benefit the Center for Children + Families, a child-protection agency in Manhattan, and the Barbara Sinatra Children's Center, a child-abuse treatment center in Rancho Mirage, Calif.
Dinner begins at 7:30, followed by the musical performances and a jam session at 8:45.
Tickets, $175, from (212) 226-3536 or at the door.
Duets for Playwrights Horizons  MONDAY -- A fund-raiser for Playwrights Horizons will pair actors and cabaret singers from the theater's productions, past, present and future.
The actress Elaine Stritch and the cabaret singers Mary Cleere Haran and Helen Schneider are among those scheduled to perform at the Manhattan Center, 311 West 34th Street.
The program, which begins with cocktails at 6:30 P.M. followed by dinner, will also honor State Senator Roy M. Goodman.
Tickets, $625, from (212) 564-1235.
Seeds of Peace Awards Dinner  TUESDAY -- Seeds of Peace, a program that brings Arab and Israeli youngsters to a summer camp in Maine, will benefit from an awards dinner honoring Queen Noor of Jordan and Reuma Weizman, the wife of President Ezer Weizman of Israel.
The black-tie event, at the Regency Hotel, begins with a cocktail reception at 7 P.M., followed by dinner at 8.
Dr.
Boutros Boutros-Ghali, the Secretary General of the United Nations, is scheduled to speak.
Lainie Kazan will sing the Israeli, Jordanian and American national anthems.
Tickets, $750, from (212) 221-1100.
Preserving Human Rights  TUESDAY -- Michael Gould, the chairman and chief executive of Bloomingdale's, is to be honored by the American Jewish Committee at a black-tie dinner-dance at the New York Hilton.
The event, to raise money for efforts to stem bigotry and preserve human rights around the world, is to begin with cocktails at 6:30 P.M.
Tickets, $500, from (212) 751-4000, extension 423.
A Venetian Ball  TUESDAY -- A Venetian-style ball to benefit the Children's Blood Foundation will be held at the 200 Fifth Club, 200 Fifth Avenue at 23d Street.
The evening, which will raise money for children's blood research, treatment and education programs at New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center, begins at 7 and will include drinks, a buffet dinner and an auction of trips, rare wines and culinary items.
Tickets, $100, from (212) 297-4336 or $125 at the door. 'London' for Lenox Hill  TUESDAY -- A benefit performance of Neil Simon's "London Suite" will raise money for Lenox Hill Hospital's medical library.
The event begins with cocktails and dinner at 5:30 P.M. at Canastel's, 229 Park Avenue South at 19th Street, followed by the performance at 8 P.M. at the Union Square Theater, 100 East 17th Street.
Gwen Verdon will be the dinner's host.
Tickets, $250, or $175 for the show alone, from (212) 434-2544.
For Breast Cancer Research  TUESDAY -- The breast cancer research program at the Albert Einstein College of Medicine will be the beneficiary of a party organized by the college's Young Women's Committee.
The event, from 8 to 11 P.M. at the Gauguin restaurant at the Plaza, will include hors d'oeuvres, an open bar, dancing, dessert and a performance by the Brazilian Carnival Dancers.
Tickets, $85, from (718) 430-4242 or $95 at the door.
In Memory of Dr.
King  TUESDAY -- Estelle Parsons, the comedian Ellen Cleghorne and others will read selections from speeches by Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr. to mark the 27th anniversary of his death.
The program will benefit the 1995-1996 season of the Working Theater, a troupe dedicated to exploring the lives of working people.
The readings, starting at 7:30 P.M., will be given at the Health and Hospitals Workers Union building at 310 West 43d Street.
A reception will follow.
Tickets, $20, from (212) 967-5464 or at the door.
For Young Audiences  TUESDAY -- Young Audiences, an organization that takes music and instruction to public schools in the five boroughs of New York, will hold a benefit concert at the Church of St.
Ignatius Loyola, 980 Park Avenue at 84th Street.
A 6:30 P.M. cocktail reception will be followed by a buffet dinner and a talk by the singer Lainie Kazan.
Tickets, $100, from (212) 319-9269.
A Night at the Opera  WEDNESDAY -- An evening to benefit the Young American Artists Program of the Glimmerglass Opera will be held at the Manhattan Center, 311 West 34th Street.
The third act of "La Boheme" will be performed beginning at 7.
Drinks and dinner will follow, and Bobby Short will perform a tribute to Kitty Carlisle Hart.
Peter Duchin will be the master of ceremonies.
Tickets, $300, or $100 for the opera performance and drinks only, from (212) 874-5457.
An Auction for Opera  WEDNESDAY -- The New York City Opera benefit, "A Night at the Auction," will be held from 6 to 9 on the Promenade of the New York State Theater at Lincoln Center.
The event includes a seated dinner and silent and live auctions featuring more than 80 vacation trips on 6 continents and couture clothing from Vera Wang, Cynthia Rowley and others.
Tickets, $300, or $150 for people 40 and under, from (212) 870-5613.
How to Succeed  WEDNESDAY -- Family Dynamics, a New York organization that seeks to prevent child abuse through parental education, will benefit from a performance of "How to Succeed in Business Without Really Trying" at 8 P.M. at the Richard Rodgers Theater.
Cocktails and a buffet dinner begin at 6 P.M. at the Hudson Theater, 145 West 46th Street.
Tickets, $200, from (212) 737-3597.
The Cirque Downtown  WEDNESDAY -- The New York Downtown Hospital is to benefit from a performance of Cirque du Soleil.
The evening begins at 6 with a buffet dinner at Moran's Restaurant, 250 Vesey Street at West Street in Battery Park City, followed by the performance at 8, at West Street and Battery Park Place.
Tickets, $250, or $100 for the show alone (for those 30 and under), from (212) 801-1707.
A Rain Forest Roast  WEDNESDAY -- The Rainforest Alliance, which is dedicated to the conservation of the world's tropical forests, will both honor and roast Ted Turner, the president of Turner Broadcasting, at a black-tie dinner at the Plaza.
Larry King, the CNN talk show host, will lead a panel that is to include Vartan Gregorian, the president of Brown University, and Michael Fuchs, the chairman of HBO.
Cocktails at 7.
Tickets, $250, from (212) 921-9070.
Paris to New York  WEDNESDAY -- A black-tie dinner at the St.
Regis will honor Robert Wilson, the opera director.
Organized by the American Friends of the Paris Opera and Ballet, the event will help pay for performances in New York of the ballet and other performing arts groups from France.
Cocktails at 7 will be followed by dinner and dancing.
Tickets, $1,000, from (212) 685-1095.
American Tables  THURSDAY -- The American Craft Museum, 40 West 53d Street, will hold a preview and sale of tableware and furnishings from its exhibition "The Banquet: A Celebration of the American Table." A benefactors' preview begins at 4 P.M.
Other guests will be admitted at 5.
Tickets, $500 for the benefactors' preview, or $75 for entry at 5 P.M., from (212) 956-3535.
The show opens to the public on Friday and continues until April 12.
Boys' Town Ball  THURSDAY -- A fund-raising ball for the 15 orphanages of Boys' Towns of Italy begins with a 7 P.M. cocktail party at the Waldorf-Astoria.
The black-tie evening will include dinner and dancing.
Matilda Raffa Cuomo is to be honored as the organization's woman of the year.
Tickets, $350, from (212) 980-8770.
Hats to Share  THURSDAY -- Share, which provides counseling and educational services to Manhattan, Brooklyn and Queens women with breast or ovarian cancer, is to benefit from a spring party and auction.
Helen Kardon, a cabaret singer, and Linda Fennimore, a jazz violinist, are to perform.
The event, sponsored by the Millinery Information Bureau, a trade organization, begins at 6 P.M. at the Church of St.
Ignatius Loyola, 980 Park Avenue at 84th Street.
Auction items include artwork, hotel stays and designer hats.
There will also be dancing, hors d'oeuvres, an open bar and a raffle of a seven-day cruise to the Galapagos Islands.
Tickets, $85, or $50 for people 30 and under, from (212) 876-1114. 'Death Defying Acts'  THURSDAY -- A benefit performance of "Death Defying Acts," three one-act plays by Woody Allen, David Mamet and Elaine May, will raise money for the Cooke Foundation for Special Education, which sponsors children with developmental disabilities in New York City private and parochial schools.
The evening begins at 6 with a cocktail buffet at La Belle Epoque, 827 Broadway near 12th Street, followed by the performance at 8 at the Variety Arts Theater, 110 Third Avenue.
Tickets, $225, or $125 for the show alone, from (212) 245-3376.  'Anyone Can Whistle'  SATURDAY -- Angela Lansbury is to be the host at Carnegie Hall as Madeline Kahn, Bernadette Peters and Scott Bakula perform songs from "Anyone Can Whistle," a musical by Stephen Sondheim and Arthur Laurents.
The event, a fund-raiser for the Gay Men's Health Crisis, begins with a cocktail party at 5:30 followed by the performance at 7:30.
Afterward, there will be a reception with the evening's stars at the Russian Tea Room.
Tickets, $500, or $250 for the cocktail party and show, or $150 for the show alone, from (212) 337-1913.
A Party for the Directors  SATURDAY -- A party at the Players, 16 Gramercy Park South, will benefit the Drama League's Directors Project, which provides training opportunities and financial support for new theater directors.
The event, from 9 P.M. to 1 A.M., will include a performance by Chicago City Limits, a comedy troupe; dancing to the Park Swing Orchestra, and an open bar.
Tickets, $40, from (212) 302-2100.
Plates and Platters in Purchase  SATURDAY -- An auction of one-of-a-kind ceramic plates and platters created by the painter Sol LeWitt, the sculptor Siah Armajani and 45 other artists, will be held at the Neuberger Museum of Art, 735 Anderson Hill Road in Purchase, N.Y.
The party, which is for the museum's exhibition and educational programs, begins with a cocktail buffet at 6:30 P.M. followed at 8:30 by the live auction.
Tickets, $125, or $55 for those age 40 and under, from (914) 251-6115.
Honoring Roberta Peters  NEXT SUNDAY -- The soprano Roberta Peters will be honored at a black-tie dinner-dance at the Plaza sponsored by the Russian emigre division of the UJA Federation.
The event begins with cocktails at 5.
Colette Avital, Israel's consul general in New York, is to speak.
Tickets, $750, from (212) 836-1340.
Opera Off Broadway  NEXT SUNDAY -- A benefit concert of classical and sacred music that will feature Maria Spacagna, a soprano; Jonathan Welch, a tenor; Marianne Cornetti, a mezzo-soprano, and other performers from the Metropolitan Opera Company will be held at the Lamb's Theater, 130 West 44th Street, at 7:30 P.M.
Proceeds will help the restoration of the landmark facade of the 90-year-old building designed by Stanford White that houses the theater.
A reception will follow.
Tickets, $100, or $35 and $50 for the concert alone, from (212) 997-1780. 125 Years of the Met  APRIL 10 -- The Metropolitan Museum of Art will celebrate its 125th anniversary with a spring ball.
The museum's public restaurant will be decorated to evoke turn-of-the-century New York as depicted in Edith Wharton's "Age of Innocence." The event, from 9:30 P.M. to 1 A.M., begins with cocktails, followed by dancing to the Hank Lane Society Orchestra in the restaurant and to disco music in the Carroll and Milton Petrie European Sculpture Court.
Black tie, or turn-of-the-century attire.
Tickets, $125, from (212) 570-3948.
For Big Brothers and Sisters  APRIL 10 -- Bill Cosby will present an award to Derek Harper of the New York Knicks at the annual Sidewalks of New York dinner for the Big Brothers and Big Sisters of New York City.
The event, at the Waldorf-Astoria, will also honor Lewis Rudin, a co-chairman of Rudin Management, and several others.
Drinks at 6:30.
Tickets, $350, from (212) 686-2042.
Peter, Paul, Mary &amp; Odetta  APRIL 10 -- Peter, Paul and Mary will perform along with Odetta, Richie Havens and Tom Chapin at a benefit concert to support vision research, clinical care and scholarships at the State University College of Optometry in Manhattan.
A 6:30 cocktail party and buffet dinner at the Hotel Macklowe will be followed by the concert at 8, next door at the Hudson Theater.
Tickets, $300, or $100 and $50 for the concert alone, from (212) 780-5060.


Chaminade Club Marks Its 100th Anniversary
GREATEST Woman Composer Tells of Her Dreams," read The Washington Post headline when Cecile Chaminade toured the United States in 1908, and such was the distinction of the French pianist and composer, so strong her status as a role model for women, that 200 or so clubs around the country had taken her name in homage.
Most of the clubs have faded away, but the Chaminade Club of Yonkers has not only stayed the course but is also ready to celebrate its centennial with a gala concert today at 3 P.M. at the Racquet Club on Park Hill (Van Cortlandt Park Avenue at Lakeside Drive) in Yonkers.


NEW YORKERS &amp; CO.
Something's Percolating On Astor Place
The coffee chains continue to caffeinate the city.


Steering Clear Of Trouble On the Roads
A look at trouble spots you can expect to encounter in the next week -- or month, or months -- courtesy of the State Department of Transportation.
1 ROUTE 208, southbound, in Fair Lawn. Left turns onto McBride Avenue banned.


Burundi's Ethnic Divide Widens, Feeding Fear of Greater Violence
An eerie quiet prevailed today on the muddy streets of Bwiza, its fire-blackened houses and gutted stores the only testimony to an attack that has revived a national mood of foreboding in Burundi.
Bwiza and nearby Buyenzi were the capital's last two ethnically mixed districts, where majority Hutu lived side by side with minority Tutsi.


William Villaume, Lutheran Pastor, 80
The Rev.
Dr.
William J. Villaume, a Lutheran minister who pursued prominent parallel careers as pastor, educator and national religious administrator, died on Monday at his home in Corpus Christi, Tex.
He was 80.
The cause was emphysema, his family said.


Defense a Key For U.C.L.A.
It was the Oklahoma State Cowboys who came to the Final Four with the reputation of in-your-face defense that kindled memories of Hank Iba and a bygone era.
The top-ranked U.C.L.A.
Bruins, meanwhile, were considered thoroughbreds who would rather outrace their opponents than suffocate them.
But an impressive defensive performance by the Bruins tonight, especially over the final three minutes of the game, brought U.C.L.A. a chance to capture its first national championship in 20 years.
The Bruins, reverting to a seldom-used zone defense, held the Cowboys without a field goal for the final 2 minutes 44 seconds to turn a 1-point game into a cozy 74-61 victory that sent U.C.L.A. into Monday night's championship game against Arkansas.


How Marianne Faithfull Turned Her Past on Its End
MARIANNE FAITHFULL -- rock-star muse, gutter survivor, post-modern cabaret queen -- has combined art and life to become what fans call a classic: a heroine whose presence speaks larger than the already large circumstances that made her what she is.
Garbo was a classic; so was Piaf.
These are the obvious comparisons.
"I know the details of her life," a devoted follower of Ms.
Faithfull once explained.
"But I don't need them. All of her story is in her voice."
Such hyperbole might seem extreme to those not convinced of Ms.
Faithfull's genius.
She's the first to admit that some still view her as "Mick Jagger's ex-bimbo," 25 years after she ended their very public four-year romance.
Few know the Edwardian ballads that made her a 1960's star in her own right, even her famous but seldom-heard version of the Jagger-Richards tune "As Tears Go By." When she re-emerged in the late 1970's with the stunning, punk-influenced album "Broken English" -- and a new voice, bereft of sweetness, bred in basement bars instead of fairy castles -- critics raved but seemed as fascinated with her drug problems as with her artistry.


Remaking Lobster In the East 60's
HOSTERIA FIORELLA ** (212) 838-7570; 1081 Third Avenue, near 64th Street; $$$; all major cards
Rustic murals, mirrors, hanging quilts and a mismatch of tables characterize this cheerful Italian seafood grill.
As for the food, the kitchen turns out a fresh and sprightly mix of well-prepared dishes.
A nice way to start is with little pizzas, which have ultrathin, brittle crusts and come with tomatoes, basil and mozzarella; shrimp, goat cheese and bacon; or radicchio, pesto, tomatoes and pepperoni.
Also good are the seafood chili with squid, sausage, shrimp and beans, and the shellfish platter that holds scallops, shrimp, salmon pastrami, smoked trout and more.
Main-course choices include linguine with lobster in a fra diavolo sauce; capellini combined with striped bass, shrimp and zucchini in garlic and olive oil; roasted mahi-mahi in a clay pot, served with portobello mushrooms and potatoes; and grilled salmon with tomato sauce, soft polenta and fried leeks. (Review: 7/24/92)  JO JO *** (212) 223-5656; 160 East 64th Street; $$; all major cards
With his compelling cooking style, built on low-fat flavored oils and fresh vegetable juices, Jean-Georges Vongerichten keeps luring them into his bistro.
The main dining room is warm, with dark wood wainscotting, yellow walls, beveled mirrors and red banquettes.
Mr.
Vongerichten has just begun his spring menu, which includes appetizers of foie gras terrine studded with green peppercorns and served with a salad of French string beans; grilled shrimp enhanced by a spiced carrot juice with Thai lime leaves, and seared tuna with a soybean coulis and spring rolls.
Among main courses are a lasagna of lobster layered with truffles and vegetables; red-pepper-crusted lamb cutlet with its ragout of white beans and vegetables, and roasted chicken with ginger, green olives and coriander juice. (Review: 7/12/91)  L'ARDOISE ++ (212) 744-4752; 1207 First Avenue, near 65th Street; $; no credit cards
L'Ardoise, which means slate or chalkboard -- the kind menus are scrawled on -- is a small, casual French bistro with sandy-colored walls, red Formica tables and gentle lighting.
The food is fresh and simple, prepared with skill and flair.
Some current starters are a salad of smoked duck breast; stuffed calamari with a scallop mousse over mixed greens; seared sweetbreads seasoned with a raspberry vinaigrette, and snails in garlic butter with parsley.
Among the entrees are a monkfish ragout with lardons in a port wine sauce; napoleon of salmon and fish mousse ringed by a red caviar sauce; duck confit; braised lamb with truffles and apple compote, and sauteed fillet of snapper and shrimp with a mango sauce. ($25 and Under: 12/5/93)  MATTHEW'S ** (212) 838-4343; 1030 Third Avenue, at 61st Street; $$$; all major cards
The lofty space, rattan chairs, white linen, fruit baskets and white ceiling fans swirling lazily overhead all contribute to a rustic, summery feel at this beguiling American restaurant, enlivened by Mediterranean accents.
For appetizers, there are tuna tartar with fennel and a caraway toast of green olive tapenade; roast quail with white raisins and hazelnuts; wild mushroom risotto; grilled spicy octopus with a white bean salad, and a soup of baked squash with yogurt and chickpea croutons.
Entrees include char-grilled lobster with curry leaves complemented by a sweet carrot risotto; stewed lamb shank with Moroccan spices and dried fruits, served with a vegetable couscous; baked chicken in lemon with olives and pignoli, and grilled Black Angus steak with mashed potatoes and spinach. (Review: 11/26/93)  PRIMOLA ** (212) 758-1775; 1226 Second Avenue, near 64th Street; $$$; American Express, Mastercard, Visa
This is a welcoming, harmonious place where the Northern Italian fare is prepared with finesse and the staff is eager to please.
Recommended starters include clams and mussels in a richly flavored broth; bresaola of beef over arugula with a drizzling of lemon and olive oil; grilled mozzarella with prosciutto on a bed of endive, and a salad of grilled wild mushrooms topped with slivers of fennel and shavings of Parmesan.
The main-course selections include spinach and asparagus risotto; tagliatelle in a robust sauce of tomatoes, meat and mushrooms; pan-fried calamari and shrimp in olive oil; sauteed veal chop with sage and artichokes; chicken breast with black truffles and topped with Fontina cheese; seared medallions of beef with sweet peppers and tomatoes, and roasted quail with polenta. (Review: 9/8/89; revisited: 3/27/95)  SIGN OF THE DOVE *** (212) 861-8080; 1110 Third Avenue, at 65th Street; $$$$; all major cards
The romantic setting paired with the chef Andrew D'Amico's superior cooking makes this restaurant a delightful spot.
A piano bar, near the entrance, done in brick, marble and rose-tinted wood, is a good place to wait if your companion is fashionably late.
One might begin with a potent beef and capon broth with caramelized onions and Gruyere crisps; seared sweetbreads with artichokes, pea shoots and carrots in a light tomato sauce with parsley oil, or house-cured salmon with a kick of mustard oil, served with potatoes and roasted beets.
Among the main courses, roast duck is served with roasted beets and figs; a grilled loin of venison is accompanied by a ragout of vegetables and glazed chestnuts, and the rack of lamb comes with its spicy vegetable tagine with preserved lemons over couscous. (Review: 3/1/91; article: 1/17/92)  SUSHI-HATSU *** (212) 371-0238; 1143 First Avenue, near 62d Street; $$$$; American Express, Diners' Club
This modest-looking Japanese restaurant with a sushi bar up front and neighborly tables in the back offers a remarkable quality and selection of sushi and sashimi that is better sampled at the bar.
Highly recommended are the marble-size octopuses; toro, the rich belly of bluefin tuna; cubed Spanish mackerel with scallions, and sliced yellowtail.
Other selections include scallops; poached shrimp; tai, a sweet, lean fish with flesh so soft it seems to melt into the rice on which it's served; large, bright pearls of salmon roe; golden chunks of herring roe, and sea urchin. (Review: 1/28/94) All-Americana  PARK AVENUE CAFE ** (212) 644-1900; 100 East 63d Street; $$$; all major cards
There's a stylish Americana motif to set off David Burke's winsome American cooking.
For starters, try the barbecued squab with a corn and foie gras cake, the tartar of tuna and salmon with osetra caviar, or the sauteed sea scallops, which are coupled with a taste of beef bourguignon.
Entreess include roasted striped bass with a crab meat strudel and artichokes, pan-seared salmon with ginger and cracked pepper, grilled lobster with curried fries and roast chicken in an onion crust served with a potato pancake. (Review: 4/17/92)
Summaries of reviews use the star system; others are culled from articles (indicated by +), the $25 and Under column (++) and Diner's Journal (


Land Sought for Golf Course
WESTCHESTER is considering adding a sixth golf course to its list of public sites, County Executive Andrew P. O'Rourke announced recently.
Noting that there was a strong demand from residents for another 18-hole course, Mr.
O'Rourke called the acquisition of the newest site -- a 194-acre tract owned by International Business Machines -- "a once-in-a-lifetime opportunity."
The county has agreed to pay $4.6 million to I.B.M. for the property in this northern suburb of rolling fields and woods, and it expects to spend another $5 million to develop it as a golf course.
Mr.
O'Rourke said the county may seek a nongovernmentalpartner, but the final decision to acquire the site rests with the county's Board of Legislators.


In Short/Baseball
Think of it as a long seventh-inning stretch, with publishers doing their bit to occupy your time until the next batter is up.
This season's lineup of baseball books includes fiction, biography and history, so no reader should feel the need to go on strike.
THE ANNOTATED BASEBALL STORIES OF RING W. LARDNER, 1914-1919  Edited by George W. Hilton.
Stanford University, $35.


Uniting to Pack a Heavyweight Wallop
Civic and religious groups working to improve the Upper West Side seem to proliferate, yet most are too small or ephemeral to flex much muscle.
Linked together, however, they might have enough clout to force public officials to pay attention.
That is the thinking behind a new coalition, Westsiders Together, which last week drew more than 1,500 residents representing 23 churches, synagogues and neighborhood groups to a meeting at Temple Ansche Chesed.


Boardwalking: Carnies in Gear For Next Ride
By night, the streets that jut from Coney Island's wide wooden boardwalk are as empty and barren as the newly groomed sand on the beachfront.
Shuttered metal gates hide the entrances to clam joints and ice cream stands, and the mechanical rides are still, naked skeletons stripped of their canvas wraps.
But during these spring days, the gentle pounding of the surf is drowned out by the hammering and chatter of workers.
Coney Island's carnival subculture is rustling up, preparing for the season that will start in two weeks, on Easter Sunday.
Young workers, mostly men but a handful of women, daub gallons of paint and whitewash, screw in hundreds of colored light bulbs and walk all 3,000 feet of Cyclone track, checking the roller coaster for safety.


U.S. Bailout of Mexico Verging On Success or Dramatic Failure
More than two months after the Clinton Administration committed $20 billion to save Mexico from bankruptcy, the effort to bail out America's troubled neighbor is teetering between modest success and potential failure.
And as Mexico struggles to lure back investors, a movement to back out of the American aid commitment has erupted in Congress.
Already the cash-starved Mexican Government has used $13 billion of a total $50 billion aid package, including more than $5 billion from the United States Treasury, to pay off billions in debts it ran up in a risky financial strategy that collapsed in December.
Most of those investors -- a mix of rich Mexicans, Americans and other foreigners -- have swept up their hefty profits and immediately transferred their money out of the country.


Dallas's Loss Becomes Knicks' Huge Gain
Acquiring Derek Harper was one of the most important moves the Knicks have made in recent years.
Just ask Dick Motta, who returned to coach the Dallas Mavericks a year too late to stop Harper from getting traded in January 1994 for Tony Campbell and a 1997 first-round pick.


A Week to Be Fashionable by Association
AT the Alternative Fashion Week ball at Webster Hall on Wednesday night, models in thousand-dollar ball gowns shared a runway with men in high heels and a dwarf in a G-string.
Like many events tied to the week of New York fashion shows that officially begins today, the evening wasn't really about clothes.
It was about generating publicity for Absolut Vodka, the show's sponsor, and raising money for Housing Works, an organization that provides housing and social services to people with AIDS and H.I.V.
The next night at Barolo in SoHo, the model Beverly Peele celebrated her 20th birthday along with hundreds of her admirers.
Like many fashionable birthday parties these days, the evening wasn't really about commemorating a birthday.
It was about having Ms.
Peele photographed by paparazzi and written about by gossip columnists.
To lure them to the party, Ms.
Peele's public relations firm billed the fete as a "kickoff to fashion week."


It Must Be Spring: The Polyester's in Bloom
SEEMS you can hardly turn the corner anymore without seeing or hearing about something virtual or cyber or info-super.
Now the ceaseless march of technology has claimed another of the senses: smell.
Rockefeller Center's Channel Gardens is the site of the city's first "virtual spring," a flower display enhanced by a special technological breakthrough.
The scientists of International Flavor and Fragrance (yes, the scientists of International Flavor and Fragrance) have invented "polyiffs," microscopic capsules that release the aroma of fresh flowers at measured pace to emulate the smell of a spring garden.


Nonrefundables: Subject to Change
THE term "nonrefundable ticket" is a piece of airline jargon with a shifting meaning.
Nonrefundable domestic advance-purchase tickets are indeed nonrefundable in the sense that they can rarely if ever be converted into cash.
But in the last three years, airlines have been allowing such tickets to be rewritten for other dates or other routes, or into vouchers to be used later.
Some airlines call them restricted tickets, and this may be closer to the truth.
At any rate, when the system was created in 1992 for domestic flights -- usually encompassing Mexico, Canada and the Caribbean as well -- most airlines added a $25 penalty for such changes.
This fee has generally risen to $35.


RESULTS PLUS
GOLF Nicklaus Shares Lead  Jack Nicklaus and Isao Aoki birdied the final hole yesterday to move one stroke ahead of the field three rounds into the $1 million Tradition in Scottsdale, Ariz.
Nicklaus, a two-time winner, reached the 531-yard finishing hole of the Cochise Course he designed at Desert Mountain in two and two-putted from about 60 feet for a three-under-par 69 and a seven-under 209 over all.
Aoki, the second-round leader in the senior event, chipped up and sank a 3-foot birdie putt to equal part despite two double bogeys and two bogeys.
Jim Ferree, who led after the first round, Jay Sigel and Jim Colbert were just off the lead at 210. (AP)


Boca Raton Books
To the Editor: Boca Raton, Fla., was correctly headlined "Bustling Boca Raton" in Cynthia Hacinli's article (Jan. 22).
But the city's most bustling venue was omitted: a bookstore.


Embargoed Fuel Sent To Serbs via Albania
As the warring parties in Bosnia gear up for their expected spring offensive, vast quantities of high-grade fuel, which is used in tanks and fighter jets, are being openly smuggled across the lake here into Yugoslavia, in violation of a United Nations embargo.
The flow of jet fuel from this small country to Yugoslavia gushed a couple of months ago, and is believed to be destined for "the Serbian war machine," as one Western diplomat put it.
In addition, millions of gallons of regular gasoline and diesel fuel have moved in recent months from Albania to its northern neighbor.


Just Superheroes Sticking Up for the Homestead
Major Payne  Damon Wayans, Karyn Parsons, Orlando Brown Directed by Nick Castle PG-13 97 minutes


Sports of The Times; The Smudge Already On Baseball
NO matter what the club owners decide today, this baseball season is already smudged.
Even if the owners vote to open spring camps to the real players and delay the start of the season for three weeks, a shortened schedule of, say, 144 games would subtract the suspense of any individual player's performance.


A Way to Join the Conversation With a Keyboard, Fax or Pencil
BEGINNING this week, readers of New Jersey can meet via computer in the @times area of America Online to discuss issues large and small facing New Jersey and its people.
This is the place to argue about politics, complain about taxes and traffic, and share advice on everything from shopping to schools.
Because readers can talk to one another, there will be plenty of lively conversation.
Each Sunday, The Times's New Jersey section will print excerpts from responses to one question, and pose a new one.


Votes in Congress
Tally Last Week in Connecticut, New Jersey and New York  Senate
1.
Regulation: Vote on a bill that would expand the role of Congress in reviewing and possibly rejecting regulations issued by Federal agencies.
Approved 100 to 0, March 29.
2.
Spending: Vote on an amendment that would require the savings from cuts in Federal spending in the current year to be applied to deficit reduction.
Approved 99 to 0, March 29.
1
2
Connecticut
Dodd (D)
Yea
Yea
Lieberman (D)
Yea
Yea
New Jersey
Bradley (D)
Yea
Yea
Lautenberg (D)
Yea
Yea
New York
D'Amato (R)
Yea
Yea
Moynihan (D)
Yea
Yea
House
1.
Term Limits: Vote on a constitutional amendment that would limit members of the House and Senate to 12-year terms and is silent on any state restrictions.
A two-thirds majority was needed for passage.
Defeated 227-204, March 29.
1
Connecticut
1. Kennelly (D)
Nay
2. Gejdenson (D)
Nay
3. DeLauro (D)
Nay
4. Shays (R)
Nay
5. Franks (R)
Yea
6. Johnson (R)
Nay
New Jersey
1. Andrews (D)
Nay
2. LoBiondo (R)
Yea
3. Saxton (R)
Yea
4. Smith (R)
Nay
5. Roukema (R)
Nay
6. Pallone (D)
Nay
7. Franks (R)
Yea
8. Martini (R)
Yea
9. Torricelli (D)
Nay
10. Payne (D)
Nay
11. Frelinghuysen (R)
Yea
12. Zimmer (R)
Yea
13. Menendez (D)
Nay
New York
1. Forbes (R)
Yea
2. Lazio (R)
Yea
3. King (R)
Nay
4. Frisa (R)
Yea
5. Ackerman (D)
Nay
6. Flake (D)
Nay
7. Manton (D)
Nay
8. Nadler (D)
Nay
9. Schumer (D)
Nay
10. Towns (D)
Nay
11. Owens (D)
Nay
12. Velazquez (D)
Nay
13. Molinari (R)
Nay
14. Maloney (D)
Nay
15. Rangel (D)
Nay
16. Serrano (D)
Nay
17. Engel (D)
Nay
18. Lowey (D)
Nay
19. Kelly (R)
Yea
20. Gilman (R)
Nay
21. McNulty (D)
Yea
22. Solomon (R)
Yea
23. Boehlert (R)
Nay
24. McHugh (R)
Nay
25. Walsh (R)
Yea
26. Hinchey (D)
Nay
27. Paxon (R)
Yea
28. Slaughter (D)
Nay
29. LaFalce (D)
Nay
30. Quinn (R)
Yea
31. Houghton (R)
Yea
KEY: (A) Absent or did not vote; (P) Present.


For the Family Caregiver, An End to the Loneliness
To the Editor:
I cried as I read the March 26 Coping column ("For Better or for Worse: Life as a Caretaker") because I also lived with the isolation, fear, anger, guilt and exhaustion of being a caregiver for my husband after he suffered a stroke in 1984.
I got him out of bed, I bathed him, I prepared his food, I pushed him in his wheelchair.
I am the same age as Beverly Kidd, and if my husband had not died in 1993, he would be the same age as Robert Kidd.


New Jersey Couple Win a U.S. Bridge Title
A major title was awarded here to a New Jersey couple at the American Contract Bridge League's Spring Nationals on Friday, 18 hours after the event was concluded.
A Chicago pair were announced as having won the North American Open Pair Championship Thursday night, by a slender margin over the runners-up, but a scoring error that changed the result was discovered the next day.


With Dreams of Croissants and Nova, South Orange Takes On the Malls
Like other small towns across the nation, South Orange has been fighting a losing battle against shopping malls.
Since the 1970's, when two malls were built nearby, business failures have turned the village's central business district into a checkerboard of shuttered storefronts.
But South Orange is fighting back with an offbeat approach to redevelopment.
Anticipating a new commuter rail link that will open in 1996, and taking advantage of a 1992 state law giving greater clout to municipalities that want to finance their own urban renewal, it has begun what village officials hope will be a complete makeover.


Commercial Property/Trinity Church as a Landlord; Turning Hudson Square Area Into an Office Hub
GIVEN his druthers, the Rev.
James G. Callaway Jr., the deputy for grants at Trinity Church, would probably rather talk about Trinity's good works.
There are the interest-free loans for housing in the South Bronx.
There are the new parishes it has helped set up.
There are the community-based programs it supports.
But Father Jamie, as everyone calls him, does not flinch when the talk turns to Trinity Church as a tough commercial landlord.
Over the years, the church has been as quick to evict deadbeats, as steadfast in keeping rents up and concessions down, as adamant about getting personal guarantees to back up leases, as any developer around.


LEGAL IMMIGRANTS IN RECORD NUMBERS WANT CITIZENSHIP
The number of legal immigrants applying to become United States citizens has nearly doubled in the last year, an increase that one immigration official described as "an unprecedented surge" stemming partly from recent initiatives passed in California and in Congress that would deny many benefits to noncitizens.
From October 1994 through January of this year, the first four months of the Federal fiscal year, applications for citizenship rose to 232,850, about 80 percent above the same period a year before, according to the Immigration and Naturalization Service.


No Requiems for This Heavyweight
I AM a 27-year-old money manager.
By day, I wear the round wire-rimmed glasses, starched white shirts and wing-tip shoes that are the trappings of my trade.
I study mountains of financial documents, call company chairmen to grill them about quarterly earnings and work up the world's greatest spreadsheets.
But when darkness falls, I become something very different and grander.
I become a boxer.
In fact, I become the heavyweight champion of the world.


Appreciating Bessie Harvey
To the Editor:
In "A Baker's Dozen to Catch at the Biennial"  [ March 12 ] , Holland Cotter posits a connection between the art of my deceased friend Bessie Harvey and "Southern Baptist Christianity." He fails to understand that in Bessie's part of the world, this usage is code for "white." The connotation is the antithesis to Bessie's brand of African-American spiritualism.


A Play's Invisible Character
WHEN "Having Our Say" opens at the Booth Theater on Thursday, one of the play's main characters will be off stage.
She is Amy Hill Hearth of Ossining, a former contributor to The New York Times who was the co-author of the best-selling book on which the play is based.
The other authors, possibly the oldest first-time authors in history, are Dr.
A.
Elizabeth Delany, known as Bessie, and her sister Sarah Delany, known as Sadie, the now world famous centenarians of Mount Vernon.


Corrections
A caption and a credit were omitted last Sunday under a picture of two houses, with an article about homeowners' questioning their property tax bills.
The houses, at 443 and 444 West 258th Street in Riverdale, the Bronx, were photographed by Chris Maynard for The New York Times.


Living on a Yankee Tightrope
Bubba Carpenter handles the remote control for his hotel television set the way a teen-ager punches a video game.
Back and forth he channel surfs from CNN to ESPN in search of fresh details about the labor disagreement.
He is a replacement player for the Yankees and his status has fluctuated from certainty to uncertainty to extreme uncertainty.
Initially, Carpenter did not want to be a replacement player.
He told the Yankees that on Feb. 23, so they sent him home to Fayetteville, Ark., and told him to wait for an invitation back.
Carpenter drove the 22 hours in his Jeep Wrangler wondering if he had made the proper choice, wondering if he was being shrewd or silly.
The Yankees summoned him to their minor league camp one week later, and he continued in anonymity as a mild prospect.


SUNDAY, April 2, 1995; CAUSES: Bailing Out Of Burma
Burma (Myanmar to its ruling junta) may be on its way to being the South Africa of the 90's, the target of an international divestment campaign.
Activists who criticize the country's record on human rights and the environment have won some conspicuous successes recently.
In February, Eddie Bauer announced it would follow Levi Strauss and Liz Claiborne and stop making clothes there.
As of March 13, Berkeley, Calif., became the first city to bar contracts with firms doing business in Burma (notably Pepsico, which bottles there, and Texaco and Unocal, which are developing natural gas reserves).
No-business-in-Burma resolutions are pending in Seattle and the Massachusetts Statehouse.
And in March, the University of Washington agreed to support stockholder resolutions (for any companies in which it holds stock) demanding withdrawal from Burma.


From a Most Ferocious Court, Exquisitely Illustrated Tales
IN EVERY GREAT MUSEUM, THERE are rooms that lead a life of their own.
Confidential themselves, they inspire confidentiality in others.
Each one of them is what the poet Andrew Marvell called -- though in quite another context -- "a fine and private place." And visitors like it that way.
The Metropolitan Museum has quite a few such rooms.
One is the Hagop Kevorkian special exhibitions gallery, a tiny space tucked in a corner of the Islamic galleries on the second floor.
The gallery has at this moment an exhibition, on view through June 4, of the greatest rarity and curiosity: "Three Royal Persian Manuscripts." It was organized by Marie Lukens Swietochokowski, associate curator in the department, and made possible by the Hagop Kevorkian Fund.
As examples of pictorial storytelling in ink, colors, gold and silver on paper, these 16 items are in a very high class.


PHOTOGRAPHER'S JOURNAL


UP AND COMING: Brandy; At 16, Her Debut Is a Sweet Success
AT 16, MOST GIRLS ARE still trying to find themselves.
Not Brandy Norwood.
As the pop singer Brandy, she exudes all the confidence of a veteran recording artist.
As well she should.
Her debut album has already sold platinum, and two singles from it, "Baby" and "I Wanna Be Down," hover near the top of Billboard's rhythm-and-blues chart.
After pleading with her manager and her publicists, she got her way and recently began a two-month stint as the opening act on Boyz II Men's national tour.
"I wanted so badly to be a part of the biggest tour in the world," says the lanky teen-ager with the bright eyes and braided hair.
Brandy has had a taste of celebrity before.
She played the part of Denesha, a sharp-tongued teen-ager, in the short-lived television sitcom "Thea." Never expecting to land the part, she says she auditioned anyway, even though she had already signed a recording contract with Atlantic.
"It wasn't that I wanted the show to be canceled, nor did I want it to go on, but I wanted to sing before I wanted to act," she says.


Where Child's Play Is Hard Work
Every time Danny tries to hide stuff under his bed, Lenny the Lint-Ball shoves it out.
The furry critter, who teaches Danny a thing or two about tidiness, is both a storybook character and a stuffed animal.
It was dreamed up by a student at the Fashion Institute of Technology, which school officials say offers the world's only toy design curriculum.
Child's play, you think? Students -- and toy makers -- say it's serious business.


The Nation; Outmaneuvering the Boss
WHEN W.R.
Grace &amp; Company confirmed last week that its chief executive had resigned after its board investigated complaints that he had sexually harassed company employees, the announcement was hailed as a first by women's advocates.
"We have done a thorough search, and we can't find any similar situation where a chief executive was asked to leave for this reason," said Marcia Brumit-Kropf, vice president of research for Catalyst, a nonprofit advocacy group for corporate women in New York.


Stanley Cain, Ecologist, 92, Led the Field
Stanley A. Cain, a pioneering conservationist who helped develop the science of ecology and served as an assistant secretary of the Interior Department in the 1960's, died yesterday at a nursing home in Santa Cruz, Calif.
He was 92.
Although his academic specialty was botany, Dr.
Cain, a Butler College graduate who received his doctorate from the University of Chicago in 1930, broadened his scientific interests considerably beyond the world of plants.


Athens
For a while, it looked as if Greeks (namely Athenians, since half the population lives in the capital) were letting the nation's troubles get to them.
According to a survey taken in January by ICAP, an Athens-based research group, Greeks entered 1995 even gloomier than usual, with one-third believing a world war could break out in the next decade (only Mexicans, South Africans and Zimbabweans were less optimistic).
A European Union survey conducted the same month reported that Greeks were among the Union's most disappointed citizens: 84 percent declared they were worse off financially in 1994 than in 1993.
In the city's cafes, Athenians complained fatalistically: nothing could be counted on anymore, not even the ground under their feet -- scientists had discovered the country's southern half slowly drifting toward Africa, tugging the banks of the Corinth Canal in opposite directions.


Reluctantly Charging Toward '98
THE Big Three are all working hard on electric cars, not out of enthusiasm, but to comply with an impending requirement in California -- since adopted by New York and Massachusetts -- that 2 percent of the cars offered for sale by the 1998 model year have "zero emissions."
The auto manufacturers' hardest work on the issue has sometimes seemed to be in courtrooms, but they have failed to persuade judges to overturn the rules.
The Big Three are still trying to negotiate with clean-air regulators, but they are also building cars.


Just Superheroes Sticking Up for the Homestead
Alice in Wonderland  A revival of the 1948 French-British-American film at the Museum of Modern Art, 7 West 53d Street, Manhattan, April 7 at 6 P.M. and April 8 at 2 P.M.
Stephen Murray, Pamela Brown, Carol Marsh Directed by Dallas Bower with animation by Lou Bunin No rating 96 minutes


Coalitions Are Squaring Off For School Board Elections
WITH county school board elections a little more than a month away, political coalitions with an interest in public education have been busy organizing.
In particular, two groups representing opposite ends of the spectrum have been squaring off, each preparing its own voter's guide to indicate where candidates stand on the issues.
For the second year in a row, questionnaires will be sent to candidates by the Christian Coalition of Westchester, a group that describes itself as a nonpartisan, grass-roots organization representing Judeo-Christian values, and by the Westchester Coalition for Democracy, which says it is a nonpartisan coalition of groups dedicated to upholding democracy and constitutional rights, particularly as they pertain to public schools.


League Throws Out First Game of Season
On a bizarre day that included one snow delay, many travel-related phone calls and seemingly endless waiting, the Mets found themselves headed back here to their spring training complex, the first game of their regular season postponed by Major League Baseball.
As anticipated, Sunday night's game between the Mets and the Marlins -- the first scheduled game of the baseball season -- was postponed by the league today, with no current plans to reschedule.
In the aftermath of the decision, which was communicated to the Mets at about 4:45 P.M., General Manager Joe McIlvaine met with the replacement players in the locker room at Jacobs Field in Cleveland and told them that, in all likelihood, their careers as replacement players had ended.


Resuscitating Noah and Refloating the Ark
IT'S not the end of the world that "Two by Two," the Richard Rodgers musical about a year in the life of Noah, from the ages of 600 to 601, has had no major revival in a quarter of a century.
And it isn't likely that anyone thirsts for a reinvention, a reconstruction or any of those R-words that nowadays prescribe new ways to do old shows.
So this one is a natural for the Forum Theater Group, New Jersey's repository for those unsung musicals people didn't know they wanted to see.
And given the theater's accent on Jewish themes, "Two by Two" accomplishes two missions for the price of one -- coincidentally like the Forum's 1990 production of "The Rothschilds," a kindred musical of the same 1970 Broadway season.


March 26-April 1; New York City as a Las Vegas Casino and Hotel
What frustrated New Yorker hasn't wondered if it might not be possible to strip away the chaos and just enjoy Gotham's wonders?
Well, last week there came an answer -- not from City Hall, Albany or a talk show host.
Yes, we're talking Las Vegas.
In recent years Las Vegas has enjoyed a spectacular building boom, covering that bizarrely fecund patch of desert with an enormous pyramid, a lake on which life-size pirate ships do battle and, most recently, a Hard Rock Casino.


John White, Real Estate Agent Expert in Big Sales, Dies at 75
John R. White, a New York realtor who set a price record in 1980 when he negotiated the $400 million sale of the Pan Am Building to the Metropolitan Life Insurance Company, died on Wednesday at his home in Jupiter, Fla.
He was 75.
The cause was complications of a heart attack he suffered late last year, his family said.


Grab That Rake, Tackle Those Weeds
ROCUSES have bloomed.
So have the snowdrops.
Early tulips and the first daffodils are beginning to show their colors.
In short, the spring bloom parade has warmed up.
And gardeners who have not done the usual seasonal cleanup ritual had better get cracking.
Because from now on, things will start happening at a rapid pace.


POSTINGS: Agents Say That in Prime Areas, It's Like Early 1989; For Large Co-ops, Prices Are Soaring
Bidding wars? Soaring prices? In Manhattan real estate?
No, this is not the mid- to late 1980's, but the city's top brokers all say it feels like it is, at least for apartments with more than eight rooms in blue-chip locations.


Overcrowded Shelters Pose Threat to Animal Residents
To the Editor:
Animal rescue groups, as discussed in "Humans to the Rescue," March 5, and Letters, March 19, do indeed help the city's cast-off pets by removing them from the street.
That's the good news.


In the Region/Connecticut; 'If You're Breathing' You Can Get a Home Mortgage
GETTING a home mortgage these days can be as bewildering as negotiating a path through Alice's Wonderland.
In Connecticut, as elsewhere, the array of mortgage instruments, brokers, banks, and a smorgasbord of mortgage-lending entities seems endless.
Because of the prolonged sluggish housing market competition among lenders is intense.
They are reaching out by tailoring mortgage loans to meet the requirements of borrowers whose credit-worthiness may not be up to the standards of the secondary market to which loans are commonly sold.
The beneficiaries may be self-employed people with erratic or unverifiable income.


Nancy B. Szabo, Steven R. Ratner
Nancy Beth Szabo, a teacher of the fourth grade at Blackshear Elementary School in Austin, Tex., was married last evening to Steven Richard Ratner, an assistant professor of law at the University of Texas at Austin.
Rabbi Mindy Portnoy performed the ceremony at the Laguna Gloria Art Museum in Austin.
Ms.
Szabo, 34, is keeping her name.
She graduated from Wesleyan University and received a master's degree in health policy and management from Harvard University.
She is the daughter of Corinne and Daniel Szabo of Rockville, Md.
Her father retired as a senior adviser at the Inter-American Development Bank in Washington and was the Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-American Affairs from 1969 to 1974.
Her mother is a photographic researcher in Washington.


Owners Prepare to Take Players Back
Baseball's replacement players were sent down to the minor leagues yesterday as the team owners prepared to take back the striking major leaguers and get a new season under way.
Under a plan outlined last night by people close to baseball management, players would begin reporting to spring training sites this week; the regular season (which would have started tonight) would begin April 26.


A Pink Oscar Week; 'Paging Dr. Freud!'
UPTOWN -- Some people are tired of O. J. Simpson.
Some are tired of the Internet or mesclun.
Marian McEvoy, the snappy editor in chief of Elle Decor magazine, is tired of black.
She's so tired of black that on March 29, at a cocktail party for her magazine on the East Balcony of Grand Central Terminal, she launched a pink offensive.


Air Pacts, Partnerships Bridging the Atlantic
MORE flights between Europe and North America should at least theoretically -- be the result of a spate of agreements between the United States and nine European Governments to open their skies to each other's airlines.
Despite a warning in February by the European Union, which wants to negotiate a global accord on air service with Washington, several member countries, including Belgium, Luxembourg and Austria, and some nonmembers, like Switzerland and Iceland, have reached preliminary agreement to phase out restrictive treaties that have governed air travel.
The others -- Denmark, Sweden, Finland and Norway -- are expected to do so this month.
"This will open up big business centers in Europe to direct traffic," predicts Tony Molinari, a United Airlines spokesman.
But United, like other carriers canvassed, said it had no immediate plans to expand flights to Europe as a result of the new accords.


Spring Ahead, Sleep Behind: It's Time
If all went well, a short-wave radio signal from Fort Collins, Colo., reached an antenna on the roof of Grand Central Terminal early this morning and sent all 80 clocks in the station spinning and whirring forward one hour.
If all went well, the guests at the Plaza Hotel found notes at their bedsides before turning in, reminding them that the twice-yearly time change was at hand and that wake-up service could be arranged by dialing zero.


Black Drama From the 60's in Revival
WHEN "Ceremonies in Dark Old Men" opened at the Negro Ensemble Company's Off Broadway theater in 1969, the play by Lonne Elder 3d was an instant classic, critics said.
A revival in 1985 supported that opinion.
The current Long Wharf production is a reminder that there's no such thing as an instant classic but premature critical judgment is not uncommon.
Perhaps "Ceremonies" is locked into an era.
But with the distance of time, it may gain historic resonance.


Jefferson? Oui
A film preview benefits the French-American Foundation, March 29.


Shooting Star
To the Sports Editor:
George Vecsey's "Stanford Finally Wins One" (The Times, March 18) mentioned the 1942 Stanford team that last won a game in an N.C.A.A. tournament, but missed the Stanford team that changed basketball forever.


240 USAir Flights Will Be Ended By July
As part of an effort to return to profitability, USAir has announced that it will drop 240 unprofitable flights, about 10 percent of its total, by July.
The company said the cuts will result in all USAir's 26 current jet flights within Florida being turned over to turboprop planes In addition, three cities -- Flint, Mich., Kalamazoo, Mich., and Jacksonville, N.C., -- will lose all USAir jet service, but will still be served by USAir turboprops.


Computer Chat About a Subject Many See Too Taboo
In an age when relationships between professors and students have led to charges of sexual harassment, Prof.
BARRY M. DANK is taking an unconventional stand: He defends romances between the two.
Professor Dank, who teaches sociology at California State University, Long Beach, has founded a network on the Internet called the Consenting Academics for Sexual Equity.
He estimates that more than 100 people correspond on it regularly.


Newborn Is Found On Brooklyn Roof
A newborn was found yesterday on the roof of a two-story building at a housing project in East New York, Brooklyn, and detectives were searching last night for the infant's mother.
The baby boy, who was suffering from a skull fracture, was found wrapped in a blood-soaked blue towel, with a paper shopping bag and a plastic sheet around the towel, on the roof of a community center behind the Cypress Houses at 710 Euclid Avenue, said Carl Pelleck, a spokesman for the housing police.


No Home, No Identity, No Longer
The 36-year-old mother of three boys stood in the streets of the Midwood section of Brooklyn one afternoon last month and stared up at the giant billboard hanging above Avenue M and East 16th Street.
There, pasted up in a 12-by-25-foot advertising box, was a huge picture of a formerly homeless woman and her young son.
"Oooh," Elise Oliver said with a mix of pride and self-consciousness, "wait till my girlfriends see me up there."


Coalitions Are Squaring Off For School Board Elections
WITH county school board elections a little more than a month away, political coalitions with an interest in public education have been busy organizing.
In particular, two groups representing opposite ends of the spectrum have been squaring off, each preparing its own voter's guide to indicate where candidates stand on the issues.
For the second year in a row, questionnaires will be sent to candidates by the Christian Coalition of Westchester, a group that describes itself as a nonpartisan, grass-roots organization representing Judeo-Christian values, and by the Westchester Coalition for Democracy, which says it is a nonpartisan coalition of groups dedicated to upholding democracy and constitutional rights, particularly as they pertain to public schools.


Lamb for Easter And for Passover
THIS year Easter and Passover coincide.
Passover begins at sundown on April 14, Good Friday.
When Easter Sunday occurs two days later, the eight-day Passover celebration will still be in progress.
Although eggs will certainly be served thoughout Passover, they will not by dyed or decorated.
Nor is there likely to be matzoh at Easter Sunday dinners.
But, nonetheless, the coincidence of the two religious events suggests an ecumenical menu suitable for both.


Still a Credo for Artists: Do as You Please
PERFORMANCE ART, THE most unruly of modernism's stepchildren, has spent much of its life standing in the shadows.
Ephemeral and subversive, it has always exerted a steady influence on its more substantial siblings, but only periodically has it commandeered art's center stage, most notably during the free-for-all of the early 1970's.
At the moment it's back, not only as a force in much new art but also in two exhibitions devoted to its history: "Endurance Art" at Exit Art/The First World in SoHo in Manhattan and "Outside the Frame: Performance and the Object, a Survey of Performance Art in the U.S.A. Since 1950" at the Snug Harbor Cultural Center on Staten Island.
While separated by New York Harbor, these shows complement and elaborate on each other and deserve to be seen together.


For Stocks With 'Oomph,' Think Small
FEELING left out?
You didn't buy McDonald's, whose shares have jumped nearly 40 percent since last summer.
And you missed out on Micron Technology, whose stock has more than doubled in six months.
And now with the market so toppy, finding stocks with "oomph" left just got harder.
There is hope for last-minute shoppers, especially among the neglected stocks of smaller companies.
With the exception of technology stocks, these shares have lagged the market as anxious investors have rushed into the arms of their old favorite consumer growth companies.
"People get too enamored with the consumer names of the 1980's," said Charles Mayer, a portfolio manager for the Invesco Industrial Income Fund.
"They're the only growth stocks they know."


Students Saying 'Nyet' To Russian
The end of the cold war has sent a chill through Russian language departments.
Enrollment in Russian classes at 50 universities has dropped an average of 30 to 50 percent since 1990, according to the National Foreign Language Center in Washington.


BEST SELLERS: April 2, 1995
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
1
57
THE CELESTINE PROPHECY, by James Redfield. (Warner, $17.95.) An ancient manuscript, found in Peru, provides insights into achieving a fulfilling life.
2
4
3
OUR GAME, by John le Carre. (Knopf, $24.) Espionage, larceny and murder in Eastern and Western Europe in the post-cold war era.
3
2
6
BORDER MUSIC, by Robert James Waller. (Warner, $17.95.) A Texas rancher and an exotic dancer.
4
3
41
POLITICALLY CORRECT BEDTIME STORIES, by James Finn Garner. (Macmillan, $8.95.) Classic tales respun to avoid offending current sensibilities.
5
10
4
THE GLASS LAKE, by Maeve Binchy. (Delacorte, $23.95.) The unspoken ties that bind a woman and her mother in a small Irish town.
6
5
8
ORIGINAL SIN, by P.D.
James. (Knopf, $24.) Adam Dalgliesh probes a case involving intrigue, malice and murder in a prestigious London publishing house.
7
6
7
DAISY-HEAD MAYZIE, by Dr.
Seuss. (Random House, $15.) A girl's head unexpectedly sprouts a daisy.
8
7
138
THE BRIDGES OF MADISON COUNTY, by Robert James Waller. (Warner, $16.95.) A photographer and a farmer's lonely wife in Iowa.
9
1
SILENT TREATMENT, by Michael Palmer. (Bantam, $21.95.) A physician is the prime suspect when his estranged wife dies mysteriously in a hospital.
10
24
MUTANT MESSAGE DOWN UNDER, by Marlo Morgan. (HarperCollins, $18.) In Australia's outback, an American woman learns about aboriginal philosophy.
11*
11
11
KISS THE GIRLS, by James Patterson. (Little, Brown, $22.95.) A police detective pursues a serial killer.
12
9
2
PHENOMENAL WOMAN, by Maya Angelou. (Random House, $10.) Four poems celebrating women.
13
8
4
THE JUROR, by George Dawes Green. (Warner, $21.95.) A woman's life takes a fearful turn when she is chosen as a juror for a mob trial.
14
15
5
THE CUNNING MAN, by Robertson Davies. (Viking, $23.95.) A doctor uses shamanism and Platonism as well as scientific medicine in his practice.
15*
12
2
MCNALLY'S TRIAL, by Lawrence Sanders. (Putnam, $23.95.) Archy McNally investigates the criminal operation at a Palm Beach funeral home.
16*
7
HOME SONG, by LaVyrle Spencer. (Putnam, $23.95.) The appearance of his unknown biological son threatens the serenity of a man's family life.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Nonfiction
1
1
3
BREAKING THE SURFACE, by Greg Louganis with Eric Marcus. (Random House, $23.) The memoirs of the former Olympic diving champion.
2
2
25
THE HOT ZONE, by Richard Preston. (Random House, $23.) The discovery of a lethal virus, more infectious than H.I.V., and the efforts to keep it from spreading.
3
4
7
THE DEATH OF COMMON SENSE, by Philip K. Howard. (Random House, $18.) How governmental rules and regulations are fettering the lives of all Americans.
4
3
14
SISTERS, by Carol Saline.
Photographs by Sharon J. Wohlmuth. (Running Press, $27.50.) The relationships of 36 sets of sisters, reported in words and pictures.
5
9
30
COUPLEHOOD, by Paul Reiser. (Bantam, $19.95.) Essays on the ups and downs of marriage.
6
7
56
MIDNIGHT IN THE GARDEN OF GOOD AND EVIL, by John Berendt. (Random House, $23.) The mysterious death of a young man in Savannah, Ga.
7
6
3
AN ANTHROPOLOGIST ON MARS, by Oliver Sacks. (Knopf, $24.) Seven tales about people who compensated for their neurological afflictions by constructing worlds of their own.
8
5
8
I WANT TO TELL YOU, by O.J.
Simpson. (Little, Brown, $17.95.) The former football star, now on trial for murder, responds to letters he has received.
9
13
67
THE BOOK OF VIRTUES, by William J. Bennett. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $30.) Moral stories adapted from the Greeks, the Bible, folklore and elsewhere.
10
8
6
THE DISCIPLINE OF MARKET LEADERS, by Michael Treacy and Fred Wiersema. (Addison-Wesley, $25.) A discussion of competitive business strategies.
11
15
3
BEING DIGITAL, by Nicholas Negroponte. (Knopf, $23.) How computers will alter our lives in the future.
12
10
10
INSIDE THE WHITE HOUSE, by Ronald Kessler. (Pocket, $23.) Anecdotes about events at 1600 Pennsylvania Avenue during the past 30 years.
13
1
THE DIARY OF A YOUNG GIRL, by Anne Frank.
Edited by Otto H. Frank and Mirjam Pressler. (Doubleday, $25.) The "definitive edition" of the diary of a Dutch victim of the Holocaust.
14*
24
DON'T STAND TOO CLOSE TO A NAKED MAN, by Tim Allen. (Hyperion, $19.95.) Meditations on life by the star of "Home Improvement."
15*
14
18
THE WARREN BUFFETT WAY, by Robert G. Hagstrom Jr. (Wiley, $24.95.) An account of the career of the man said to be the world's most successful investor.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous
1
1
97
MEN ARE FROM MARS, WOMEN ARE FROM VENUS, by John Gray. (HarperCollins, $23.) Communicating.
2
2
7
THE BEARDSTOWN LADIES' COMMON-SENSE INVESTMENT GUIDE. (Godin/Hyperion, $19.95.) Tips for successful investing from 16 Illinois women.
3
3
49
IN THE KITCHEN WITH ROSIE, by Rosie Daley. (Knopf, $14.95.) Recipes by Oprah Winfrey's cook.
4
4
3
THE SEVEN SPIRITUAL LAWS OF SUCCESS, by Deepak Chopra. (Amber-Allen/New World Library, $12.95.) How to "generate wealth in all its forms."
Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending March 18, at 3,050 bookstores plus wholesalers serving 28,000 other retailers (gift shops, department stores, newsstands, supermarkets), statistically weighted to represent sales in all such outlets nationwide.
An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
And Bear in Mind (Editor's Choices of other recent books of particular interest) BROKEN COVENANT: American Foreign Policy and the Crisis Between the U.S. and Israel, by Moshe Arens. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $25.) A senior Israeli politician indicts Bush Administration policy as meddlesome and duplicitous.
IN LOVE WITH DAYLIGHT: A Memoir of Recovery, by Wilfrid Sheed. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $23.) This writer's account of his battles with alcohol, drugs and cancer is grim, but it's told with whimsical wisdom and good-natured resolve.
LONDON: A Social History, by Roy Porter. (Harvard University, $29.95.) The development of the Great Wen over 400 years, examined as a quasi-biological explosion that everyone feared and no one could curtail.
MOZART: A Life, by Maynard Solomon. (HarperCollins, $35.) A psychologically informed and often brilliant analysis of Mozart (and his father) that complicates rather than simplifies our understanding of Mozart.
As it should.
THE NEW VICTORIANS: A Young Woman's Challenge to the Old Feminist Order, by Rene Denfeld. (Warner, $21.95.) The author contends that feminism has abandoned the quest for equality and turned to bashing male vices.
NEW YORK 1960: Architecture and Urbanism Between the Second World War and the Bicentennial, by Robert A.M.
Stern, Thomas Mellins and David Fishman. (Monacelli/Penguin, $125.) A huge book that takes account of the city's development as the world capital of finance and art; with extensive local descriptions.
A SCATTERING OF SALTS: Poems, by James Merrill. (Knopf, $20.) A collection, published weeks after his death, by a poet whose utter integrity suspended within it wit, irony, grief, frivolity, apparent frivolity, candor and reserve.
SIX MYTHS OF OUR TIME: Little Angels, Little Monsters, Beautiful Beasts, and More, by Marina Warner. (Vintage, paper, $10.) Humorous, urgent essays on how myth and fiction enshrine and fix categories like the moral condition of children.
TOM PAINE: A Political Life, by John Keane. (Little, Brown, $27.95.) A good introduction to a difficult, often unlovable character and a highly effective propagandist of revolution.
THE TUNNEL, by William H. Gass. (Knopf, $30.) This sprawling novel (652 pages) by an American master is all spun out of the head of its monstrous protagonist, a language-driven professor of fascist views who is as dreadful as he is plausible.
A VOID, by Georges Perec. (Harvill/HarperCollins, $24.) The letter E never occurs in this 1969 French novel or in its translation by Gilbert Adair; what does occur is a wildly amusing feast of puzzles, mind games and rules broken just to exhibit their latent existence.
WAITING FOR THE DARK, WAITING FOR THE LIGHT, by Ivan Klima. (Grove, $21.) A fine, skeptical novel, published in Prague in 1993; its hero, a cameraman and would-be film maker, fears that the corruption of spirit induced under the old regime may be permanent.


A Painful Case Tests Poland's Abortion Ban
Poland's first abortion trial since a strict new law came into effect has opened in this grimy mining town, revealing a lonely woman's fear of having another child in poverty, a lover's desire to seek revenge and the personal anguish stirred by a statute that sharply divides the country.
Barbara Pawliczak, 37, who has acknowledged in testimony to the district attorney that she had an abortion in March 1994, appeared nervous and troubled during a brief appearance in the small fourth-floor courtroom here today.


The Night the Poles Invaded Themselves
THE LOVES OF FAUSTYNA By Nina FitzPatrick. 216 pp.
New York: Penguin Books.
Paper, $9.95.


Commitment in the Making Over the Rinse Cycle's Hum
KATHRYN BROWN had her eye on Alan Tracy.
"I don't know what it was that attracted me," said Ms.
Brown, who works at Mum's Wash Tub, a laundry in Groton where Mr.
Tracy, a Navy sonar technician, took his clothes to be washed and folded.
Whatever it was, the chemistry between Ms.
Brown and Mr.
Tracy was intriguing.
"I couldn't get him to talk, but he smiled," Ms.
Brown said.
"I wanted to meet him."
All Mr.
Tracy needed was a little prodding.
"I wasn't looking at the time," he said.
"But I noticed her. I thought she was a friendly person who smiled a lot."


Missing L*tt*rs
To the Editor:
I was surprised to find no mention of Ernest Vincent Wright's "Gads by" in James R. Kincaid's review of "A Void," by Georges Perec (March 12).
"Gadsby," published in 1939, was a story of more than 50,000 words written in English without the letter E. I believe that was actually the first book written in English without its most frequent letter.
Of course, it wasn't called "The Great Gadsby" because that would have violated the underlying principle right in the title.


March 26-April 1; Tired, Hungry and Far From Home


A Golden Moment At the Oscars
ALTHOUGH Lizzy Gardiner won an Oscar on Monday night for the outfits she designed for the film "The Adventures of Priscilla, Queen of the Desert," her best costume may be the one she wore to accept the award.
Miss Gardiner, who was honored with Tim Chappel for the wild and sparkling numbers they created for the movie about Australian drag queens, came to the ceremony decked out in a spaghetti-strap dress constructed entirely from American Express gold cards.
"I was looking for an American symbol," said Miss Gardiner in a telephone interview from Los Angeles, where she recently migrated from Australia.
"A Coca-Cola bottle or a Mickey Mouse would have been ridiculous, doing anything with the American flag would have been insulting and Cadillac hubcaps were just too uncomfortable."
An added bonus: the cards matched her Oscar.
The inspiration for the dress actually came to her when she was designing costumes for the film, but American Express would not agree to give her the cards she needed, she said, adding, "It was a small Australian film, and they really did not want to be involved, and I didn't really blame them."
Two weeks before the awards ceremony, when she realized that she needed something to wear, she appealed again to the company, which just happened to be an advertiser for the event, and they agreed to send her 300 cards.
She and Salvadore Perez, a Los Angeles designer, whipped the whole thing together in about 12 hours.
"It was her idea and we made it happen," said Maureen Bailey, a spokeswoman for American Express.
"We feel so happy that every time she uses American Express now, she'll remember this great moment."
On television, the host David Letterman quipped that Miss Gardiner's outfit had expired during a commercial break.
In fact, she was not able to splice up her dress and make a run for Rodeo Drive: her cards were not validated.
JENNIFER STEINHAUER


Horse Is an Owner's Dream
IT is the dream of everyone who has ever thrilled to the beauty of a horse competing: you own one yourself, probably a modest purchase with equally modest credentials.
And then a miracle occurs. The horse starts winning and winning. And winning some more.


Chaminade Club Marks Its 100th Anniversary
GREATEST Woman Composer Tells of Her Dreams," read The Washington Post headline when Cecile Chaminade toured the United States in 1908, and such was the distinction of the French pianist and composer, so strong her status as a role model for women, that 200 or so clubs around the country had taken her name in homage.
Most of the clubs have faded away, but the Chaminade Club of Yonkers has not only stayed the course but is also ready to celebrate its centennial with a gala concert today at 3 P.M. at the Racquet Club on Park Hill (Van Cortlandt Park Avenue at Lakeside Drive) in Yonkers.


CITY OF ORPHANS
THEY ARE EVERYWHERE IN the ruins of Kabul, scavenging, playing, begging.
In a city that has shrunk from two million in the last days of the Soviet occupation, in 1989, to about 600,000, children seem at times to make up the bulk of the population.
Too young to fight in one of Afghanistan's many warlord armies, orphaned or born to families too stubborn or poor to flee, they scratch out a bare existence in a moonscape left after 15 months of pounding by the rockets and shells of rival Afghan factions.
Through the centuries and numerous invasions by foreign powers, Kabul was never sacked.
Today, half the city lies in ruins, including the Arg Palace, once the principal residence of Afghanistan's kings, the Id Mosque, the central place of worship, and a historic fortress, the Bala Hisar.
On either side of the Kabul River, which cuts the city in two, whole neighborhoods have been demolished.


N.C.A.A. TOURNAMENT: Sports of The Times; Auriemma Helps Pave The Way at UConn
GENO AURIEMMA was born in Italy and moved to the United States with his family when he was 7 years old.
He recalls that he received some good advice at that time: "My mother put me on the boat, sent me to America and said, 'Win the national championship.' "
That was 34 years ago, and by yesterday afternoon, Geno was poised to grant Mama Auriemma her supposed wish.
He is coach of the undefeated Connecticut women's basketball team, which beat Stanford, 87-60, to advance to tomorrow's final of the National Collegiate Athletic Association basketball championship against Tennessee.


Razorbacks (1 Title) and Bruins (10) Try for Another
By now we should get the message.
The Arkansas Razorbacks are just much too comfortable being uncomfortable.
"You can't be lucky," said Nolan Richardson, the coach of the Razorbacks, "if you don't put yourself in position to be lucky."
They have overcome the imperfections that have not been tolerated for a defending national champion with five returning starters.
The Razorbacks have put themselves in position to play for the national collegiate championship the same way they have advanced through the harrowing defense of their title -- the hard way.


Vincent Sees No Hope In the Seas of Hatred
As the longest work stoppage in baseball history creeps toward its conclusion, the 28 owners and 750 or so major league players will not be alone in looking back at what has been left in the wake of professional sports' most destructive strike.
Also looking back over the charred ground is one Fay Vincent, the former commissioner who was forced out of office in 1992 in what was the first ill-fated move by the owners in their endless, bloody game of chess against the players and their union.


Ukraine President Claims New Powers in Crimea
In the strongest assertion yet of Ukrainian sovereignty over the secessionist leaders in the Crimean, President Leonid M. Kuchma put the local government under his direct control today and claimed the right to approve the region's Prime Minister.
Two weeks ago, Ukraine's Parliament voted to annul the Constitution that Crimean voters had approved by referendum in 1992 and to unseat the separatist President of the predominantly Russian region, which had been transferred to Ukraine in 1954 under Soviet rule.


Tamar D. Raskas, Ethan E. Benovitz
Tamar Dina Raskas, a daughter of Sheri and Stanley Raskas of St.
Louis, is to be married today to Ethan Evan Benovitz, a son of Helene and Dr.
Harvey Benovitz of Riverdale, the Bronx.
Rabbi Murray Grauer, the bride's grandfather, is to perform the ceremony at the Ritz-Carlton Hotel in St.
Louis.
The bride, 21, expects to graduate from Yeshiva University in May.
Her father owns Raskas Foods, a dairy food producer in St.
Louis.


Bud Shuster's Dirty Water Act
The Republicans have now begun phase two of their campaign to destroy the network of laws developed over 25 years to protect the nation's environment.
Until last week, they had attacked by stealth and indirection, using the promise of "regulatory reform" to weaken enforcement of those laws.
Phase two is more direct but just as bad.
Last week, the House Subcommittee on Water and Environment approved crippling revisions to the Clean Water Act of 1972.
This act has done much to make America's waters fishable and swimmable.
Experts in both parties regard it as the most successful of the environmental mandates passed by Congress since Earth Day 1970.


S. D. Melfe, M. P. Vestergom
Sheila Diane Melfe, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas A. Melfe of Port Washington, L.I., was married there yesterday to Michael Peter Vestergom, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Mihaly Vestergom of New York.
Msgr.
Walter E. Simmons performed the ceremony at St.
Peter of Alcantara Church.
Mrs.
Vestergom, 36, is a senior producer at WPIX-TV in New York.
She graduated from Carnegie Mellon University, as did her husband, and received a master's degree in studio arts from New York University.
Her father is a senior partner in the law firm of Donovan, Leisure, Newton &amp; Irvine in New York.


Deborah Alpert And Steven Levin
Deborah Lynn Alpert, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Joel J. Alpert of Chestnut Hill, Mass., was married in Boston last evening to Steven Lewis Levin, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
W.
Robert Levin of Newton, Mass.
Rabbi Cary D. Yales officiated at the Boston Harbor Hotel on Rowes Wharf.
Mrs.
Levin, 31, is a manager of communications at Johnson &amp; Johnson in New Brunswick, N.J.
She graduated from Smith College.
Her father is a pediatrician in Boston and a professor of pediatrics and public health at the Boston University School of Medicine.
He was formerly the chairman of B.U.'s pediatrics department and the chief of pediatrics at Boston City Hospital.
The bride's mother, Barbara W. Alpert, retired as a coordinator of continuing medical education at B.U.


Bullets Over Miami


Coleman Counts Himself Out of Nets' Games
Derrick Coleman further dimmed the Nets' chances of making the playoffs by strongly suggesting today that he might miss the team's final 11 regular-season games with a severely sprained left wrist.
"If it's still bothering me, then I won't be back," Coleman said outside the A.P.A.
Recreation Center, where the Nets practiced.
"When I feel like I felt before it was hurt, then I'll be back."


First Fidelity Executive To Head Bankers' Group
Leslie E. Goodman of Lawrenceville, the senior executive vice president of First Fidelity Bancorporation in Newark, was elected chairman of the New Jersey Bankers Association last week at its convention in Orlando, Fla.
He succeeds Barbara Harding, chairman of the Phillipsburg National Bank and Trust Company.
Harry W. Van Sciver, president of Burlington County Bank, was elected vice chairman, and Kenneth T. Neilson, president of Hudson United Bank, Union City, was elected treasurer.
Alfred H. Griffith continues as president of the association.


Ms. Rappaport And Mr. Moser
Bonnie G. Rappaport, an advertising manager at the Dreyfus Corporation in New York, was married last evening to Evan M. Moser, the director of tour marketing for the Big Apple Circus in New York.
Rabbi Bruce Ginsburg officiated at Temple Hillel in North Woodmere, L.I.
Mrs.
Moser, 29, graduated from American University.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Brian Rappaport of Woodmere, L.I.


'Garter' Invented For Lyme Disease
IT'S that time of year again -- tick season.
And as surely as the now infamous arachnids come with the spring, so too will the endless discussion about Lyme disease, its prevention, treatment, the experimental vaccine, research, financing, testing and more.
Even Lyme disease lawsuits are coming into fashion, as workers slap suits on employers asserting that they were not sufficiently protected from the illness.
But now the widespread interest in Lyme disease has spawned still another sideline -- it has inspired the imagination of would-be inventors and entrepreneurs.
Two Scarsdale residents, Susan and Neil Luria, recently received a patent on their contribution to the field: the Tick and Small Crawling Creature Barrier and Trap.


Derivatives as Scapegoat In the Barings Collapse
To the Editor:
I read with considerable dismay, "Is It Now Time for Gun Control on Wall Street?" (Market Watch, March 5).
As a practitioner and consultant in the derivatives business since 1978, I am tired of people blaming derivatives for the ignorance and poor business judgment ensconced at the top of many financial institutions.
Based only on what has appeared in the newspapers during the last weeks, it is clear that derivatives are wrongly accused in the failure of Barings.
Barings management seems incredibly foolish and no doubt deserves its current position alongside the dinosaurs.


A Play's Invisible Character
WHEN "Having Our Say" opens at the Booth Theater on Thursday, one of the play's main characters will be off stage.
She is Amy Hill Hearth of Ossining, a former contributor to The New York Times who was the co-author of the best-selling book on which the play is based.
The other authors, possibly the oldest first-time authors in history, are Dr.
A.
Elizabeth Delany, known as Bessie, and her sister Sarah Delany, known as Sadie, the now world famous centenarians of Mount Vernon.


Corrections
A report in the Funds Watch column last Sunday about management changes at the Warburg Pincus investment bank misstated Harold Ehrlich's new position.
He is a member of the international equity team, not its head.


Runaway Memory
MEMORIES ARE LIKE FOOL'S gold.
We tell ourselves that they are firm and shining treasures that we can store and relish forever, and that no matter what pains or losses life may impose on us, at least it cannot take from us our memories.
But that this is not so, I have lately come to realize in a very personal way.
It is not my own memories but those of my mother, once an ambitious concert singer but 90 now and living in a nursing home in Chicago, that have brought me to this unwanted knowledge.
Some of her earliest memories are featured in a touring exhibit called "Becoming American Women: Clothing and the Jewish Immigrant Experience, 1880-1920," at the Ellis Island Immigration Museum.
In the catalogue of the show, there is a haunting picture of her at 14.
Her face is a delicate oval, her skin is as smooth as silk.
She is carrying the kind of hat I'm sure must have delighted her gypsy spirit -- wide-brimmed, trimmed with ribbon and fluttering with feathers.
The placards that accompany the various exhibits include numerous observations drawn from her memoirs.


Did Acquirers Pay Too Much Or Try a Sleight of Hand?
THE bottom line of an earnings report is kind of like a hot dog: No matter how plump it looks, you can't tell if it's any good without knowing what went into it.
Still, investors don't give a company's books the kind of scrutiny they reserve for the sidewalk hot-dog vendors.
If they did, they'd find that some of the more unsavory ingredients companies use these days are coming from aggressive accounting tactics after corporate acquisitions.


Democrats Counter on Budget
On the day a new state budget was supposed to be in place, the Democrat-controlled Assembly today offered a first glimpse of its counterproposal to the fiscal plan agreed on earlier this week by Gov.
George E. Pataki and his fellow Republicans who control the Senate.
The Assembly passed a bill on state operating expenses, one of several key bills in the overall budget.
It would restore $305 million of Mr.
Pataki's proposed cuts to the State University of New York and the City University of New York.
The version Mr.
Pataki and the Senate agreed to would restore $115 million to higher education.


For the Family Caregiver, An End to the Loneliness
To the Editor:
In my case, my husband had Alzheimer's disease.
In my case, I went down to 77 pounds taking care of him at home and was hospitalized for acute asthma, and he was moved to a nursing home (which, believe me, is not a home).


Alcatraz
To the Editor: "Unsealing Grim Alcatraz" (Feb. 19) missed describing one of the island's important visitor features.
To reach the cell block visitors must climb a very steep quarter-mile path -- impossible without assistance for wheelchair users, others with mobility problems and families with young children.
To overcome this barrier, three user-directed interactive computers were installed as a way for all visitors to experience what Alcatraz has to offer.
This was accomplished through a joint effort of the Easy Access Park Challenge, a nonprofit private-public partnership with the San Francisco-based George S. Ladd chapter of the Telephone Pioneers of America, Pacific Bell, the California Academy of the Sciences, the National Park Service and the National Park Foundation.


Destiny's General
THE LAST GREAT FRENCHMAN A Life of General de Gaulle.
By Charles Williams.
Illustrated. 544 pp.
New York: John Wiley &amp; Sons. $30.


Grab That Rake, Tackle Those Weeds
ROCUSES have bloomed.
So have the snowdrops.
Early tulips and the first daffodils are beginning to show their colors.
In short, the spring bloom parade has warmed up.
And gardeners who have not done the usual seasonal cleanup ritual had better get cracking.
Because from now on, things will start happening at a rapid pace.


Habitats/Wilton, Conn.; Picking Up an 1850 Barn in Foreclosure
IT might be natural to resent people who could get themselves a converted barn, full of history and possibilities, on two acres here at seemingly a bargain price -- $275,000 for a property previously on the market for $575,000.
But when you meet them you find them too likable to resent -- an enthusiastic young couple who have volunteered to raise and train a 9-week-old black Labrador retriever puppy for a blind person.


Megastores are Making Over the Highway Retailing Landscape
Until last summer, shoppers looking for pet supplies along Route 10 in East Hanover had one choice: NJ Pets.
It was a modest 1,500-square-foot store for all seasons, stocked with a limited selection of pet food, dog and cat toys, and a nail-clipping and bathing service.
But suddenly, there are five pet stores in a two-mile stretch.
Hanover Pet Center opened last July about a quarter-mile from NJ Pets.
Petland Discounts arrived in February in the shopping center next to Hanover.
And Petco, an 18,000-square-foot megastore, opened a half-mile away in December.
For shoppers who can wait until July, Pet Food Giant will unveil an 18,000-square-foot store half a mile down the road in Livingston.


Too Often, Child Welfare System Breaks Up Poor Families
To the Editor:
Esther Wattenberg (letter, March 26) would have us believe that children are taken from their parents only in cases of the most extreme abuse or imminent danger.
That's the myth.
This is the reality:


Ruling Against Street
Basketball experts, from the National Basketball Association chief scout MARTY BLAKE to Iowa Coach TOM DAVIS, say the late Iowa player CHRIS STREET would have been guaranteed millions of dollars as a first-round draft pick.
On Friday, an Iowa County jury said Street was 100 percent responsible in the traffic crash that killed him on Jan. 19, 1993, 15 games into his junior year.
Had the jury found the 6-foot-9, 220-pound forward responsible for 50 percent or less in the crash with a Johnson County snowplow, it could have awarded millions of dollars in damages asked by his parents. (AP)


INVESTING IT: Between Main and Wall; For the Fee-Hungry, Stars Are a Banquet
THE BEEF Carol Alt, the supermodel, and her retired hockey star husband, Ron Greschner, say they told their broker to buy municipal bonds.
He bought junk bonds instead.
The broker earned commissions.
The clients lost money.
THE BROKER Kenneth Miller, a former model and restaurant maitre d', became a Shearson broker in 1983, and then a Smith Barney broker when Primerica bought Shearson.
Ms.
Alt and Mr.
Greschner, who knew him from his days as a maitre d', were among his first customers.


Death of a Rapper: A Legacy Built on the Gangster Image
ERIC WRIGHT, THE multimillion-selling rapper known as Eazy-E, took on a sad new celebrity last Sunday night, when he became the first hip-hop star to die of AIDS.
Ten days earlier, Wright had released a statement that revealed his condition, announced that he had "seven children by six different mothers" and said he wanted his young fans to "learn about what's real when it comes to AIDS." But Wright's career can't be summed up in his cause of death.
Eazy-E, 31, was a classic American figure: a hustler who knew how to surround himself with talent and how to sell sensationalism.
He was a member of N.W.A. (Niggaz Wit' Attitude).
While he didn't do the bulk of the group's writing or rapping, he was the executive producer of the definitive gangster rap album, N.W.A.'s "Straight Outta Compton," in 1988.
With that, he became the entrepreneur who made gangster rap a hot commodity.


To the Defense Of the Bethel Cinema
I take exception to the characterization of the Bethel Cinema in the Dining Out column about the adjoining restaurant, Emerald City Cafe, "Plain, Simple and Enjoyable Indeed," (March 5).
Though the review gives the restaurant high marks, it does less for the theater when it says that, "Unlike its movie counterpart, there is nothing glitzy or phony about the cafe."


TODAY'S SECTIONS
Special Today: Education Life/Section 4A
The life style of the mall and its franchise outlets is sweeping across college campuses and raising questions about how to balance economic realities and the atmosphere traditionally associated with higher learning.


Don't Be Lulled by Easy Loans
MY pen moves slowly across the blank check, as I savor the moment of accomplishment.
Date: March 1, 1995.
Pay to the Order of Chemical Bank.
Eighty-Seven and . . . 28/100 Dollars.
Exclamation point.
Almost 15 years after starting college, I have just paid off my student loan.


U.S. Offered Unusual Class On 'Diversity'
The Department of Transportation has sponsored training programs in which men were groped, women sobbed for hours, and blacks and whites were urged to exchange epithets, employees of the department told a Congressional subcommittee this week.
The courses, in management skills and diversity awareness, were offered for 11 years until Transportation Secretary Federico F. Pena suspended them in 1993 after participants complained to him.
The classes cost more than $3 million and were attended by at least 5,000 employees, most from the Federal Aviation Administration, Government figures show.


Maloney Takes Stock of Hockey for Fox From Seat in a Hollywood Studio
Dave Maloney, the former Rangers captain and an inveterate chatterbox, walked the few blocks to lunch from his office at Bear Stearns &amp; Company, where he is a managing director.
He toted a briefcase containing a summary of which stocks the investment firm was recommending.
First on the list: News Corporation.
A few days before, Maloney signed a deal to be the studio analyst for Fox's National Hockey League coverage, which begins today.
Fox is owned by News Corporation, which is controlled by Rupert Murdoch.


. . . 3 Explorers of a Certain Age, Scaling Mountains and More
AS A RESTLESS HARVARD student in 1928, Norman Vaughan heard of Adm.
Richard E. Byrd's plans for the first American expedition to Antarctica and the South Pole.
An expert sled-dog musher, Mr.
Vaughan dropped out of college to spend two years exploring that harshest of continents, and while there, Admiral Byrd named one of the mountains they discovered for him.
For 62 years, Norman dreamed of going back and climbing Mt.
Vaughan.
Last December he finally did it.
After eight days picking his way up the icy ridge leading to the peak, he became the first man to reach the 10,302-foot summit -- three days before his 89th birthday.
And a cameraman-producer from the National Geographic "Explorer" series, Larry Engel, chronicled the effort for a documentary, "Height of Courage," which will be shown at 9 o'clock tonight on TBS.


BRAT RAP
It is difficult not to sink into apocalyptic despair after reading Retha Powers's piece on rap music's next generation ("Brat Rap," March 5).
Is anyone ennobled by the poetry of these young people, who speak almost exclusively of unreflective, animal sexuality and their lust for guns and violence?
Is society profited by "artists" whose singular contribution to the wonder of music derives from wearing their clothes backwards?
What parent affirms a child's desire to sing of blood and sodomy, for 5,000 years the spoils of barbarians?
Is it simply that they have somehow hatched a prodigy?
Do they know how common lust is, and how more profound virtue?


Recollections Give Professor A Film Topic
The unsettling facts of some students' lives have helped inspire a feature-length film written and directed by BRIDGETT DAVIS, an assistant professor of English at Baruch College in Manhattan.
"Naked Acts" grew out of her regular request that students keep journals or write about their early experiences.
At least a few women would recount memories of being sexually molested as children.
In some cases, she said, they were recalling these incidents for the first time.
"I thought that was astonishing," said Professor Davis, who has helped some of these students get professional help.


Word for Word / Names for an Era; No Time Like the Present To Leave Something for Posterity
Two weeks ago the Week in Review invited readers to choose a name for the time we live in, in the spirit of James Atlas's article, "Pinpointing a Moment on the Map of History." The reaction was fast and floodlike.
A few readers were outraged at the very idea of The New York Times soliciting opinions.
Someone derisively named the current age "The Era of the Audience-Participation New York Times." But hundreds of readers -- professors, students, psychologists, bureaucrats and hackers -- replied seriously.
Some got carried away, unintentionally casting their votes for the Age of Indecision by sending in long lists of suggestions.
One reader sent 52.


LONG ILSAND JOURNAL
Beleaguered Mascot
THIS was not a job for the faint of heart.
Encased in a giant plastic head with a red light blinking on top, Rob Di Fiore was about to enter the Nassau Veterans Memorial Coliseum to entertain hockey fans.
Except that the fans were mostly Rangers fans.
And Mr.
Di Fiore is the mascot for the Islanders.
"I love a challenge," he said as he prepared for the sellout crowd by watching "Wayne's World II." Dressing in a silly costume for sports fans who like watching fights as much as skating can be a challenge.
When many of those fans are rooting for the other team, the challenge may call for hazard pay.


Ideas &amp; Trends; When Going Out Is In, We Are Where We Eat
DAVE CHASEN wasn't a chef.
He was an actor who made great chili and turned it into an empire.
He did it by serving simple food to his celebrity pals -- and letting the rest of us watch.
When Chasen's, the restaurant he opened 59 years ago, announced that it was closing April 1, Hollywood went into mourning; it was the end of an era.
For most of its history, Chasen's defined glamour in Hollywood.
Later restaurants would affect a brash California attitude, a sort of casual outdoor style; not Chasen's.
This was grown-up glamour straight from the "Thin Man," a restaurant where people dressed for dinner and drank martinis.
It might be 90 degrees and dry outside, but inside it was cool and Christmasy.
Sunshine?
Not here.
Chasen's looked more like a New England inn.
Dave Chasen's restaurant was a place where patrons could actually imagine that they were in the movies.
Then the movies became less glossy and the restaurant lost its cachet.


The End Is Near for Alexander's Abstract Mural on Route 4
Whether they love it or hate it, shoppers and commuters who regularly pass Alexander's here have come to regard its huge abstract impressionist mural as a kind of landmark.
The 200-by-50-foot work, created by the Polish-born artist Stefan Knapp, has dominated the intersection of Routes 17 and 4 since 1962.
Constructed of red, orange and blue porcelain panels attached to a steel structure, it was commissioned for $250,000 by George Farkas, a former owner of the store.


On Sunday; April Rules: A Little Italy Springs Ahead
EASING into springtime, the small city neighborhood of Belmont in the Bronx is wise enough to be showcasing the words of Dante in the local public library in celebration of his "marvelling and impassioned voice which the human soul transmits from age to age in the ever recurring creation of the world." No less than poetry, the neighborhood's recurring creation includes provolone cheese on sale by the heady wheelful nearby in Mike &amp; Son's delicatessen.
This is in the cavernous indoor city market where, 55 years ago, Mayor Fiorello H. La Guardia imperiously consigned the grand Italian street peddlers clogging traffic on Arthur Avenue.
Warming sunlight and the spirit of resurrection lately bathe the streets that are still vibrant as the Bronx's Little Italy and as good a place as any to measure winter's death in New York.
In the fine print of the city's latest population projections of a shrinking white minority, Belmont somehow freshens its Italian flair within the ever-recurring creation.


Hearty Fare in Robust Provencal Style
SERGE BACKES, as he has done before, demonstrates considerable cooking skills in a setting that shows them off with aplomb at his new restaurant in Avon, Serge.
The premises of the new venture present two intimate, romantically lighted dining rooms with knotty pine plank ceilings, sponge-painted pastel walls and oak trim.
A tiny third room with a few tables and chairs has a service bar invitingly hung with gleaming copper pots.
Overall, both appetizers and entrees are hearty, delivered in trencherman portions, a fact underscored by the huge ceramic plates (in beautifully nuanced colors, all from the Great Barrington Pottery) on which each dish is presented.
Even the freshly made bread was served in two humongous slices apiece.
As a sop for the herb-infused olive oil, it was delicious, though we had to refrain from making a meal of it.


Identity Crisis


IS THERE AN ART TO A WELL-PLACED CHAIR?
Julie V. Iovine's piece on interior design was witty and enlightening.
However, her suggestions to "get a dog," with the rationale that "All interiors need pets" is, at best, misguided ("Is There an Art to a Well-Placed Chair?," March 12).
Animals are not simply chic accessories but living creatures who require a time-consuming commitment of care.
To feature pets among windows and bold paint colors in a list of interior design recommendations is absurd.
JACQUELINE MORRIS MAYO New York


With a Little Help . . .
THE Vladeck Houses cover four square blocks of the Lower East Side and seem pygmy-sized against the apartment towers that cast long shadows over the rest of the neighborhood.
Most tenants in this public housing complex, which dates from World War II, are poor and old.
This is home to Yiu-chun Yuen, a 74-year-old onetime seamstress and 15-year resident, who is a walking personal archive spilling Medicaid and hospital identification cards, prescription-drug receipts and miniature tins of Tiger Balm ointment from her pockets.
She weeps as she recalls the husband who she says abandoned her seven years ago for a younger woman from Malaysia.
And it is home to Juana Yulfo, a dignified 93 and still making it to the local community center every day for lunch, and to Sally Smith, 68, a South Carolina native who wears her silvery hair in braids wound around her head and almost never leaves her living room.
And to Chenk Tsui, a bearlike man whose hands tremble uncontrollably years after he retired from kitchen work in a Chinatown restaurant; he is 79 and widowed and snowed by the paperwork required to renew his food stamps.


Disputes Dim Prospects for Limits on Carbon Dioxide Emissions
A meeting of more than 130 nations aimed at helping to prevent catastrophic changes in the world's climate seems unlikely to produce substantial progress toward limiting carbon dioxide emissions, which scientists say are the main cause of global warming.
The conference, which opened here on Tuesday, has the modest goal of starting up a negotiating process to set limits on emissions.
But the nations taking part have broken into feuding blocs, unable to agree even on procedural issues.


When It's Students At Your Service
It was a slow, snowy Tuesday night in the wood-trimmed lounge of the Radisson Airport Hotel in Providence, R.I.
At the bar, several men in business suits bantered with the bartender, while near the kitchen, the wait staff -- a slim, blond woman and a stocky young man with a sculptured haircut -- were deep in conversation.
Was the talk of politics or raises?
TV shows or love lives?
Try academics.
"I've got a final tomorrow," said the woman with a nervous sigh as she folded her green apron.
"I'm outta here."
To the untutored eye, the Radisson looks like any other airport hotel -- big, bland and squeaky clean, with a grand piano on castors in the lobby.
But look again.
There's lots of staff, from a regiment of young men and women in blue blazers behind the check-in desk to a phalax of waiters who often outnumber diners.
The median age appears to be about 20.
And the shoptalk is all about school -- professors, classes and final exams.


Lamb for Easter And for Passover
THIS year Easter and Passover coincide.
Passover begins at sundown on April 14, Good Friday.
When Easter Sunday occurs two days later, the eight-day Passover celebration will still be in progress.
Although eggs will certainly be served thoughout Passover, they will not by dyed or decorated.
Nor is there likely to be matzoh at Easter Sunday dinners.
But, nonetheless, the coincidence of the two religious events suggests an ecumenical menu suitable for both.


Conner Stays in Trials By Quarter of an Inch
A dispute that threatened to knock Dennis Conner out of the America's Cup trials dissolved today around the smallest of technicalities.
By agreeing to add a mere quarter-inch to the bottom of Stars &amp; Stripes's 13-foot keel, Conner will be allowed to race another day.
An international yachting jury ruled this morning that a discrepancy in keel length violated rules for the cup defense trials.
But it was an easy fix for Stars &amp; Stripes, a job so simple that adding any length at all, even a screw, to the bottom of the keel would give the team the extra length it needed to comply.
The five-member jury sat for more than 20 hours to come to that conclusion.


March 26-April 1: Artists' Tablecloths; Add a Little Mustard And -- Voila! -- Art
There was nothing fancy about the menu at the little bistro on the Rue des Grands-Augustins.
Yet in the mysterious way these things happen, in the immediate postwar years Le Catalan became a favorite for artists and poets on the Left Bank of Paris.
And as they sat around, they often doodled, sketched or scribbled on the paper that served as tablecloths.
By 1952, Le Catalan had lost its clientele and soon afterward closed.
But thanks to Georges Hugnet, a painter and poet who was a regular, it left an interesting legacy.
Mr.
Hugnet made a point of collecting the drawings and poems left by his friends.
And now, 179 of these improvisations are at the Pavillon des Arts in Paris in an exhibition called "Jeux de Nappes" (Tablecloth Games).


New York Should Keep Home Health Care
To the Editor:
I was happy to read of the impact of the "Let's throw Granny into a nursing home" television ad protesting New York State's home health care cuts (news article, March 29).


1,500 Dine, and Back Restaurant in Battle With Union
In a dramatic and unprecedented display of community solidarity against the independent union that has been trying to organize restaurant workers in Chinatown, 1,500 people packed the largest restaurant in the neighborhood Thursday night.
The event at the Jing Fong restaurant marked a rare moment of unity in politically fractious Chinatown.
The participants banded together to show their opposition to Local 318 Independent Restaurant Workers Union, which represents waiters in two Chinese restaurants in Chinatown and Flushing, Queens, and has tried unsuccessfully to organize employees at Jing Fong.


Editorial Notebook; A Resurrection in the South Bronx
Eleven floors up a pitch-black stairwell, walking in pigeon dung and rotting plaster, is a long way to go for a view.
But the roof of Morrisania Hospital -- 20 years abandoned, ravaged by scavengers -- is well worth the hike.
West from the roof lies curvaceous Yankee Stadium, the elevated train line snaking along its flank.
South looms the skyline of Manhattan and a view to swoon for.
In the foreground, the Bronx itself rolls in low and strong, right up to Morrisania's doors.


Corrections
An article about Richmond last Sunday misstated the range of prices for a double room at the Jefferson Hotel.
It is $105 to $195, not $105 to $95.


S.A.T. With Familiar Anxiety but New (Higher) Scoring
After three hours of suffering through the S.A.T. yesterday morning, Isaac Hurwitz and Geoffrey Fischer stood near the Tribeca Bridge whooping and exchanging high-fives.
And for the first time since leaving the testing room at Stuyvesant High School in Battery Park City, their classmate Stephanie Xie allowed herself a smile.
" 'Stalwart' is to 'cause' as 'adherent' is to 'party,' " she rejoiced.
"Yeah! I had that too!"


Segue to Women Who Weren't Born Yesterday
Jessica Lange has been through it all, from King Kong to Blanche DuBois, from depending on the gentleness of apes to depending on the kindness of strangers.
She has been dismissed as a blond bimbo and honored as a great actress.
She has bridled at being called pretty and longed to be called pretty.
In life, she has been passionately involved with the dancer Mikhail Baryshnikov and the playwright Sam Shepard, and, on film, with Jack Nicholson (on a kitchen table) and Liam Neeson (in a kilt).


Rangers' Skid Ends With Victory in Boston
Usually, Aleksei Kovalev is one of the first Rangers out of the locker room after a game.
Today, after a 3-2 victory over the Boston Bruins, he was the last.
His two goals helped end a seven-game losing streak, but Kovalev's obligations didn't end with the final buzzer in Boston Garden.
He remained in the trainer's room for treatment of a charley horse above his right knee.


Toby Willner And David Silver
Toby Ann Willner, the daughter of Dr.
Selma Willner and Dr.
Arthur Willner of Port Washington, L.I., was married last evening to Jordon David Silver, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Allan Silver of Rumson, N.J.
Rabbi Lia Bass officiated at Bridgewater's, a restaurant in New York.
Ms.
Willner, 33, is the coordinator of the Coalition of Battered Women's Advocates in New York.
She graduated from the University of Pennsylvania.
Her mother is a professor of social work at Westchester Community College in Valhalla, N.Y.
The bride's father, who is retired, was the director of the psychology department of Long Island Jewish Hospital in New Hyde Park, L.I.


Value of Patience In Drivers' Ed
As a 16-year-old high-school junior who is now taking drivers' ed, I feel that it is a very worthwhile class  [ "Drivers' Ed Classes: A Debate Heats Up Over Effectiveness," Feb. 26 ] .
Although statistics may prove that students who don't take drivers' ed have no more accidents than those who do, I still feel that it is beneficial to the drivers and every one else on the road.
I can honestly say from experience, because I have been in drivers' ed for almost 10 weeks now, that it is an extremely valuable class.
Being in the class I not only learn the rules of the road, but also I learn many safety procedures and necessary precautions that should be taken that I doubt I would learn from my parents.
For instance, what to do on a rainy day?
Or if you're on a patch of ice or just a simple question about who has the right of way?


75 Years After His Death, a Composer's Originality Is Honored
IN the Musical Genius Died Young category there are some familiar bright lights: Mozart at 35, Schubert at 31, Bizet at 36 and Gershwin at 39 -- as well as those whose brilliance was just dawning on the world.
The American composer Charles Tomlinson Griffes falls into the latter group.
The Boston Symphony, Philadelphia Orchestra and Cleveland Orchestra all played premieres of his works the year before he died of pneumonia at 35.
Griffes was director of music at the Hackley School here from 1907 until his death in 1920.
Concertgoers know him best, if they know him at all, for works like "The White Peacock," "The Pleasure Dome of Kubla Khan" and "Poem for Flute and Orchestra," music composed in his time off from academic duties.


March 26-April 1: That Masked Man in Line; Bank Robbery Increases As Branches Multiply
For thieves, scarcely any crime has the panache of bank robbery, so daring in its defiance -- and so unlikely to be successful.
Such robberies have nearly tripled in the past decade to about 9,000 a year.
Loot taken in robberies jumped to nearly $90 million in 1993, the last year for which figures are available, compared to about $20 million in 1983.
Some law enforcement officers say the increasing number of bank branches, some lacking armed security, has provided new targets for robbers.
The typical robbery nets less than $2,500, and three of every four bandits get caught, said Robert Long, an F.B.I. agent in Chicago.


Only April, but That Ideal Rental May Already Be Rented to Someone Else
It wasn't an unusual request by Jersey Shore standards: two women from North Jersey each wanted a four-bedroom summer rental house within walking distance of the beach, with air-conditioning, a microwave and a dishwasher.
They were willing to pay top dollar, said Lee Childers, owner of Childers Real Estate in Normandy Beach: at least $2,000 a week.
One balmy weekend in March, they drove to Mantoloking, in Ocean County, where Mr.
Childers showed them six houses.
But they went home unhappy, he recalled.
"They said to us, 'You're a professional, with a nice office and a nice car, and you show us six miserable properties.' "


At Long Last: Playground Work Is Almost Finished
After 21 years without repair, the playground in Fort Greene Park looked more like urban decay than a romping ground for small children.
The tennis courts, too, had fallen into disrepair, with bubbled pavement and ripped chain-link fence.
Within two months, those images of decrepitude will be nothing but memories for local residents, the Parks Department says.
The six tennis courts, closed since last June, are scheduled to reopen on April 30.
Besides a racquet, all that neighborhood residents will need to play on them will be a department permit, available for $50 annually.


Play Ball: Substitutes Go as Clubs Prepare to Say Yes
Baseball club owners will meet in Chicago today presumably to act on the players' offer to return to work and the future of replacement players, but the decisions have already been made, people familiar with the official thinking said last night.
The owners' answers will be yes to the striking players and no to the replacement players, they said.
As part of their plan to welcome the players back grudgingly, the owners have proposed beginning the season on April 26, with each team's schedule reduced from 162 games to 144.
A person close to the management planning committee said last night that players can begin reporting to spring training on a voluntary basis early this week, but must be in camps by Friday.


THE MASTERPIECES THEY CALL HOME
If Paul Goldberger enjoyed researching and writing his article "The Masterpieces They Call Home" (March 12) as much as I did reading it, we both had a delightful time.
If I still had a car, I would love to drive about to look for the magnificent Pelli "chateau en bois." Still, the very fine photographs reminded me of so many houses I have admired, from Tuscany, Fallingwater to Chestnut Hill.


'Garter' Invented For Lyme Disease
IT'S that time of year again -- tick season.
And as surely as the now infamous arachnids come with the spring, so too will the endless discussion about Lyme disease, its prevention, treatment, the experimental vaccine, research, financing, testing and more.
Even Lyme disease lawsuits are coming into fashion, as workers slap suits on employers asserting that they were not sufficiently protected from the illness.
But now the widespread interest in Lyme disease has spawned still another sideline -- it has inspired the imagination of would-be inventors and entrepreneurs.
Two Scarsdale residents, Susan and Neil Luria, recently received a patent on their contribution to the field: the Tick and Small Crawling Creature Barrier and Trap.


The Devils Closing In On Top Spot
The Devils came home to Byrne Meadowlands Arena after only one loss in five games on the road and picked up where they left off.
They posted a convincing 4-1 victory over the Canadiens, bringing them within 2 points of first place in the Atlantic Division.
"I never thought about that," said Coach Jacques Lemaire when asked about first place.
"I'm happy when we play well. I always focus on playing the best you can and the end result will take care of itself."


NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-16  STATUS OF MEXICO BAILOUT  More than two months after the White House committed $20 billion to save Mexico from bankruptcy, the effort is teetering between modest success and potential failure. 1  FEAR GROWS IN BURUNDI  As ethnic violence and a sense of foreboding rise in Burundi, thousands of people have left the capital, Bujumbura, seeking refuge in the countryside or in Zaire. 1


Ups and Downs of Michelin '95
The 1995 Michelin Guide for France, published last month, promoted Marc Veyrat, chef-owner of Auberge de l'Eridan near Annecy, to its top three-star rating.
The self-taught chef is known for his extravagant use of wild herbs, and for a modern translation of the rustic mountain cuisine of the Savoy region.
The longtime three-star restaurant Pic, in Valence, was reduced to two stars, leaving the number of three-star establishments in France at 20.
Other significant changes include the demotion of Andre Daguin's restaurant, France, in Auch, from two stars to one; and the awarding of a single star to a Parisian fish restaurant, Paul Minchelli.
Many well-known restaurants lost their single star, including La Cagouille in Paris, La Belle Gasconne in Poudenas, Cro Magnon in Les Eyzies-de-Tayac and La Cabro d'Or in Les Baux de Provence.


THE MASTERPIECES THEY CALL HOME
Goldberger focused on a small group of clients who wanted their homes to make a very special statement -- and could afford to pay through the nose for it!
However, the thrust of the article strongly implied that hiring any architect to design any home has become "a sport of the rich." This certainly isn't the case.


CRIME
Who were the Anasazi?
What compelled them to carve their cities out of towering desert cliffs?
What forces of man or nature caused these ancient cliff dwellers to vanish without a trace?
Nevada Barr poses these confounding questions in ILL WIND (Putnam, $19.95), the third novel in a brisk outdoor series with a National Park Service ranger named Anna Pigeon as resident sleuth.
A strong, athletic woman with depths of sensitivity that she takes pains to hide, Anna needs to leave civilization to find her peace.
On her new assignment at Mesa Verde National Park in Colorado, "it soothed her to be where the people weren't," watching the wind and pondering the fate of the Anasazi.
But there are more immediate mysteries to solve: Who is sabotaging construction of the new waterline?
Why are people collapsing in Cliff Palace, the most spectacular of the park's ruins?
Who killed a ranger and laid out his body in one of the ancient subterranean rooms?


A Little Light Viewing
It's all done with mirrors.
That's what the makers of Bnox say about a new four-ounce set of binoculars.
Just Four inches wide, the binoculars give 7x magnification and cost $20.
A set of mirrors (along with prefocused acrylic lenses) keeps weight down and the size compact, Bnox's manufacturers say.
Bnox are sold at sporting-goods and department stores, and they are packaged in clear plastic, allowing you to see if they outperform your old ones before you buy.


Bringing Slavery's Long Shadow to the Light
During most of his 59 years, Oswald Sykes, a former hospital administrator for New York State, rarely thought about his ancestors' odyssey through slavery.
And when he did, all he felt was a fleeting rage.
But then he saw the remnants of a rotting English slave ship, the Henrietta Marie, discovered in the Florida Straits.
As he examined the heavy iron shackles and ship's bell, he pondered how strong his ancestors must have been to survive the passage from the Gulf of Guinea.


Day-Care Choice: Cost Or Quality
WHEN her son was born three years ago, Diane Charton Karsch set out to find the best child care that money could buy.
"It's not that the dollars didn't matter," said Mrs.
Karsch, a Mount Kisco resident who is an account executive for a public relations concern.
"And it wasn't like I was going back to work for pin money, because we had a mortgage to pay. But even though some options were cheaper, I wouldn't consider them."


Tea With Trotsky
To the Editor: Thank you for the article "A New Kahlo-Rivera Museum" by Paul Sherman (Feb. 19), which led us to a major highlight on a recent trip to Mexico City.
None of the travel guides lists the new Dolores Olmedo Patino Museum, as it opened only in September.
The long but easy trip (possible by subway then trolley for less than 50 cents round trip) brought us to one of the most exquisite museums we have ever visited.
It houses Ms.
Olmedo Patino's collections of major works by Frida Kahlo and Diego Rivera as well as pre-Columbian artifacts and Mexican folk art, all displayed in a beautiful walled hacienda and gardens, which are alone worth the trip.


Reducing the Fat, Cream and Cholesterol From a Classic French Menu
THE news that Mirabelle, probably the Island's most renowned French restaurant, has added a diet menu poses some interesting questions.
Will diners, even those who are diet conscious, display discipline and restraint by ordering reduced-fat, -salt and -sugar meals?
Might they not be tempted to forget their healthy eating resolutions and splurge?
And why, after Mirabelle made its reputation with traditional French food with rich ingredients and sauces, is it adding healthful alternatives?


From Clams to Cuttlefish, Lisbon Likes Seafood
THE best window shopping in Lisbon is provided by stacks of pie-sized crabs, numerous varieties of sausages and cheeses, irresistible tarts and cakes, and fine wines and vintage ports -- which the city's population seems to ingest without cease in countless eating places and cafes.
At least that was my impression during the week between New Year's and Epiphany, when my companion and I visited Lisbon.
Somewhat similar thoughts struck the English eccentric William Beckford, who wrote in 1787: "The Portuguese had need to have the stomachs of ostriches to digest the loads of savory viands with which they cram themselves."
We were partly on our own, sightseeing and eating in well-known restaurants, and partly guided by a Portuguese friend, who saw to it that we also had a more genuine experience.
Fresh fish and shellfish from the Atlantic is the dominant theme, but salt cod (bacalhau), pork, beef, chicken and duck are widely served, and in winter game is an important subtheme.
Solar dos Presuntos
The name means the villa of the hams, and prosciutto-like Iberian hams do hang in the main window of the restaurant's small tile-covered building in the heart of Baixa, the fashionable downtown district.
But inside, the display is extravagantly marine.
We went for a weekday lunch and found the place hopping, the atmosphere that of a high-rent trattoria.
The other customers were nearly all Portuguese, despite the fur-coated gangs of hungry post-Christmas tourists from Milan we'd seen roaming the streets.


Harlequin Romance
THE FIRST IMPRESSION LOOKS LIKE A Saturday morning cartoon of Versailles.
The Louis in the living room is impeccably choice, XV or XVI, but then the purples, the diamonds and the velvets pop out.
The boisterousness of it all is rather startling for staid Park Avenue.
The designers, William Diamond and Anthony Baratta, had dreamed of returning the apartment to its prewar swellegance.
But when the client said her favorite color was purple, they quickly calculated that only blue and green go well with purple, and that only the French classics could bear the weight of so much vividness.
Thus, a Louis XVI sofa is encased in emerald green velvet; a bergere, in head-to-foot green harlequins; a floating wafer of a footstool, in custom dyed lavender damask.
For a touch of whimsy on the walls, they added tables and cachepots to a traditional Chinese hand-painted paper already crowded with flowers and birds.


A Neo-Traditional Link With the Past
To the Editor:
I read with interest your article on Feb. 12 headed "Old Victorian Style, but Computer-Ready Housing" about the Village of Montgomery being built at Orangeville, Ontario.
But nowhere, in that article or anywhere else, have I read about the similarities between this neo-traditional trend in new communities and certain planned communities built by the Federal Government during World War I to house defense workers.


A Breeze For U.S. Davis Cup Squad
Here in the Mediterranean cold snap, the local lemons have received a dose of freezer burn on the branch.
But the United States Davis Cup team continued its hot play and clinched the quarterfinal competition against Italy, 3-0, this blustery afternoon with victories by Pete Sampras and the doubles tandem of Richey Reneberg and Jared Palmer.
Added to Andre Agassi's coup in the only match to be sandwiched in between Friday's thunderbursts and hail sessions, today's pair of American victories -- a lopsided singles duel and a boisterous doubles confrontation where the fans finally asserted themselves on their home turf -- effectively ended this chilly weekend mismatch.


A Visitors' Center For White House Tours
With the opening of a new visitors' center in the Department of Commerce Building, the White House tour has been made a bit easier for visitors who in the past have waited in lines outdoors.
At the new center, which is two blocks from the White House, people can pick up free tickets and view exhibits while waiting for their appointed times.


Correction
A credit last Sunday with a picture in the music listings showing Rivers Cuomo, lead singer of the rock band Weezer, misidentified the photographer.
He was Ebet Roberts, not Steve Eichner.


Ideas &amp; Trends; Put On Your Best Chest -- It's Time To Preen
THE greatest difference between us and the rest of the animal kingdom, declared Clairee Belcher, the cheeky elder stateswoman in "Steel Magnolias," is "our ability to accessorize." Ah, but Ms.
Belcher might well have noted another outstanding trait specific to our species: breasts.
We are the only mammal whose mammaries stay permanently enlarged whether or not the glands are dispensing milk.
Breasts.
Accessories.
Breasts as accessories.
Put them on, take them off, push them up, bind them tight.
The right kind of bra, and voila, you have your own continental shelf cantilevered right below your collarbone, complete with the deepest, most delicious San Andreas fault line running down the middle.


MAR-A-LAGO BOULEVARD
When I read Michael Rubiner's "Mar-a-Lago Boulevard" (Endpaper, March 12) my daughter and I were in an otherwise empty schoolyard.
She was swinging on one swing, I was leaning against another, when laughter -- mine -- pierced the silent air.


Unsigned Free Agents Might Have a Place To Showcase Talents
The Players Association planned to run a spring camp this month in Homestead, Fla., for the players who were going to make their all-star tour starting next month, playing games for charity as a way of reminding fans who the real major leaguers were.
Now that the real major leaguers are on the verge of returning to work, the union plans to convert the Homestead site into a camp for free agents.
Invited participants will be the slightly more than 100 players who voluntarily became free agents last fall and remain unsigned and perhaps another 100 or more who became free agents involuntarily, by being released or not being tendered contracts.


Mississippi May Reopen Klan Killing
Every week, Ellie Dahmer visits the church cemetery and the gray granite stone that marks the grave of her husband, Vernon Dahmer Sr., who died in 1966 in a blaze set by the Ku Klux Klan.
"The grave isn't the bad part," Mrs.
Dahmer, 69, said recently.
"It's the bad memories. I still wake up at night. I still hear my daughter Bettie screaming. I still see the fire. They are memories that won't go away."


Baffling Trusses, Flying Buses or Fishy Buttresses
In a sense, there are only two ways to look at the Port Authority Bus Terminal's Ninth Avenue bus ramps.
The first is to see what is there: rusty steel overpasses that cut a dark, ungainly line across Ninth Avenue just south of 42d Street.
The second is to see what could be there.
And there lies a window on the peculiar stuff urban visionaries' dreams are made of.


Heather Drewes and Richard Feldman
HEATHER DREWES, 29, a fashion editor who has worked at Harper's Bazaar and Mirabella and is now at Glamour magazine, looks like a model from the 1950's.
She is buxom rather than rail-thin, her hair is platinum blond a la Marilyn Monroe, and her skin is as milky white as bobby socks.
Among friends she is known for her "footlong eyelashes," as one put it; her habit of wearing gloves and carrying a big umbrella to protect her skin on the beach, and her level-headed presence in a business filled with personalities as flamboyant as a patent-leather cat suit or tin-foil bikini.


Replacing Leaking Oil Tanks
THE last thing Brian Bickford wanted was a 550-gallon time-bomb buried in his backyard.
So before Mr.
Bickford and his wife, Tamara, agreed to buy the house they found in Millstone Township, N.J., they hired an expert to take soil samples around the house's underground heating-oil tank.
The test revealed that the tank was a "leaker," Mr.
Bickford said.
"I was not about to own somebody else's problem," he said.
With the help of his lawyer, he said, the seller was finally persuaded to shut down the tank, fill it with gravel and dispose of the contaminated soil before closing on the house.


PLAYING IN THE NEIGHBORHOOD
PROSPECT HEIGHTS  For City Youth Leagues, There's No Lockout
A strike may have major league baseball behind in the count, but it has done little to dim the enthusiasm of city children who play in youth leagues.


DeRiggi Had Opposed Incinerator-Sewer Plant
In 1993, Glen Cove Mayor Donald DeRiggi won the election as a Nassau County judge  [ "Glen Cove Tries to Stop Contractor From Reopening City Incinerator," March 12 ] .
In 1991, the only time that Donald P. DeRiggi and Thomas R. Suozzi faced each other as opposing candidates, Mr.
DeRiggi was elected Mayor of Glen Cove.
Ironically, in the late 1970's, before the plant was built, Mr.
DeRiggi had opposed the planned construction, urging that Glen Cove's sewer system be connected to the facility maintained by Nassau County.
The city government, under the leadership of Mayor Vincent Suozzi, opted instead to build a co-disposal plant at a cost of about $40 million.
In the co-disposal design, the incinerator burns the residue from the sewage-treatment system, supplying electricity in the process.
If the incinerator does not operate, the sewage-treatment plant still remains.
The City of Glen Cove must then pay for power and for the disposal of sludge, at an additional cost estimated at over $1 million a year.


Ending the Dollar's Disastrous Decade
Growth is great for a company, but it helps to know what produced the growth.
And now, at the end of a disastrous decade for the dollar, it is more important than ever for owners of some Wall Street darlings.
Take a couple of the great stocks of the last decade.
Coca-Cola saw its earnings per share rise at a compounded annual rate of 17 percent a year.
Johnson &amp; Johnson had an increase of 16 percent.
The gains brought ample rewards for shareholders.


'Baby Bell' Is Looking To Old Field
The Justice Department is expected to ask a Federal judge on Monday to let one of the regional Bell companies offer long-distance service, a market that the companies have been barred from since their creation 11 years ago.
Justice Department officials hope that their agreement with the Ameritech Corporation, a Chicago-based Bell company that provides local service in the Midwest, will serve as a blueprint for letting local and long-distance companies compete in each other's markets.


MARKET TIMIMG
Monday  The Commerce Department reports personal income and spending for February.
A drop in the average workweek to 34.5 hours, from 34.9 hours in January, should limit income growth.
Forecast: income up 0.3 percent; spending up 0.1 percent.
Most United States auto makers report March sales for new cars and light trucks.
Economists expect car sales to be at an annual unit rate of 6.9 million to 7.1 million and light trucks at 5.8 million to 6 million.
The National Association of Purchasing Managers releases its survey for March.
Forecast: Continued growth is seen in manufacturing, though the index is expected to fall to 52.9, from 54.5 in February.
Tuesday  Mickey Kantor, the United States trade representative, plans to discuss the Administration's agenda at the Senate Finance Committee hearing on trade law.
Report is due on February construction spending.
Forecast: no change.
Wednesday  Report is due on Leading economic indicators for February.
Forecast: down 0.2 percent.
Ford and Nissan report March vehicle sales.
Commerce Department to release wholesale trade figures for February.
Thursday  House expected to vote on a package of tax cuts and offsetting spending cuts, in what Republicans hope will be the final flourish to the Contract With America.
Housing completion figures for February are scheduled to be released.
Shareholders of the computer manufacturer Zeos International are expected to approve an acquisition by Micron Technology, a maker of computer products.
Friday  Labor Department to release unemployment figures for March.
The numbers should confirm that the economy is continuing to slow.
Forecast: 5.5 percent, with a rise of 225,000 in nonfarm payrolls.
The Federal Reserve reports consumer credit for February.
Forecast: up $6.3 billion.


It's 'The Gap' Once You're Hired, But Job Hunters Must Spiff It Up
IN the depths of Sherry Yerkey's closet is a dowdy blue skirt that she wore recently.
But she won't wear it again anytime soon.
Ms.
Yerkey, 21, has been offered her first real job, as an associate at a technology company.
And when she starts, she will go back to wearing skirts above the knee and the bold colors that she loves.
But she was told by her career counselor at the University of Chicago, where she is a sociology major, that for job interviews her skirt should be long, navy and simple.


Service Now Matches Splendid Food
NORTH Shore diners are buzzing about Classico, a recently reopened restaurant in Roslyn Estates that had been closed for four and a half months after a fire.
On a recent Saturday, a woman at the next table leaned forward and whispered conspiratorially to her companions that Classico was the latest "in" restaurant.
They oohed and aahed over the seven-foot antique chandelier from Spain, the sponge-painted walls and the row of false French windows that recreates the look of a Florentine house.
Colorful murals depict other windows opening to Italian country scenes.
Lovely as the lighter, brighter quarters are, the big news is the vastly improved service.
A review in 1989, when the restaurant was new, tellingly ended with the comment, "Classico's service brings on apoplexy, but its food will bring you back." Today the service is a match for the still splendid food.


On the Road


'Garter' Invented For Lyme Disease
IT'S that time of year again -- tick season.
And as surely as the now infamous arachnids come with the spring, so too will the endless discussion about Lyme disease, its prevention, treatment, the experimental vaccine, research, financing, testing and more.
Even Lyme disease lawsuits are coming into fashion, as workers slap suits on employers asserting that they were not sufficiently protected from the illness.
But now the widespread interest in Lyme disease has spawned still another sideline -- it has inspired the imagination of would-be inventors and entrepreneurs.
Two Scarsdale residents, Susan and Neil Luria, recently received a patent on their contribution to the field: the Tick and Small Crawling Creature Barrier and Trap.


Is Whitman's Popularity Democrats' Only Hope?
Governor Whitman has politely denied any personal interest in next year's Presidential politics about as often as she has been touted as a contender for the Vice Presidency, and generally her disavowals of higher ambition have been taken at face value.
But last week the Governor stepped directly into the 1996 Presidential spotlight, aligning herself with the moderate wing of the Republican Party and, in the odd way these things play themselves out in politics, giving heart to New Jersey's downtrodden Democrats.
If they can paint the hugely popular Governor as more interested in a spot on the 1996 Republican ticket than in slogging through year after year of state fiscal headaches, the State House's minority party members think, they may also be able to draw some support for their candidates for the Assembly this fall, as well as funnel more money to local governments.


Marnie Goodman And Gordon Hard
Marnie Goodman, a daughter of Estelle Goodman of Middletown, Conn., and the late Franklyn Goodman, is to be married today to Gordon Hard, a son of Marguerite Setten Hard of Wilton, Conn., and the late William Hard Jr.
Judge Robert Holzberg of the Connecticut Superior Court in New Britain is to officiate at the Gelston House, an inn in East Haddam, Conn.
Ms.
Goodman, 39, is keeping her name.
She is a corporate public relations specialist at the ITT Hartford Life Insurance Companies in Simsbury, Conn.
She graduated from Grinnell College.
Her parents were part-owners of Shapiro's, a former department store in Middletown.


A Gardening Legacy In Puget Sound
THE Bloedel Reserve, one of this country's most original and ambitious gardens, lies within a 150-acre sweep of forest land on Bainbridge Island, in Puget Sound, a half hour's ferry ride north of downtown Seattle.
The garden reflects the intensely disciplined concepts of an extraordinary couple, Prentice and Virginia Merrill Bloedel, members of prominent Northwest timber dynasties, who lived on the reserve from 1953 through 1984.
Virginia Bloedel, who died in 1989, was originally more knowledgeable about horticulture, but her husband's almost mystical reverence for the land eventually made him the driving force behind the transformation of the property.


Investigators at Fulton Fish Market Search for Arson's Motive
Investigators looking into a fire at the Fulton Fish Market searched there yesterday for records that they hoped might lead them to the arsonists who set it.
"They've sent in the accountants," one police officer said after he arrived at the market at 7:30 A.M. bearing boxes for carrying documents, axes to break open filing cabinets and shovels to clear debris.


Saturdays at Kleinfeld's
ON a block in Bay Ridge lined with small local businesses, the gray limestone building at 82d Street and Fifth Avenue stands out.
Flood lights in the windows shine on haute couture dresses in white taffeta and ivory peau de soie.
Mercedes-Benzes drop off clients.
A shuttle bus pulls up from Manhattan.
On any given Saturday, people pour out of the packed lobby of the retailer called Kleinfeld's -- the bridal institution that has been part of this Brooklyn neighborhood for 54 years.
Last Saturday, more than 325 appointments for showings and fittings were scheduled.
No one gets beyond the lobby without an appointment.


Strickland Is Unhappy
Portland Trail Blazers guard ROD STRICKLAND, who was benched after missing a flight, is angry enough with Coach P. J. CARLESIMO that he is threatening to leave the team at the end of the season.
Strickland played only four minutes Friday night in the Trail Blazers' 86-85 loss to the 76ers after he missed the team flight from New Jersey to Philadelphia.
"I don't like him, and you can write that," Strickland said of his coach after the game.
"I didn't like him in the beginning, and I don't like him now. I'm just going to play these last 14 games and that's it."


The Sad Contrast
To the Sports Editor:
I've just read William C. Rhoden's "For Iverson, Curtain Falls on Act One" (The Times, March 24) concerning John Thompson and Allen Iverson.


Too Often, Child Welfare System Breaks Up Poor Families; Spiritual Poverty?
To the Editor:
In your March 25 front-page article on the House welfare bill, you quote the unsubstantiated ideas of Representative James M. Talent of Missouri.
Mr.
Talent states that the public assistance system, while "trying to give people material wealth and lift them out of poverty, is luring them into a kind of spiritual poverty by destroying their families and their incentives to work."


The World; 2 Feuding Nations With Fish Stories
SPANIARDS are crazy about fish, like the Germans are about bananas or the French about artichokes.
Visit any Spanish taverna: you'll see appetizers of tiny eels, barnacles and periwinkles, mouth-watering slabs of monkfish, bream and hake, snacks of squid, mountains of mussels.
Madrilenos have long bucked the misfortune that founded their capital city 400 miles from the ocean.
Historians note that as far back as the mid-16th century the Spanish perfected techniques for transporting cod overland, by packing it in salt.
Until recent years the most treacherous road in the country was the long diagonal stretch from the ports of Galicia to Madrid.
It was plied nightly by truckers barreling at 100 miles an hour to be the first to arrive at the Mercamadrid and claim the bonus, a bundle of pesetas, put up by the fishmongers.


March 26-April 1: Latest Don't; Judge Strikes Down Policy For Infringing Rights Of Homosexuals in Military
A Federal judge last week struck down the military's new policy on homosexuals, which took effect a year ago.
Judge Eugene H. Nickerson of Federal District Court in Brooklyn said the policy violated the First and Fifth Amendment rights of gay troops in order to appease the bigotry of heterosexual soldiers.


Jane-Iris Farhi And James Barron
Dr.
Jane-Iris Farhi, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Jean-Pierre Farhi of New York, was married yesterday at the Princeton University Chapel in Princeton, N.J., to James Turman Barron, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
James P. Barron of Lynchburg, Va.
The Rev.
Sue Anne Morrow, a United Methodist minister who is an associate dean of religious life at Princeton, officiated.
Rabbi Shimon L. Berris took part in the ceremony.
Mrs.
Barron, who will continue to be known professionally as Dr.
Farhi, is a cardiologist in New York.
She is also a clinical instructor in cardiology at the Mount Sinai School of Medicine and an associate instructor in clinical medicine at Columbia University.
She graduated summa cum laude from Barnard College, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa, and received her medical degree from Harvard University.


Body Bags at 11
SIRENS BLEAT, BODIES float, suspects cringe, victims weep.
Celebrities preen and promote.
Anchors chat and emote.
It's local news time: normally 30 minutes of hell and blather, ads and promos, weather and sports, starting at 9, 10 or 11 -- local television's most profitable time of night and its most disheartening use of the air.
There are exceptions, of course, here and there, one night or another.
But in most of America, whatever channel you watch, the late news is obsessed with crime and disaster, encouraging fear or smug comfort, or both.
It assails the mind but offers nothing much to think about -- not even about crime, war and disaster.
No helpful assessments of the police or local hospital.
Almost nothing about education except some school shooting.
Nothing about housing except some landlord's venality.
Nothing about traffic except some flaming collision.
Much less anything reflective about politics, economics, foreign affairs.


Habits of Highly Effective Authors
THE best-selling business books this month run heavily to common sense and spirituality.
But only a churl would mention that those two themes seem contradictory.
The style and substance of the books, all on The New York Times Book Review's Best Seller List, range widely.
At the very top of the hardcover pile sits the homey and populist "Beardstown Ladies' Common-Sense Investment Guide." Readers who yearn for a time when the word "derivative" meant a Brian De Palma movie will appreciate the sensible advice of the Illinois housewives and their now-famous investment club.
Not to mention the recipe for "Shirley's Stock Market Muffins (Guaranteed to Rise!)."


This Is the House That Greed Built
THEY swelter in the dust and the filth of the colonias, the poorest communities in America's poorest counties, often without even the indoor toilets that most of us take for granted.
Yet the Mexican immigrants who crowd these squalid settlements along the Texas border are also a source of wealth -- for the colonia owners and developers.
Buying cheap land, sometimes for a few hundred dollars an acre, sometimes in flood plains for much less, politically powerful developers can resell it for thousands or tens of thousands of dollars an acre to immigrants who struggle to build houses on their plots, board by board.
Some developers reap hundreds of thousands of dollars a year.


Indiana Jones Comes To Disneyland
Disneyland's newest attraction, "Indiana Jones Adventure," opened last month, with waits for the ride up to two or three hours, according to a park spokesman.
The attraction is based on themes from the Indiana Jones movie series.
Cars styled to look like military troop transports take riders on a four-minute expedition through the Temple of the Forbidden Eye into an encounter with the deity Mara.
Indiana Jones himself makes an appearance in an attempt to keep the expedition on track and out of danger, but the temple god takes his revenge on the intruders, forcing them to flee through a series of perilous chambers.


Pleasing Voices That Tell Gritty Tales
THE VOICES ARE GIRLISH AND BLITHE, ON top of the world.
The guitars chime and push, promising buoyant, catchy pop-rock.
But the songs aren't so single-mindedly eager to please.
"Beware of me," Tanya Donelly coos, sweet as a lullaby, on Belly's second album, "King." "You forgot to rip my heart out before you let me go," Juliana Hatfield sings on her new album, "Only Everything." She adds, "A heartbeat says you haven't died."
Donelly and Hatfield are comparatively old hands at the newest wavelet of alternative rock, in which bright female voices and insistent guitars carry non-pop tidings.
Along with their peers, they know how to use pop's allure without accepting its superficiality.
They sound friendly, but they're not pushovers; they're assertive without getting nasty.
Many reject being grouped as "women in rock," but theirs is one idiom male rockers can't seem to match without sounding coy or mannered.


THE MASTERPIECES THEY CALL HOME
Goldberger focused on a small group of clients who wanted their homes to make a very special statement -- and could afford to pay through the nose for it!
However, the thrust of the article strongly implied that hiring any architect to design any home has become "a sport of the rich." This certainly isn't the case.


Emily S. Goldberg, Brett T. Goodman
Emily Sue Goldberg, the daughter of Nancy and Irvin Goldberg of Livingston, N.J., is to be married there today to Brett Todd Goodman, the son of Sandra and Leonard Goodman, also of Livingston.
Rabbi Peter E. Kasdan is to perform the ceremony at Temple Emanu-El.
Ms.
Goldberg, 26, is keeping her name.
She graduated magna cum laude from Brandeis University and received a master's degree in French studies from New York University.
She is a candidate at Columbia University for a master's degree in teaching English to speakers of other languages.


The King of the Strings: A Concert Master's Craft
IT is 7:50 P.M., 10 minutes before the New York Philharmonic concert starts, and patrons are taking their seats in Avery Fisher Hall at Lincoln Center.
Backstage, the scene is silent and tense.
The Westminster Symphonic Choir dashes for the stage in a seemingly endless single file.
The only sound is the rustle of their skirts and white-tie coats.
Members of the orchestra head for the stage through a different entrance.
A nervous music librarian peeks out one last time to make sure all the color-coded music sheets are on the right stands.
Clutching a Guarnarius del Gesu violin by its neck, Glenn Dicterow, the concert master, waits nervously backstage for the rest to take their seats.
Soon he is the only musician left.
Peering at the audience, Mr.
Dicterow takes a deep breath.


Shadowy Alliance -- A special report.; In Guatemala's Dark Heart, C.I.A. Lent Succor to Death
Adjacent to La Aurora Air Base in Guatemala City, the workplace of Col.
Julio Roberto Alpirez, a C.I.A. informer linked to two murders, stands a new military intelligence school, a two-story concrete building flanked by high walls and barbed wire and guarded by 30-foot towers and soldiers armed with Israeli Galil rifles.
The school was built with the encouragement and financial help of the Central Intelligence Agency, said Gen.
Hector Gramajo, Guatemala's Defense Minister from 1987 to 1990.
"I got a lot of help from United States Central Intelligence," General Gramajo said.


Dream Final Is a Reality: UConn vs. Tennessee
You had to see today's Connecticut-Stanford game to believe how fired up a women's basketball team could be.
UConn, playing at a race-horse pace, decimated a tall, strong and talented Stanford team, 87-60, in the semifinals of the National Collegiate Athletic Association tournament.
Now only Tennessee, a marvelous team itself, stands between Connecticut and perfection.
In the first semifinal, Tennessee had everything it needed -- court savvy, speed, decent shooting, dedicated defense and superior rebounding.
The overflow crowd of 18,048 watched the Lady Vols breeze to a 73-51 victory over Georgia.


The View From: Storrs; Amid Lush Foliage, Hundreds of Orchids
THE temperature outside was 35 degrees.
A biting wind whipped down the sidewalk and tugged at a red neck scarf.
But relief was nearby.
Inside the University of Connecticut's biology greenhouses was a world of gardens and the sweet fragrance of orchids and jasmine.
Behind the plain aluminum door, dabs of sunlight fell on the huge waxy leaves of a banana tree.
Passion flowers bloomed in the warm, moist air.
The nepenthes, a carnivorous plant that resembles a green Greek urn dangling on a vine, waited to trap and digest insects.


THE MASTERPIECES THEY CALL HOME
We are informed by Goldberger that the architects of patronage houses attempt to shock and challenge, to deliberately upset the visual and psychological status quo and appeal to the narcissism of owners.
Nowhere in his article is there a mention of the impact of these bizarre structures on others who are forced to look at them.
Property belongs to individuals but vistas belong to all of us.
As in art, architectural beauty will always be in the eye of the beholder.
And rightly so.
But there must be some room for the sensibilities of the average person who is offended by what seems grotesque and out of place.


A Foreman-Tyson Bout: Just A Heavyweight Pipe Dream?
Suddenly, the heavyweight division has a tantalizing matchup -- maybe the first really good one since Muhammad Ali and Joe Frazier came together almost 25 years ago.
And it is a most unlikely pairing: a 46-year-old, burger-chomping George Foreman against Mike Tyson, a 28-year-old, recently released felon.


Sowing Seeds Of Interest In Other Areas of Agriculture
He's baled hay, driven a tractor and harvested corn, but that's as far as it goes.
Old MacDonald can have his farm; COREY D. FLOURNOY wants no part of that life.
Yet this city kid from Chicago's South Side heads one of the country's largest agricultural groups.
Mr.
Flournoy, a 20-year-old sophomore majoring in agricultural economics at the University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign, recently became president of the National F.F.A.
Organization, known until 1988 as the Future Farmers of America.
He's the first president from a large city and the first black to head the group, which has 428,109 members.


A Foreclosed Co-op in Brooklyn Becoming a Rental
IT is every co-op owner's worst nightmare: The building falls into default on its underlying mortgage.
Then the bank moves to foreclose.
Then the co-op files for bankruptcy.
Then the judge sells the building, effectively liquidating the shareholders' equity and turning every apartment owner into a renter.
Such a scenario is unfolding in Bay Ridge, Brooklyn, where a 106-unit co-op, Hamilton House, which was built as a co-op in 1986, was foreclosed on by Citibank last year after falling behind in payments on its $7.2 million underlying mortgage and filing for bankruptcy.


Markdown; The Selling Of a Used President Gets Easier
FOR two years, Bill Clinton tried hard and looked as if he was trying hard.
He began his Presidency with a flurry of proposals, some carefully thought out, others concocted on the fly, some enacted, some defeated, some abandoned.
On balance, the American people did not much like what they saw.


Balkan Spring
Spring in the Balkans is a bitter season.
Milder weather means renewed fighting as mountain passes reopen and troops move out from winter encampments to resume a war without end.
This year the Bosnian Army has initiated combat, nudging back Serbian positions in northern and central Bosnia.
The Serbs have responded by shelling civilians in at least three of the six refugee-swollen cities under the nominal protection of the United Nations Security Council.
As a result, the four-month cease-fire that Jimmy Carter brokered at the end of last year is unraveling weeks ahead of schedule.
Washington can remind Bosnia of the enormous risks it is taking by breaking the cease-fire.
It can lament the likelihood of increased civilian casualties.
But an outside world that has chosen neither to impose a peace settlement nor to enforce U.N. resolutions protecting civilians in Government-held cities is obliged to restrain its criticisms of Bosnia's decision to resume fighting.


Lamb for Easter And for Passover
THIS year Easter and Passover coincide.
Passover begins at sundown on April 14, Good Friday.
When Easter Sunday occurs two days later, the eight-day Passover celebration will still be in progress.
Although eggs will certainly be served thoughout Passover, they will not by dyed or decorated.
Nor is there likely to be matzoh at Easter Sunday dinners.
But, nonetheless, the coincidence of the two religious events suggests an ecumenical menu suitable for both.


Van's Presence Linked to Drop In Street Crime
The Police Department usually uses its bus-sized command posts as mobile headquarters during riots, disasters and big demonstrations.
But in the 24th Precinct, one such van is being used to fight routine street crime.
Last November, Deputy Inspector John P. McDermott, who was then the precinct's commander, was trying to think of a way to combat the seasonal rise in crime between Thanksgiving and New Year's.
He decided that stationing a police van and its staff on high-crime avenues would deter criminals, and so he borrowed a van from police operations.


When It's Students At Your Service
It was a slow, snowy Tuesday night in the wood-trimmed lounge of the Radisson Airport Hotel in Providence, R.I.
At the bar, several men in business suits bantered with the bartender, while near the kitchen, the wait staff -- a slim, blond woman and a stocky young man with a sculptured haircut -- were deep in conversation.
Was the talk of politics or raises?
TV shows or love lives?
Try academics.
"I've got a final tomorrow," said the woman with a nervous sigh as she folded her green apron.
"I'm outta here."
To the untutored eye, the Radisson looks like any other airport hotel -- big, bland and squeaky clean, with a grand piano on castors in the lobby.
But look again.
There's lots of staff, from a regiment of young men and women in blue blazers behind the check-in desk to a phalax of waiters who often outnumber diners.
The median age appears to be about 20.
And the shoptalk is all about school -- professors, classes and final exams.


Front and Center for Spring
If you're lucky enough to have a raspberry patch and you forgot to cut down the second-year canes after they fruited last year, shame on you.
Do it now!
Thin out weak new canes, trim about a foot off the the stronger ones and tie them to horizontal wires stretched across the patch.
Plant early spring bloomers like violas, pansies, forget-me-nots, English daisies and foxgloves without delay.
If bare-root trees or bushes arrive before you can plant, heel them in temporarily by digging a small trench in a lightly shaded area where the soil is workable, setting the plants in the trench at a 45-degree angle and covering the roots with soil.


You Might as Well Say 'Bon Appetit"
As Congress began to debate the dismantling of the Federal school lunch program, many people looked back at their own school days and said, "Good riddance."
Childhood memories came flooding back -- of squishy spaghetti and gray hamburgers floating in an indefinable liquid.
Some of us remembered the horrors of creamed chipped beef, others the ladies in hairnets who dished out the slop and the vile smell of the school lunchroom itself.


Serena's Song Makes History, Not Derby
She is Serena's Song, the grandest filly in the land, and today she came, she saw, she conquered seven colts in the $600,000 Jim Beam Stakes, the richest prep race for the Kentucky Derby.
But her trainer, D. Wayne Lukas, who already has two of the top three colts in the Derby, said that she would not test them or any other colts in the racing classics.
Instead, she will most probably aim for the Kentucky Oaks on Friday, May 5, while her stablemates Timber Country and Thunder Gulch make the Run for the Roses the next day.


The Temple And Palestinians
Regarding the article about Joel Carmichael  [ "Separating History From Religious Faith," March 19 ] , I note that the writer distorts history when she writes of the Temple at the time of Jesus that it was "the second largest official building in Palestine." The name Palestine did not exist then and was only later to be given by the Romans after the Bar-Kochba rebellion more than 100 years later in order to eradicate the name Judea.
This may seem a minor point.
But at a time when there are persons who call themselves Palestinians and fraudulently identify with New Testament Judea, the point becomes telltale.
DAVID BASCH West Hartford, Conn.


75 Years After His Death, a Composer's Originality Is Honored
IN the Musical Genius Died Young category there are some familiar bright lights: Mozart at 35, Schubert at 31, Bizet at 36 and Gershwin at 39 -- as well as those whose brilliance was just dawning on the world.
The American composer Charles Tomlinson Griffes falls into the latter group.
The Boston Symphony, Philadelphia Orchestra and Cleveland Orchestra all played premieres of his works the year before he died of pneumonia at 35.
Griffes was director of music at the Hackley School here from 1907 until his death in 1920.
Concertgoers know him best, if they know him at all, for works like "The White Peacock," "The Pleasure Dome of Kubla Khan" and "Poem for Flute and Orchestra," music composed in his time off from academic duties.


Hollow Opposition To Health-Care Plan
It is interesting how "Physicians Joining Group Care"  [ Feb. 12 ]  and "G.O.P. Moves Debate to Health Care"  [ Section 1, page 1, Feb. 12 ]  show how hollow was the Republicans' relentless opposition in 1994 to any part of the Clinton health plan.
The cornerstones of that negativism were Government control of health care and the individual's right to choose doctors.
In the article in the Long Island Weekly we get a clear picture of how the "free market" solution to controlling health costs is developing.
It will not be government bureaucracy's dictating terms and extent of treatment, but corporate bureaucrats who will tell doctors what they can and cannot do.


ALSO INSIDE
MAKING IT WORK 3 The king of the strings: the concert master at the New York Philharmonic.
NEW YORKERS &amp; CO. 4  The wedding gown frenzy at Kleinfeld's: a rite of passage for brides-to-be.


Songs, Comedy and a Tribune
Bally's Park Place MAIN BALLROOM Anne Murray, singer.
Today at 8 P.M.
Tickets: $30 and $35.
Ticketmaster, (800) 736-1420.


Pataki Budget for Abortion Includes a Counseling Rule
It has attracted little attention in the budget fight, but Gov.
George E. Pataki included in his fiscal plan a new abortion rule that he had promised during the campaign: that poor women seeking state-supported abortions must first be counseled on methods of birth control, including abstinence.
Supporters of abortion rights argue that the proposal, along with a cut in state money for family planning clinics, underscores what they say is Mr.
Pataki's ambivalence on abortion rights.
They say the counseling singles out poor women for "chastity lectures" that could ultimately discourage them from seeking abortion or birth control.


Hello, Turbotax, I Hope You Can Help Me!
ONE man's problem with too many zeroes has captured the imagination of the technical people who answer questions daily for thousands of perplexed users of Turbotax and Macintax software.
"He complained that he couldn't get the program to accept his income figure," said Mark Allemand, a supervisor at the technical support center here for Intuit, the maker of the popular tax programs.
"Then, he told us his income was in eight digits -- more than $10 million. Our software will only take figures up to $9,999,999."


Yanks' Michael Charged With Drunken Driving
Yankees General Manager GENE MICHAEL and Detroit Lions safety BENNIE BLADES were arrested separately in Fort Lauderdale, Fla., last week by the same deputy on charges of driving while intoxicated.
Blades, a former Miami football star, was arrested Thursday night on Route A1A along the beach.
Michael was arrested Wednesday night in Oakland Park.
Broward County Sheriff's Deputy ROBERT LAHIFF made both arrests, The Sun-Sentinel of Fort Lauderdale reported in yesterday's editions.


Barrette Studies
As clothing becomes simpler in style, decorations are going to the head.
Multiple hair barrettes, often six at a time or more, are being worn as functional embellishments.
Many women mix jeweled barrettes with hair clips, bobby pins and barrettes trimmed with plastic flowers to secure layered and sculptured cuts.
One woman (in two pictures near right) decorated both sides of her hairstyle with a variety of items.
Even longhair pets (bottom, far right) use barrettes to keep hair out of their eyes.


A Pianist and Two Programs in Common
BY a quirk of fate, the chief 3 o'clock competition to David Korevaar's solo recital today is a concert by Hexagon, an ensemble the pianist helped found, and of which he was a longtime member.
There's even a coincidental programming connection: works of Beethoven and Hindemith form the centerpieces at both events.
The solo recital, at the Pequot Library in Southport, is the 36th annual scholarship benefit for the Westport School of Music, where Mr.
Korevaar has been a teacher since 1987.
In addition to Beethoven's "Waldstein" Sonata and Hindemith's 1922 Suite for Piano, the program lists two nocturnes and a barcarolle by Faure; a nocturne, two mazurkas and the third ballade by Chopin.
For more information, call 227-4931.


Titled Bohemian; Caroline Blackwood
WHEN LADY Caroline Blackwood, the Irish writer and Guinness heiress, was living in Paris in the early 1950's, she and her first husband, the painter Lucian Freud, were invited to visit Picasso.
"Picasso got one of his followers to ask Lucian if he would like to see Picasso's paintings," Blackwood says.


Who Needs a House? Try a Dorm
Some professors would never sell a home of 18 years in a quiet neighborhood to move into a two-bedroom dormitory unit with windows that overlook a frisbee end zone -- not even if their housing expenses were limited to long distance phone calls.
"A lot of my colleagues think that we're nuts," Prof.
HARVEY BLANKESPOOR of Hope College in Holland, Mich., said with a laugh.
"Maybe we are."


Just Superheroes Sticking Up for the Homestead
Tall Tale: The Unbelievable Adventures of Pecos Bill  Nick Stahl, Patrick Swayze Directed by Jeremiah Chechik PG 98 minutes


Day-Care Choice: Cost Or Quality
WHEN her son was born three years ago, Diane Charton Karsch set out to find the best child care that money could buy.
"It's not that the dollars didn't matter," said Mrs.
Karsch, a Mount Kisco resident who is an account executive for a public relations concern.
"And it wasn't like I was going back to work for pin money, because we had a mortgage to pay. But even though some options were cheaper, I wouldn't consider them."


Casino Seek Out Minorities And Women
The Casino Control Act requires casinos to spend at least 15 percent of their budget for goods and services with companies led by women and minorities.
In 1993, only four casinos met that goal.
Last year, all 12 did.


Razorbacks (1 Title) and Bruins (10) Try for Another
By now we should get the message.
The Arkansas Razorbacks are just much too comfortable being uncomfortable.
"You can't be lucky," said Nolan Richardson, the coach of the Razorbacks, "if you don't put yourself in position to be lucky."
They have overcome the imperfections that have not been tolerated for a defending national champion with five returning starters.
The Razorbacks have put themselves in position to play for the national collegiate championship the same way they have advanced through the harrowing defense of their title -- the hard way.


DeRiggi Had Opposed Incinerator-Sewer Plant
In 1993, Glen Cove Mayor Donald DeRiggi won the election as a Nassau County judge  [ "Glen Cove Tries to Stop Contractor From Reopening City Incinerator," March 12 ] .
In 1991, the only time that Donald P. DeRiggi and Thomas R. Suozzi faced each other as opposing candidates, Mr.
DeRiggi was elected Mayor of Glen Cove.
Ironically, in the late 1970's, before the plant was built, Mr.
DeRiggi had opposed the planned construction, urging that Glen Cove's sewer system be connected to the facility maintained by Nassau County.
The city government, under the leadership of Mayor Vincent Suozzi, opted instead to build a co-disposal plant at a cost of about $40 million.
In the co-disposal design, the incinerator burns the residue from the sewage-treatment system, supplying electricity in the process.
If the incinerator does not operate, the sewage-treatment plant still remains.
The City of Glen Cove must then pay for power and for the disposal of sludge, at an additional cost estimated at over $1 million a year.


Past Not the Issue
To the Sports Editor:
Within "Lewis's Night Now Is Tainted" (The Times, March 22) are several reports from various sources concerning Reggie Lewis.
These informants comment on Lewis's cocaine usage, and I really feel there is no need to pursue the matter.


A Shot at Fame Via the Folks Back at School
While other struggling actors in New York City are waiting tables, tending bar and dreaming of the big time, the TODD THEATRE TROUPE, formed at the University of Rochester, has a head start.
The troupe's seven members, all 1990's graduates from around the country, are now working as a resident company at La Mama E.T.C., where they are given free rehearsal and performance space on a project-by-project basis.
Their production costs are paid by the University of Rochester's theater program, whose director, Mervyn Willis, has had a 25-year relationship with La Mama as an actor and director.
Ellen Stewart, the theater's founder and artistic director, invited the troupe to perform there.


Michelle A. Miller, James S. Keller
Michelle Ann Miller, a daughter of Patricia and Ronald Miller of Chicago, was married there last evening to James Scott Keller, a son of Jacqueline and Dr.
Barnes Keller of East Brunswick, N.J.
Rabbi Bennett Miller performed the ceremony at the Hotel Inter-Continental.
Mrs.
Keller is an assistant product director at Johnson &amp; Johnson Consumer Products in Skillman, N.J.
She graduated from Colgate University and she and her husband received M.B.A.'s from the University of Pennsylvania.
Her father is the senior partner of Miller, Shakman, Adelman, Hamilton, Kurtzon &amp; Schlifke, a Chicago law firm.
Her mother is a trader at William Blair &amp; Company, securities brokers there.


Ever Flowering, Even in the Autumn Of Their Years
THE MUSES ARE FICKLE AND do not pause to explain their caprices.
Seemingly promising writers, painters, composers and choreographers can drearily repeat themselves or vanish into obscurity.
Therefore, when, year after year, inspiration keeps returning, any artist so rewarded is truly blessed.
Last month, New York audiences could marvel at the achievements of three modern-dance choreographers who have been triumphant survivors.
These hardy perennials not only managed to hang on, but their talents continued to develop.
They differ in terms of the themes they favor and the styles in which they are at ease.
What they share is unquenchable creative fervor.


Tinkering With the Education of Engineers
At PENNSYLVANIA STATE UNIVERSITY, students are taking apart toasters, dismantling bikes, breaking down lawn mowers -- all to build better engineers.
Some professors say that in the age of video games, fewer kids are treating their toys this way.
So while some parents cobble together thousands for engineering school, some schools are cobbling together courses like Penn State's Product Dissection.


Tale of a Two-Headed Trout, Fly-Fishing and Baseball
In the observation of a half-century tradition, New York fly-fisherfolk gathered Friday night near the Junction Pool of the Beaverkill for the annual Two-Headed Trout dinner.
Begun in the 1940's by the former New York Timesman Red Smith, the original group of diners included fly-fishing pioneer Lee Wulff and A. J. McClane, who was perhaps the greatest American angling author of all time -- if you don't count Ernest Hemingway.
Over the years the dinner party grew, taking over all of the tables in the Antrim Inn, a wonderful Catskills roadhouse that went out of business a few years ago.
The party and the trout have since moved to the nearby Rockland House and yes, the trout does have two heads, but savvy anglers have long suspected a taxidermist's subterfuge.


To Our Readers
Starting today, the suggested Sunday newsstand price of The Times in the greater New York area increases to $2.50.
The change results from a sharp rise in the cost of paper.
The Times's weekday price is unchanged.


New Golf Courses In the Caribbean
For handicappers heading to the Caribbean, three new golf courses have opened within the last year.
The par 71 Tierra del Sol, an 18-hole course designed by Robert Trent Jones Jr., is on the northwest coast of Aruba, within view of the Caribbean.
The course, which opened in January, is landscaped with cactus and other native flora.
Ten hotels on Aruba have access to the course; players can also make arrangements through the pro shop in the club house.
A round of golf is $110 for 18 holes with a cart.
Rental for a standard set of clubs is $25.
Information: 2978-67800.


Full Steam Ahead
Spring chicken and lamb, young harbingers of the season, are much more tender than their elders.
Spring pickings, on the other hand -- asparagus and watercress shoots, field spinach, pea sprouts and wild morels -- are much more insistent.
Which makes it all the more imperative that the cook find an emphatic method to retain the ephemeral flavor of spring.
Sauteing and flash frying are two such ways.
So are steaming and blanching, moist techniques particularly suited to the season since they neither add nor detract from the ingredients.


BEHIND THE WHEEL/General Motors Impact; Future Shock: Driving an Electric Prototype
FINGERS point and mouths gape when the Impact, General Motors' prototype electric car, glides by.
Even blase New Yorkers stare at the futuristic coupe from sidewalks or crane their necks from their plain old gasoline-powered cars.
Ninety years ago, it must have been like this to drive a horseless carriage.
"How fast will it go?" they ask. "How far?" And, "How much?"


Coalitions Are Squaring Off For School Board Elections
WITH county school board elections a little more than a month away, political coalitions with an interest in public education have been busy organizing.
In particular, two groups representing opposite ends of the spectrum have been squaring off, each preparing its own voter's guide to indicate where candidates stand on the issues.
For the second year in a row, questionnaires will be sent to candidates by the Christian Coalition of Westchester, a group that describes itself as a nonpartisan, grass-roots organization representing Judeo-Christian values, and by the Westchester Coalition for Democracy, which says it is a nonpartisan coalition of groups dedicated to upholding democracy and constitutional rights, particularly as they pertain to public schools.


Horse Is an Owner's Dream
IT is the dream of everyone who has ever thrilled to the beauty of a horse competing: you own one yourself, probably a modest purchase with equally modest credentials.
And then a miracle occurs. The horse starts winning and winning. And winning some more.


Corrections
Because of editing and production errors, an article last Sunday about a New York Times/CBS News poll on the ways Americans save for retirement misstated some findings.
Fifty-three percent of those asked, not 40 percent, said they expect company pensions or Social Security to be the major source of their retirement income.
Three-fourths of those with investments, not two-thirds, said they rarely buy or sell their stocks or shift money between mutual funds.
Sixty percent said they found it hard to keep up with their bills, not that they were never out of debt.
People earning $50,000 a year or more are most likely to have savings; they do not constitute a majority of those with savings.


Cleanliness Is Next to Chic-ness
WHAT: The designer bar of soap, a luxury bath accessory produced by companies like Ralph Lauren and Calvin Klein, and most recently by Banana Republic and Gap Scents.
Many come with traveling cases or special soap dishes that fit the bar's specific shape. 101 MORE USES FOR THE BATH: Designer soaps are part of a larger trend toward more luxurious bath rituals, said Allan G. Mottus, an independent consultant to the cosmetics industry.
The bathroom is increasingly being seen as a place to unwind from a stressful day, and homeowners are upgrading bathrooms with additions like Jacuzzis and multihead showers.
Bathing or showering two or three times a day has also become more common, especially with the physically and socially active, said Lois Mander, a spokeswoman at Ralph Lauren Fragrances.
These groups often bathe once in the morning, again after working out and maybe once more before going out at night.
THE IMPORTANCE OF BEING SOAP: Specialty soaps are both simpler and more advanced than "off the shelf" soaps.
They boast only natural fats and oils, but their formulas also include additives that their manufacturers say distinguish them from lower-priced bars.
The Polo Sport soap, for example, contains luffa particles, and the Safari for Men bar has oatmeal, both to help with exfoliation.
Calvin Klein's Escape for Men soaps have algae extracts for moisturizing.
Glycerine soaps, like those made by Gap Scents, also act as moisturizers.
HOW FAT BECOMES SOAP: The ancient Babylonians began making soap around 2800 B.C. by mixing animal and vegetable fats and oils with plant ashes.
Today, commercial alkalis have replaced plant ashes, and many "soaps" on the drugstore shelves, like Dove, are made mostly of synthetic detergents.
SIGNS OF THE TIMES: For label-conscious consumers, stylish soaps are an inexpensive way to indulge, like designer jeans in the 1970's and couture perfumes in the 80's.
"If you can't actually improve your life style, you take ordinary items and give them the aura of aristocracy," the sociologist Stuart Ewen said.
FOR ONE SEX OR BOTH: Unlike the traditional designer soaps, whose scents have designated them for one sex or the other, the latest ones, like those from Gap Scents and Banana Republic, have gone unisex.
Still, few are economical, even if all members of the household can share them.
Gap, designer to the masses, prices its soap at $2.50 for 5 ounces, or 50 cents an ounce, while Calvin Klein's Eternity comes in at the high end, at $27.50 for three 3-ounce bars -- more than $3 an ounce. (A 7-ounce bar of Ivory costs around $1.) MAKING THE GRADE: Although they're proliferating, designer soaps make up only 5 to 10 percent of the $1.6 billion soap industry, said Eric Jungermann, a consultant to the soap industry.
Antibacterial soaps like Dial, in comparison, make up 35 percent of all soaps sold nationwide.
"Specialty soaps may be high-quality natural soaps with a better finish," Mr.
Jungermann said, "but they're not more effective. A good soap is a good soap." At a time when flesh-eating bacteria make the cover of news magazines and the recent top-grossing movie "Outbreak" is about a highly contagious killer virus, perhaps it's no wonder that the latest product to flex its muscles is soap.
MICHELLE SHIH


Thousands Mourn Slain Singer Selena
A prominent lawyer, a Congressman and a State Senator paid tribute tonight to Selena, the 23-year-old diva of Tejano music who was shot to death on Friday, but it was a 7-year-old who moved the crowd of 3,000 most profoundly.
"I love Selena in my heart and will never let her go," said the girl, Crystal Hernandez of Corpus Christi, who was just barely visible behind the lectern.


Software; Logging On to Learning,From Typing to Health Tips
We live in an age of convergence.
First banks and insurance companies, then cable television and the telephone.
Now the Scholastic Assessment Test has inspired software that resembles a video game.
From the Nintendolike opening music and cartoonlike characters to the tips on how to beat the odds and the irreverent interactive lessons, "Inside the S.A.T.," by the Princeton Review, tries to take the pain and fear out of one of the most awesome rituals of American life by turning it into just another computer game.


Shouts and Murmurs
GENIUS IN DISGUISE Harold Ross of The New Yorker.
By Thomas Kunkel.
Illustrated. 497 pp.
New York: Random House. $25.


Journal; AIDS on the Air
Less than a decade ago William F. Buckley was proposing that "everyone detected with AIDS" be tattooed on the buttocks.
Time has certainly marched on.
This week Mr.
Buckley's National Review will publish a memoir called "Positively HIV" in which David Brudnoy, the conservative ratings champ of New England talk radio and a National Review contributor since 1968, graphically describes his own near-death experience with AIDS last fall and the subsequent outpouring of affection with which his audience greeted the revelation of both his illness and his homosexuality.
Not that everyone has been supportive.
Mr.
Brudnoy writes that "most conservatives take a dim view of homosexual activity" and that "some conservatives" now feel "that the Brudnoy they thought was on their side must be a fraud because homosexuals can't be conservative."


SUNDAY, April 2, 1995; STUFF: Making A Better Mess
Anyone who didn't find coffee spilled on the mortgage payment yesterday didn't really experience April Fool's Day.
At least not in the way made possible by Jeremy Sage and Thomas Garbutt.
The two spillmasters, who own Jeremy's Place, a store on Manhattan's Upper East Side, were dissatisfied with the standard cookie-cut vomit and plastic-looking doggy do.


Grad Students Plan Walkout To Seek Recognition as a Union
In a move that could disrupt humanities and social science classes, hundreds of Yale University graduate students say they plan to walk off their jobs as teaching assistants on Monday to press their demand for the right to unionize.
University administrators say they will never accept a graduate student union.
The graduate teaching assistants lead weekly discussion sections for lecture courses and teach introductory foreign language and freshman English classes.


Taps for March as April Readies Its Foolery


Informer Explains Boastful Lies but Holds to His Tale of Terror
For the last two weeks, the Government's main witness in the terror conspiracy trial of Sheik Omar Abdel Rahman and 10 others has acknowledged how he routinely lied about his past.
Still, the Government is depending on him to help prove its case.
Emad A. Salem, 45, a former Egyptian military officer, has told jurors in Federal District Court in Manhattan how he spun a web of lies to impress Americans, among them F.B.I. agents, to whom he boasted about working for Egyptian intelligence.
And while the F.B.I. had doubts about Mr.
Salem, the agency used him to infiltrate the group of Islamic defendants who, prosecutors say, conspired to wage a war of terrorism against the United States.


An Old Japanese Custom
To the Editor:
In his essay "Art in Aisle 3, by Lingerie, and Feel Free to Browse"  [ March 19 ] , Michael Kimmelman writes that the "relationship between department stores and art museum is characteristically American."


Witness for the Defense
In Paris in January, Rei Kawakubo presented her Comme des Garcons men's collection for fall, titled "Sleep." An assortment of striped pajamas worn with sweaters, jackets and bathrobe coats, it was, she said, her attempt to revive lounge wear, which had once been an important category in the gentleman's wardrobe.
The date assigned to Kawakubo for her show was, as it happened, the 50th anniversary of the liberation of Auschwitz, and two critics saw in the striped pajamas a reminder of the Nazi death camps.
Their outraged reviews, in Le Figaro and The International Herald Tribune, prompted a visit to the Comme des Garcons showroom by members of the European Jewish Congress and a spate of articles denouncing Kawakubo as, at best, an unwitting anti-Semite.
As a gesture of conciliation, she withdrew the pajamas from the line.
Other items in the collection had been stenciled with numerals, randomly scattered, and with footprints.
For those of us in the audience that evening in January, the Holocaust connection was one of many possible interpretations, and a highly subjective one, at that.
Some spectators saw the show as a late-night get-together at a boys' dormitory.
Others were dismayed by the overtones of emergency, as if the models had been wakened in the middle of the night.
To my mind, they looked like insomniac patients roaming a hospital ward.
"There is no meaning," Kawakubo insisted, and, indeed, the body of her work has been abstract -- a formal exercise.


4 Months After Robbery, Bike Shop Is Still Picking Up Pieces
In his mind, Gerald Browne still smells the acrid odor of gunpowder and hears his silent goodbyes to unseen loved ones.
Roy Beatong jolts awake at night, shaken and sweating.
And Neil Ir, the owner of Frenchie's Cycle World in Canarsie, Brooklyn, still hears that chilling phone call of four months ago, when his store and his workers, Mr.
Browne and Mr.
Beatong, came under attack.
Mr.
Ir says he retains "an inability to fathom how someone is ready to eliminate you for a piece of metal" -- a bike.


Ideas &amp; Trends; Searching for the Quick Fix
IN medicine, particularly at the fuzzy boundaries where medical science meets the unknown, the knife has long been the patients'  therapy of choice.
Back in the mid-1970's, a rigorous test began on coronary bypass surgery.
The study, established by the National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute, was to compare drugs with surgery, evaluating whether patients lived longer or felt better after the expensive operation.


Schedulers, It Appears, Are in a Box
A FEW YEARS AGO, NEARLY EVERY MUSICAL institution in new York was in transition, and almost anything seemed possible.
Kurt Masur was taking over the New York Philharmonic; the 92d Street Y was re-examining its commitment to classical music; the Brooklyn Academy of Music was redesigning its house orchestra; Lincoln Center was seeking a new director of programming, and Carnegie Hall was beefing up its educational activities.
Indeed, the concert world itself was in crisis: art music was becoming increasingly marginal in a society preoccupied with entertainment.
That crisis continues unabated, but the sense of open-ended possibility has vanished.
To judge from the accumulating announcements of programming for next season, most institutions now display a restraint that verges on constraint: surprise seems deliberately avoided; convention and habit are cultivated.


Rebuilding Glamour in Berlin
EARLY in the movie "Cabaret," the aspiring singer Sally Bowles, played by Liza Minnelli, dresses in a smashing tuxedo and pulls on white gloves as she prepares to meet her father, a debonair world traveler who is swooping into Berlin to dazzle her for an evening.
"Well, I'm off to the Adlon!" she announces with a broad smile.
In Berlin during the first half of this century, the Adlon Hotel was a swirl of romance and intrigue, the place where the most glamorous parties were held and where the most important and exciting people stayed.
At the hotel bar, the actor Emil Jannings told the director Josef von Sternberg that he had discovered a cabaret performer named Marlene Dietrich, whose impact he compared to "an erotic earthquake." When Enrico Caruso was a guest, he came down with a throat infection and was treated with special concoctions prepared by Auguste Escoffier, the hotel's legendary chef.


PHOTOGRAPHER'S JOURNAL


Drowning in The Second Wave
"We are feeling the impact of the third great wave of change in history, and we are, as a result, in the process of creating a new civilization," writes the Speaker of the House in his foreword to "Creating a New Civilization: The Politics of the Third Wave," by his favorite futurists, Heidi and Alvin Toffler (published by the Progress and Freedom Foundation, Newt Gingrich's think-tank).
It is Mr.
Gringrich's credo.
On his second day as Speaker, he issued Toffler-inspired marching orders to the House Ways and Means Committee: "I would suggest to you and to your staff, and to the witnesses you bring in, that about every policy we should ask the question, 'Does it accelerate our transition into a third wave information age, or does it slow it down?"


Where Schooling Happens on Location
WANTED: Teachers.
"The company is actually an outgrowth of my own interests: acting and teaching," said Alan Simon of Chappaqua, who founded On Location in 1982.
"I'm a former teacher who always wanted to be an actor. Finally, I left teaching to act full time, and I worked on the summer circuit and in Off Off Broadway shows for a number of years."


Streetscapes/Central Synagogue; A $500,000 Restoration of an 1872 Masterwork
THE 1,500-seat Central Synagogue, one of the most spectacular houses of worship in New York City, is a rare surviving example of early Victorian religious architecture.
Construction sheds are now going up for a $500,000 restoration of the building's 1872 stone exterior.
Central Synagogue, originally known as Ahawath Chesed, was founded in 1846 by immigrants from Prague and the nearby regions of what was then Bohemia.
In 1864 the congregation took over an old church building at Avenue C and Fourth Street, and by 1869 it had decided to move uptown.


Maloney Takes Stock of Hockey for Fox From Seat in a Hollywood Studio
Dave Maloney, the former Rangers captain and an inveterate chatterbox, walked the few blocks to lunch from his office at Bear Stearns &amp; Company, where he is a managing director.
He toted a briefcase containing a summary of which stocks the investment firm was recommending.
First on the list: News Corporation.
A few days before, Maloney signed a deal to be the studio analyst for Fox's National Hockey League coverage, which begins today.
Fox is owned by News Corporation, which is controlled by Rupert Murdoch.


QUIZ
Real events become reel events when Hollywood spins a tale from a true story.
And film biographies are among the industry's best; many have been nominated for Academy Awards.
Test your knowledge of the men and women whose lives made history -- on and off the screen. 1.
"The Barretts of Wimpole Street" portrayed the love story of a pair of 19th century poets.
Their romance inspired a once frail and shy woman to write one of the most famous declarations of love in the English language, a sonnet that begins, "How do I love thee? Let me count the ways."


Safety Note
Fire officials recommend changing the batteries in smoke alarms twice a year, when daylight saving time starts and ends.
This spring, that is today.


Cut, Print, Wrap, Bye Now . . . Wait! Let's Make Another One
WHAT CAN A screenwriter, a film director and a star do when they become so fascinated with the characters they have created that they can't bear to let go of them?
If the screenwriter is the novelist Paul Auster, the director Wayne Wang and the star Harvey Keitel, they simply extend the shooting schedule five days, call on some big-name actors willing to work on short notice, for far less than their usual pay, and improvise a quick second film.
Both films -- the one that was planned and the one that was unexpectedly born on the set -- were given their world premiere in February at the Berlin Film Festival.
"Smoke," which won the second prize, or Special Jury Prize, at the festival, will open in the United States in June (the first prize went to "L'Appat," in English "Fresh Bait," by Bernard Tavernier).
The second film, "Blue in the Face," opens in the fall.


Seles Is a Surprise Guest
MONICA SELES, out of tennis since being stabbed during a match in April 1993, made a surprise appearance yesterday for the dedication of a $3 million indoor tennis center at the College of William &amp; Mary in Williamsburg, Va.
The McCormack-Nagelsen Tennis Center is named for MARK McCORMACK, a William &amp; Mary alumnus whose International Management Group represents Seles and McCormack's wife, the former tennis player BETSY NAGELSEN.
McCormack footed much of the bill for the facility.


The Urban Imagination, Run Wild


On Helping Patients Who Lose Their Way
Re the Connecticut Q&amp;A with the Rev.
Dr.
Jeffrey H. Boyd, "Psychiatrist and Explorer of the Soul" (March 12).
Unfortunately Dr.
Boyd permits his role as minister to distort his role as a psychiatrist.
He believes that an atheist can't find a meaning in life, and thus implies that they are doomed to eternal suffering.
Apparently he would strive to convert his atheistic patient to his form of religion.
I do not need Dr.
Boyd or his God to teach me to love my fellow man, to seek justice, to hold humanness as a great treasure.
Nor do I try to change my patients' religious or non-religious views.


THE MASTERPIECES THEY CALL HOME
The article "The Masterpieces They Call Home" skirts the edge of a compelling reason for the wealthy to pour millions into houses.
One should complete the statement ". . . . in the evolution of our cities . . ." by adding, "a building is about the only art that cannot be stolen."


Variety of Materials To Frame Pictures
Mat boards  [ "Home Clinic, "Picture Frames' 2 Sides: Esthetic and Utilitarian," Feb. 5 ]  come in several varieties and are not necessarily cardboard. There are three basic types of mats, paper, acid-free museum grade and cotton-rag museum grade. The article points out that corrugated cardboard should not be used as a backing board to mount art work. This is also true of the mat that will be lying on top of the art.
Most conservators would recommend cotton-rag board for both the top mats and backing, since they are inherently pH neutral.
However most of the treated boards, acid-free museum grade, have been buffered to resist acids from air pollution and outgassing from other framing materials.
The bottom line is that the choice of materials depends on the value of the art work, the esthetics of the presentation and the budget.


Grab That Rake, Tackle Those Weeds
ROCUSES have bloomed.
So have the snowdrops.
Early tulips and the first daffodils are beginning to show their colors.
In short, the spring bloom parade has warmed up.
And gardeners who have not done the usual seasonal cleanup ritual had better get cracking.
Because from now on, things will start happening at a rapid pace.


The Hard Part: Keeping Lotto Good Fortune From Going Bad
MARY ANN SHERIDAN has been styling hair for half her life, but she only recently started giving free haircuts to millionaires.
Standing over a folding stool in her small kitchen, Mrs.
Sheridan uses an electric clipper to put the finishing touches on a trim for her son, Ron.
Before she sweeps up, she has to turn off the washing machine so Ron, who is 24, can shower without being scalded.


2d Man Freed Because Evidence Was Faked
A man who was convicted of beating an elderly man unconscious has been set free after a retrial in Ithaca, N.Y., that focused on state police efforts to fabricate fingerprint evidence against him.
Mark Prentice, who served six and half years in prison for burglary and the assault of an 81-year-old man, is the second person to be freed as a result of a state police evidence-tampering scandal that has led to the conviction of four troopers.


Assessing a Fund's Risk Is Part Math, Part Art
HOW many Americans head down to a car dealership to buy a mini-van, only to end up with a sporty Miata by mistake?
That may sound preposterous.
But the investing equivalent happens all the time with mutual funds -- as financial advisers and Federal regulators are all too aware.
Doubters need look only at the lawsuits filed recently by disgruntled bond fund owners who say their investments were described as safe.


A Campus Service Is Also Helping Men Get Home Safely
After 14 years of helping female students get home without trouble, the Indiana University Student Association Safety Escort Program is now ferrying men, too.
The service provides van rides and pedestrian escorts both on and off the Bloomington, Ind., campus.
All students pay a $1.17 fee toward its $72,900 budget, said Lisa Carter, a graduate student who directs the program.


Big Hurdle for the Tax Bill: the 'Rule'
Divisions among Republicans over their tax-cut bill, which faces a fight when the House of Representatives considers it in the coming week, have put the spotlight on the House Rules Committee, one of the most powerful and, to outsiders, most obscure institutions in Congress.
The crucial vote next week will be not on the tax bill itself but on what is called a rule, a procedural resolution that determines which amendments, if any, members will be allowed to debate -- and thus limits how much the legislation can change before a final vote.
The rule, prepared by the Rules Committee, must be approved before the House can consider the bill itself.


Susan Greenbaum And Ira Gross
Susan Leslie Greenbaum, the daughter of Joseph and Ellen Greenbaum of Upper Montclair, N.J., was married last evening to Ira Neil Gross, a son of Arnold and Ruth Gross of Springfield, N.J.
Rabbi Martin Freedman performed the ceremony at Preakness Hills Country Club in Wayne, N.J.
Mrs.
Gross, 32, graduated from Lehigh University.
She is the operations manager of Greenbaum Interiors, a furniture and interior design company owned by her father, in Paterson and Morristown, N.J.
Her mother manages the company's wholesale division.


N.C.A.A. TOURNAMENT: Sports of The Times; Arkansas Back in the Final; What a Surprise
REPEAT after me: there are no strangers in the Final Four these days.
Nolan Richardson would have you believe his Arkansas team is a rank outsider, but his cover story is rapidly being dissipated.
Outsiders do not demoralize Dean Smith's North Carolina team the way Arkansas did yesterday, 75-68, to reach the final of the national basketball tournament again.
Arkansas won it last year and Richardson kept insisting he and his team did not get respect, but their tenacious defense and disciplined offense is giving them away.


Drinking Pals


Maria J. Bianco, Richard M. Golick
Maria Jean Bianco, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas C. Bianco of Atlanta, was married there last evening to Richard Marshall Golick, the son of Judith S. Golick of Great Neck, L.I., and Ronald A. Golick of Las Vegas, Nev.
Rabbi Fred Davidow officiated, and Msgr.
R.
Donald Kiernan took part in the ceremony at Callanwolde, a historic home.


Blind Faith Leads Down a Tragic Path
It began as a love story.
A decade ago, Susan Anne Smith was lonely living in Lakeside Manor, an adult home on Staten Island.
"Sometimes I couldn't sleep and she couldn't sleep," a friend recalled.
On those nights, Susan Smith would talk about how she had always wanted to get married.


Republican Governors Working With Congress to Shift Medicaid Authority to States
Republican governors and the Republican leaders of Congress are negotiating major changes in Medicaid that would limit the soaring cost of the program and vastly increase the states' power over it.
The proposal, if adopted, would give the states new authority in deciding eligibility, benefits and methods of paying doctors and hospitals for the care of 36 million low-income people.


TO OUR READERS
This is the first issue of New Jersey, a new weekly section that will help New Jerseyans navigate life in their home state.
The section, which succeeds the New Jersey Weekly, will provide enhanced coverage of New Jersey with new features and formats, as well as color photographs and illustrations.


GOING ON 300


DIARY
AUTOS It Ain't Broke, but Fix It Chrysler's message to mini-van owners, apparently, is this: Your tailgate latches are not a safety hazard, but come in and we'll replace them -- free.
Huh?
Why not replace the perfectly good headlights while they're at it?
You'd be excused for finding Chrysler's deal with regulators a bit convoluted, but it all comes down to that ugly word "recall." Even though 29 deaths have been linked to the latches' tendency to pop open in crashes, Chrysler didn't want this to be an official recall, and it got its way.
A recall, you see, wouldn't look too great in some coming lawsuits.
But how, asked one safety advocate, do you get van owners to come in if you're "telling them there is no hazard"? (Don't rush in, by the way -- it'll take months to build enough latches.) BANKING  The Biggest Get Bigger  Nomination for understatement of the week: a merger with the Mitsubishi Bank would, in the words of the Bank of Tokyo's president, "make an interesting bank." Interesting, that is, as in huge.
The merger of those Japanese banks will create, by far, the world's largest bank -- with $819 billion in assets, it will have more than three times the assets of the not exactly tiny Citicorp -- and 100 times the assets of Bill Gates.
Will life change for the rest of the world?
Not really.
Japan's always had the bank giants, and those banks have been trimming overseas activities, and that's not expected to change.
In California, though, Union Bank is 70 percent owned by Bank of Tokyo, and Bank of California is owned by Mitsubishi.
No doubt either they'll be merged or one will be sold.
UPHEAVALS  Will the Flag's Colors Be Next?
Americans face a wrenching adjustment.
No, it isn't the death of the New Deal, the fall of Communism.
It's -- brace yourself -- the colors of M&amp;M's, a constant for nearly half a century.
M&amp;M's were born in 1941, in six colors (brown, yellow, red, orange, green and violet).
In 1949, tan replaced violet, and that mix outlasted Elvis, Liberace, even Nixon.
But Mars Inc. concluded that people don't like tan and ran a poll to pick a new color.
And last week it named the winner: blue (even with Communism dead, people weren't ready for pink; it got just a 10 percent vote).
The new mix is due in September.
In the meantime, save those tans; they'll be collectors' items (if they don't melt).
EXECUTIVE SUITE  Sex. $20 Million.
Read On.
Odd as it may sound, this seems to have been W.R.
Grace's message to J.P.
Bolduc: You've been accused of sexual harassment, so you'd better resign as chief executive, and instead of a $15 million farewell handshake, let's make it $20 million.
Yes, when Mr.
Bolduc quit unexpectedly a month ago, the official version featured executive-suite boilerplate: "differences of style and philosophy." Plus that $5 million bonus.
But last week it turned out that a former Federal judge advising the board had concluded that, though Mr.
Bolduc was vehement in his denials, allegations of sexual harassment were on solid ground.
Add to that the recent resignation of J. Peter Grace as chairman, and it's not exactly a smooth passing of the baton for a $5 billion company.
TELEPHONES  Whose Long-Distance Savings?
Americans must be as sick of hearing about long-distance deals as they are of that Los Angeles trial.
But at least the O.J. lawyers, pro and con, don't call you or mass-mail you or ad-blitz you with the latest twist (well, not yet).
The question now is whether AT&amp;T, MCI et al. will now rush to tell you the latest news -- that the F.C.C. last week cut by $1 billion a year the access charges they must pay local phone companies, the biggest single cost cut since the Bell breakup.
The access charge is a big part of a call's cost -- 4 cents a minute, on each end -- and long-distance companies have been lobbying hard to get them down.
But watch carefully to see if those savings are passed along (or -- horrors! -- pay for even more aggressive marketing).
TRAVEL  Agents' Fees: Never Mind  It's the old story.
Airlines get together and trumpet some historic change, but then, under market pressure, things slip right back where they were.
A few years ago, American, with much huffing and puffing about simplified fares, swept away all the nonsense of having 97 different fares for the same route, and many other carriers piped up, "Me too." But there are no simple skies, and when that became clear, the notion collapsed.
Then this February came a "revolution" in travel agents' fees: No more 10 percent commissions, the airlines said -- the top fee is $50 for a round-trip domestic ticket.
But cracks are already appearing: Continental is offering agents a $50 "bonus payment" for some costly tickets, and Delta's offering incentives, too.
Consumer tip: while this backtracking sorts itself out, don't let yourself get steered to a high-commission fare that's not the best deal.
INCOME TAXES  It's in the Form?
So What?
Tax season wasn't already complicated enough, right?
Tax forms, it seems, say the self-employed can deduct 25 percent of health-insurance costs.
The trouble is, that deduction expired in 1993.
But the I.R.S. put it in the form anyway, assuming it would be reinstated.
Well, it hasn't -- yet.
Why rush?
April 17 is two weeks away.
The House did vote it back in last week, but the Senate has still to act.
If it affects you, better not file till the last minute. . . .
Also, for $250-plus donations, you can now, if necessary, get the required receipt after filing.
MARKETS  Stocks Hit a Bad Bump  The stock market heard what it wanted to hear most of the week, and the Dow industrials bumped to a few more new highs.
First the Fed met without raising interest rates.
Then new-home sales fell 14 percent, to the lowest point in three years -- investors like things cooling off.
But Friday morning the bubble burst, partly because of a report that fourth-quarter G.D.P. had grown at a 5.1 percent rate -- too hot for comfort.
This was compounded by worries about the dollar -- it rose 2 percent on Thursday after Germany cut its interest rates, but traders wanted more.
As a result, the Dow plunged 60 points in the opening minutes, though it later steadied to be off just 14 for the day.
INVESTING  Ready!
Set!
Lose Your Shirt!
Speaking of Barings -- O.K., nobody's spoken of Barings lately; that's why an update is in order.
Nicholas Leeson, who has insisted that he was being a company man when his risky trading brought down Barings, is in a prison in Frankfurt -- that's where he was arrested, en route from Singapore -- as Singapore tries to extradite him on fraud charges.
Back in London, though, a stiff upper lip has curled into a sly grin: The Independent is running a "Lose Your Bearings" contest.
The goal: create an imaginary Asian stock portfolio, and see how much you can lose.
Whoever loses the most by April 4 gets a vacation to Singapore -- with, yes, a stopover in Frankfurt (not, presumably, in handcuffs).


Islanders Recall the Glory Days, Then Return to Reality
There was a lot more to cheer about before this afternoon's game than during it.
The Islanders raised Bobby Nystrom's No. 23 to the Nassau Coliseum rafters before today's matinee against the Buffalo Sabres, putting it alongside the hallowed sweaters of Denis Potvin, Mike Bossy and Billy Smith.


Calling All Cowboys
Ralph Lauren cowpokes can see the real ones perform at the top rodeos -- from the Little Bighorn Days in Billings, Mont., to the Pendleton Round-Up in Oregon -- on Maupintour's Rodeos of the Wild West tour programs.
Each tour, from five to nine days long, features one of five major rodeos, with departures from July 6 to Nov. 8.


Fear or Faith: Will the Cabby Return the Bag?
THIS is a feel-good story.
At 12:44 P.M. last Saturday, Kathy Sulkes stepped into a cab at Broome Street and Sixth Avenue.
She was carrying her pocketbook and the brown leather L. L. Bean tote bag that has been her briefcase for many years.
In it were the keys to all her doors and her Filofax, the key to everything else.
Ms.
Sulkes is a 44-year-old documentary television producer, one of those people who believe that reality can be gathered, shaped and timed out.
They cheerfully admit to being control freaks and find no irony in their need to run to relax.


Ballet Director Appointed
Roy Kaiser has been appointed artistic director of the Pennsylvania Ballet.
Mr.
Kaiser, a longtime dancer with the company, was named acting director in June 1994 after Christopher d'Amboise resigned as the head of the financially troubled company.
Mr.
Kaiser's appointment, by unanimous vote of the board, is effective immediately.


Trans World Airlines Inc.(TWA,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Mubarak's Challenge
President Hosni Mubarak's visit to Washington in the coming week will take place as he is being confronted at home with rising discontent and mounting accusations of human rights abuses, governmental corruption and mismanagement that are driving away foreign investors.
Despite a recent crackdown that has curtailed violence by Islamic militants in Cairo, critics who include Western diplomats describe this country of 56 million as on the brink of crisis.
They point to dismal economic growth and a refusal by Mr.
Mubarak to share power as among the main elements for creating further social upheaval.
Many Western diplomats now contend that the Government is too weak to sustain the shock of serious reform.


Poor Town Finds an Angel in a White Coat
The old man swore he saw angels.
It was a year or so back, the day 79-year-old Emile Lyons suffered an abdominal aneurysm.
"The day my insides busted," he said.
The bony commercial fisherman had lived through hurricanes, heart bypasses and his 50th wedding anniversary.
But that day, he really believed the Lord had called him home.


At Knight-Ridder, a Struggle of Illness, Not Power. . .
It may never be easy for corporate executives to give up power.
It was not easy for James K. Batten.
On March 24, he announced that because of his battle with brain cancer he would step down as chief executive of Knight-Ridder Inc., the Fortune 500 company that publishes 28 daily newspapers, including The Miami Herald, The Philadelphia Inquirer, The Detroit Free Press and The San Jose Mercury News.


Washington Memo; Tax Cut Edges Out Deficit As G.O.P.'s Guiding Tenet
There is considerable evidence in public opinion polls that Americans put a greater priority on balancing the budget than cutting taxes.
At the same time, there is considerable anxiety among Republican lawmakers that their promise to produce a balanced budget by the year 2002 will be substantially complicated by their pledge to also provide nearly $200 billion in tax cuts over the next five years.
But this week, the Republican majority in the House is expected to set aside those concerns and approve a huge tax cut proposal as the final act of this Congress's first 100 days.
Yes, there are last-minute jitters in the House, and an out-and-out wariness toward the idea in the Senate.
But behind the drive for a tax cut are some powerful political forces in the Republican Party, born of years of conservative theology, internal struggles for the soul of the party and searing experiences on the campaign trail.


Mets Happy To Finally Be Bound For Camp
Bret Saberhagen will be on the mound here Monday, throwing a baseball for the first time since Aug. 10.
Rico Brogna will bring his bats, and hit in a cage, with the hopes that he can open the 1995 season with the same eye-opening performance he had during his truncated rookie year.
And, after weeks of sitting home while the replacement Mets drove to Thomas J. White Stadium, Todd Hundley can hop in his truck and drive the 10 miles there himself.
Saberhagen, Brogna and Hundley are three of the Mets who are expected to appear at the team's spring training complex here Monday, the first day after club owners accepted the players' offer to end a nearly eight-month baseball strike.
Players are required to report to spring training by Friday, with exhibition games scheduled to start on April 13.
The Mets have agreed to let the players use their facilities immediately and will begin to house players here as early as Tuesday.


More on Baseball
NOBODY WINS -- With the possibility of another disruption eventually, there is only a loser -- the fan.
Dave Anderson, Page C1.
FEW FANS CHEER -- As one sandlot player put it, "They're already taken the joy out of the season and opening day." Page C2.
AN EDGE FOR YANKS -- The Yankees have 12 players signed, including many regulars and two starting pitchers.
Page C4.
METS' HELLO AND GOODBYE -- The regulars are eager to return while replacements depart with a $5,000-per-man bonus.
Page C4.


Buffs
Ruth Rauch loves the theater, loves it so much, she told a Times reporter recently, that she goes to something like 200 shows a year.
Ms.
Rauch, then, has put in some pretty bad evenings on some pretty hard chairs.
Never mind.
"It just makes me feel good," Ms.
Rauch says.
Ms.
Rauch is a buff.
New York City is full of buffs.
It is probably, in fact, buff central.
Buffs, as some of them like to put it, "use New York," which is a lot better than their letting New York use them.
This city has a way of doing that to people.
Give it an inch of aggravation and it will take a mile.


A Mellower Graham Parker
Some of the Graham Parker fans who packed Tramps on Friday night may have been wondering: Where's the bile?
Since 1976, when his first album appeared, Mr.
Parker has built a dedicated following with songs that lash out at hypocrisy and smugness.
He arrived just before punk-rock as part of England's pub-rock movement, which valued the craftsmanship of 1960's soul, folk-rock and country music; his rage never tore apart his songs.
And through most of the last two decades, he has been articulately snarling at everyone from estranged lovers to unthinking consumers.
But on Friday night, Mr.
Parker had more affectionate tidings.
"People think I'm filled with hate/ They've got it wrong, that's out of date" he sang in "Pollinate," from his new album, "12 Haunted Episodes" (Razor and Tie).
One love song proclaimed earnestly, "You're my partner for life"; another insisted, "I am undoing this cruel stage that I've been going through." From his older material, he chose some of his more atmospheric, less combative songs, in gentler new arrangements: "Fool's Gold" changed from a march to a waltz.
For most of the new songs, he strummed an acoustic guitar, and he didn't mind singing 'la la" choruses; his new band, the Episodes, would rather lilt than pound.


Let's Take New Look At Pesticide Hazards
To the Editor:
We are two seventh-graders who are working on an environment action unit about pesticides.
We want to make our community aware of this problem, and we hope that it will take action.


No Headline
"The players are back, the game is back and we are very happy about that." -- BUD SELIG, acting baseball commissioner.  [ A1:6 ]


Canada Flouts Sea Law in Fish Dispute
To the Editor:
Your report on the Canadian Coast Guard's confrontation with a dozen Spanish trawlers just outside Canada's territorial waters east of Newfoundland (news article, March 28) makes important points about the fishing dispute between Canada and the European Union.
However, I would like to underline a few additional points:


No Headline


Chambers Development Co.  (CDV.A,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Economic Calendar
Listed below are the scheduled release dates for major economic indicators this week.
Monday  Personal Income . . .
Feb.
New-Car Sales . . .
March


To Our Readers
Starting today, as a service to readers seeking to focus on particular companies, articles inBusiness Day will use bold type for the first mention of each parent company.
Because the Company Index on the second business page lists parent companies, the prominent typography will simplify searching for references cited there.


American Greetings Corp.(AGREA,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


Dividend Meetings
Following is a partial list of dividend meetings this week:  MONDAY  Central Vt Pub Svc Oxford Inds Inc TUESDAY  Pacific Enterprises THURSDAY  Amer Wtr Wks Inc General Pub Utils Corp Grace W R &amp; Co Sun Inc FRIDAY  NY St Elec &amp; Gas Corp US West Inc


U.S. Gives Russia Secret Data on Iran to Discourage Atom Deal
The Clinton Administration has taken the unusual step of providing Russian officials with American intelligence on Iran in hopes of persuading them to drop Russia's project to build nuclear reactors in Iran.
American officials said the written intelligence report shared with the Russians shows that Iran has a crash program to build nuclear weapons that would be accelerated by Russia's $1 billion contract to build up to four reactors in Iran.


The Baseball Truce
Just when it seemed the highlight of the summer sports season might be videotape of Michael Jordan's return to basketball, Major League Baseball has been forced to snap out of its stupefying labor dispute.
The resumption of baseball, even for an abbreviated season that may make 15-game winners the paradigm of pitching excellence, is cheering news for baseball fans, many of whom feared a summertime choice between lawn mowing and watching hapless replacement players.
But the resumption of Major League Baseball does not signal an end of the economic and labor issues that have divided the players and owners and badly wounded America's most ingenious sport.
This is a reprieve, not a resolution.
If a new labor agreement is not reached in the weeks ahead, there is a good chance play will be suspended again in coming years.


POP
A Little Rusty But Still Relevant  Bush Tetras The Knitting Factory
They came on like a dinosaur-rock band, talking about the good old days, about being rusty and about how much things have changed.
But in reality their music still sounded relevant and they looked no older than Sonic Youth, a New York noise-rock band that is at its commercial peak today.
They were the Bush Tetras, in their first reunion in four years for a Saturday night benefit for Franklin Furnace, the visual-art and performance space.
The band -- three women and a man -- epitomized downtown New York's post-punk scene in the early 1980's, bashing out a dissonant blend of funk, rock, noise and savage independence, and influencing future members of rap, punk and funk fusion bands like Luscious Jackson and the Beastie Boys.


S. A. Cain, 92, Conservationist And Ecology Pioneer, Is Dead
Stanley A. Cain, a pioneering conservationist who helped develop the science of ecology and served as an assistant secretary of the Interior Department in the 1960's, died on Saturday at a nursing home in Santa Cruz, Calif.
He was 92.
Although his academic specialty was botany, Dr.
Cain, a Butler College graduate who received his doctorate from the University of Chicago in 1930, broadened his scientific interests considerably beyond the world of plants.


Essay; Newt's 100th
As King Louis XVIII re-entered Paris on a fine June day in 1815, after the defeat of Napoleon Bonaparte, the Count of Chambord bowed in welcome and coined a phrase: "A hundred days have elapsed, sire, since the fatal moment when your Majesty was forced to quit your capital in the midst of tears."
On Friday of this week, in a prime-time television address, Speaker Newton Gingrich will mark the close of this House's first hundred days -- a historic period that drove the liberal ancien regime to tears of rage.


Tuberculosis Resurgent
Health professionals are losing the struggle to control tuberculosis, an infectious disease that will kill some three million people this year, mostly in poor nations but increasingly in wealthy societies as well.
The woefully underfinanced campaign has had only scattered successes around the world.
Worse yet, skimpy or misdirected programs in many countries may inadvertently be spreading the disease, thus doing more harm than good.
That tragic development does not mean health professionals should give up the fight and let nature take its devastating course.
The only sensible response is to refashion tuberculosis control programs and boost their funding by the modest amounts needed to make them truly effective.


Finish Line Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


Highway Into Scenic Byway
The image of New Jersey for many drivers is one of refineries and smoke-belching stacks.
So state officials are trying to register Route 29, which meanders along the Delaware River for 35 miles from Trenton into Frenchtown, as the state's first road in the Federal Scenic Byways program.
Officials say the road, almost free of billboards, would need only minor landscaping and better signs directing tourists to parks and historic sites to be "scenic."


Hewlett-Packard to Enter Home Computer Market
The Hewlett-Packard Company plans to announce today its first entry into the market for home computers, with three lines of aggressively priced multimedia Pentium machines that it plans to sell through consumer electronics stores.
And the Compaq Computer Corporation, in what could be a pre-emptive strike against its new competitor, will announce new features for its best-selling Presario machines.
Hewlett-Packard has already courted the home market with its line of color inkjet printers and low-end laser printers.
Yet the company has made most of its fortune selling calculators and office printers, along with heavy-iron computers to large corporations and universities.
Hewlett hopes to compete aggressively on both price and features with the Presario, the best-selling home computer, and with similarly equipped computers from Packard-Bell Electronics.


DANCE
A Skilled Young Company With Paul Taylor Style  Taylor 2 Symphony Space
Saturday mornings in spring should always start with a jolt of dance by Paul Taylor performed by Taylor 2.
The touring ensemble, an adjunct of the Paul Taylor Dance Company, offered a rare New York performance on Saturday as part of the Just Kidding! children's series at Symphony Space.
It was an impressive event, presented by a group of highly individualistic dancers.


Bon Voyage for a Bottle
Seven months ago, six New Jersey boys and girls lamenting the end of their summer vacation in North Carolina put their greetings, names and addresses into a plastic bottle and heaved it into the Atlantic.
They returned home and forgot about the bottle, which drifted into the Gulf Stream, around Newfoundland and toward Europe.


'Dateline NBC' Stands Tall in Ratings While Rival News Magazines Slump
NBC gave a party last week to celebrate the third anniversary of its news magazine, "Dateline NBC," partly to show off an elaborate new $1 million set, and partly just to revel in the fact that the program is still around.
"Dateline," after all, is the program that almost brought down NBC News two years ago when it was forced to admit that it had faked explosions in a report on truck safety.
That scandal led to an extraordinary on-air apology, the dismissal of the program's executive producer and two other producers, and the resignation of the president of the news division, Michael G. Gartner.


Withholding Care From Patients: Boston Case Asks, Who Decides?
A Massachusetts doctor's refusal to take extraordinary steps to keep alive a comatose patient suffering from irreversible brain damage has intensified the debate over whether physicians or family members should determine when further treatment is futile.
The doctor, who is at Massachusetts General Hospital in Boston, acted against the wishes of the patient's daughter, who has sued the hospital and the doctors over the issue.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-9  DISCONTENT IN EGYPT
President Hosni Mubarak of Egypt facing accusations of human rights abuses, governmental corruption and mismanagement that are driving away investors.
A2  BOMB KILLS 8 IN GAZA
At least eight people were killed when a bomb blew up in a Gaza City neighborhood that is reputed to be a stronghold of Hamas, the militant Palestinian group.
A2  RWANDANS END FLIGHT
Tens of thousands of Rwandans fleeing camps in Burundi halted their flight after their leaders became convinced that Tanzania would not open its borders.
A3  In Kenya, a crackdown on opposition and the press.
A3  FIRST LADY IN NEPAL
For Hillary Rodham Clinton, in Nepal on her five-nation Asia tour, a media-pleasing elephant ride and a meeting with Sir Edmund Hillary, her namesake.
A6  NEW STEP FOR THE U.N.
The United Nations has been breaking tradition to help Asian governments' efforts to push tens of thousands of migrants back to Vietnam by the end of the year.
A6  A SCHOOL AND A SCANDAL
To its supporters, the School of the Americas teaches professionalism to Latin American soldiers; to its most severe critics, it is an academy of assassins.
A8  FEARS IN HAITI
Despite the new United Nations mission of establishing a "safe and stable environment" in Haiti, there is growing nervousness among the population about the future.
A8  SHARING DATA WITH RUSSIA
The Clinton Administration has offered American intelligence on Iran to Russian officials in hopes of persuading them to drop plans to build nuclear reactors in Iran.
A9  In Dublin, a landmark on the road to peace in Northern Ireland.
A7  Paris Journal: Notre Dame out of harmony with computer age.
A4  National A12-17, B6-8  TAX-CUT QUANDARY
The Republican majority in the House is expected to pass a deep tax-cut proposal this week despite misgivings about public opinion and the possibility of making the Federal the deficit expand.
A1  GAYS IN THE MILITARY
House Speaker Newt Gingrich promises to try to overturn the Government's new policy on homosexuals in the military although the Joint Chiefs of Staff are happy with the current rules.
A1  LIFE AND DEATH: WHO DECIDES?
The question of whether doctors or family members are to decide when brain-damaged patients should get continued medical treatment will be examined in a lawsuit against Massachusetts General Hospital in Boston and its doctors.
A1  SEAGRAM DEAL IS NEAR
The Seagram Company is close to a deal to sell its 25 percent stake in Du Pont back to the company for nearly $10 billion in cash, people familiar with the negotiations said last night.
A1  TRYING TO CURB LAWSUITS
A Republican package of bills aiming at revamping the nation's civil court system easily passed the House, but its fate is far from certain in the Senate.
B6  PREPARED FOR BATTLE -- OR NOT
The Pentagon is spending less on new weapons and equipment than at any time in nearly 50 years, and some are afraid combat readiness is in jeopardy.
B7  A STATE WITH ITS OWN MIND
Rhode Island, bucking a national trend, seems likely to adopt a law that would increase the state's protection to homosexuals against bias in housing, employment, public accommodations and credit.
A12  DIM HOPES FOR DEMOCRATS
Many leading Democrats have all but given up hope of regaining control of the Senate in 1996 and are focusing on persuading wavering House members to run again.
B6  A DOCTOR WITH A HEART
In Bayou La Batre, a poor fishing village on the Gulf Coast in Alabama, the people have an angel: a country doctor who makes house calls and works on credit.
A12  ROMANCE IN THE AIR
Fiction came to life at a convention of readers of romance novels.
The readers got a chance to meet the men who model for the pirates, firemen and others on the covers of the books they devour.
A12  Strikes have halted most public transit in Philadelphia.
A17  Metro Digest B1  Business Digest D1  Arts/Entertainment C13-19  Finding a mission in Handel's operas.
C13  Theater: Critic's Notebook C13  "The Only Thing Worse You Could Have Told Me . . ." C16  "Watbanaland." C16  Music: Graham Parker.
C16  The Schubertiade evolves.
C18  Dance: An Ailey ensemble honors its leader.
C13  Books: An intimate of F.D.R.
C17  Sports C1-11  BASEBALL OWNERS QUIT FIGHT
Major League Baseball owners yesterday accepted the players' offer to return to work, ending the longest work stoppage in professional sports history.
A1  REPLACEMENTS NOW REPLACEABLE
As baseball's real players edged closer to returning, the game's replacement players edged back toward anonymity.
A1  A PERFECT UCONN SEASON
The Connecticut women's basketball team completed its undefeated season by stopping Tennessee, 70-64, in the final of the National Collegiate Athletic Association tournament.
A1  Baseball: Fans not happy.
C2  Yanks ahead of most teams.
C4  Basketball: Knicks top Nets.
C9  Columns: Anderson on baseball.
C1  Berkow on UConn women.
C1  Rhoden on N.C.A.A.
C6  On Baseball.
C3  Hockey: Rangers lose again.
C8  N.C.A.A.: 2 paths to final.
C1  Obituaries B10 Stanley A. Cain, a pioneering conservationist who helped develop ecological science.
Dame Lucie Rie, a ceramicist.
Oliver Rea, a theatrical producer.
Editorials/Op-Ed A18-19 Editorials  The baseball truce.
Mischief on Mexico.
Buffs.
Tuberculosis resurgent.
Letters  William Safire: Newt's 100th.
Anthony Lewis: Never again.
Philip K. Howard: Put the judges back in justice.
Chronicle B4  Bridge C18


For Connecticut Women, a Perfect Ending
Yes, the Connecticut women's basketball team played many weaker teams while Tennessee played one tough team after another this season.
Yes, Tennessee had more depth, more physical explosiveness.
Yes, Tennessee had the sport's most celebrated coach in Pat Head Summitt.
And yes, her team had one chance after another to put Connecticut away today in the final of the National Collegiate Athletic Association tournament.
But in the end and at the end, Connecticut won.
When it was time to do it or fold, the Huskies did it.
Rebecca Lobo, their all-America center/forward and player of the year, made key shots.
Jen Rizzotti, their all-America point guard, darted and scampered and scooted and stole the ball and drove to the basket.
Jamelle Elliott, a physical forward who always seems to rise to the occasion, rose again.


Kaufman &amp; Broad Home Corp.(KBH,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


CLASSICAL MUSIC
A Prize Winner Explores Some Art-Song Rarities  Theresa Santiago, Soprano Alice Tully Hall
Theresa Santiago, the soprano who won first prize in last year's Naumburg Vocal Competition, offered a tour of some odd corners of the art-song repertory on Wednesday evening.
Along the way she presented herself as a sensitive, expressive interpreter with an impeccable technique.
She has a light sound and a generally bright timbre, and she uses vibrato judiciously, varying its speed and width to suit the music.


Kodak Reviewing For New Campaign
The Eastman Kodak Company is beginning a review for a new worldwide corporate brand advertising campaign, separate from ads for the company's products.
The billings were not disclosed.
In a statement Friday, George M. C. Fisher, the chairman, president and chief executive of Kodak, confirmed the review, a report of which appeared in the March 20 issue of Adweek, published by VNU.
Kodak was "in discussions with a limited number" of agencies regarding the campaign, he said, which would "provide a foundation for our efforts to drive growth in both traditional photographic and emerging digital imaging businesses."


An Ailey Ensemble Pays Tribute to Its Leader
Unlike Hollywood, the dance world has never promoted the myth of careers by chance.
Being discovered at a soda fountain, Lana Turner style, is not the way dancers rise out of the ranks.
For 20 years, Sylvia Waters has trained young performers in the Alvin Ailey Repertory Ensemble.
Although conceived as an apprentice troupe to the Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater, the group has taken on a life of its own under Ms.
Waters's direction.


Amway Asia Pacific Ltd.  (AAP,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


There Is Little Joy Among the Fans
In the dust and dirt of a city playground, pure baseball is played without hot dogs, heroes or joyless thoughts of major league squabbles.
After a season without a World Series, the sandlot is one of the few retreats for fans who confess they feel more loyalty to a scuffed and battered baseball than to the men who throw it for a living.
Not even the talk of a baseball settlement brings peace.


Corrections
A brief report in the Company News column of Business Day on Friday about a proposed purchase by the Parker Hannifin Corporation misstated the assets that will be acquired.
Parker Hannifin is buying the assets of the Figgie International Inc.'s power systems division in Rockford, Ill., for an unspecified amount of cash; it is not buying Figgie.


Fire in an Engine Forces Passengers Down Emergency Chutes at Kennedy
The tail engine of a Caribbean-bound American Airlines jet caught fire on a taxiway at Kennedy International Airport yesterday and, while the flames were quickly extinguished, the aircraft was halted, emergency chutes were deployed and all 108 passengers and crew members were safely evacuated onto the tarmac.
While the fire's cause was not immediately determined, airline officials said it appeared to be a flareup of residual fuel in the engine's exhaust, similar to a car backfiring.
A warning light and another plane alerted the cockpit crew, and a chemical spray in the engine put out the flames.
Airport crews also raced up and poured chemicals on the smoking engine as a precaution.


Rhode Island Is Moving To Protect Homosexuals
While anti-discrimination laws are being challenged elsewhere, Rhode Island is bucking the national trend by advancing a bill that would grant protection to homosexuals in employment, housing, public accommodations and credit.
"Rhode Island has always been contrary," said State Senator William P. Fitzpatrick, a Democrat from Cranston who is gay and will shepherd the bill through the Senate, where it is given a good chance of passage.
The measure was approved 57 to 41 on Wednesday by the House of Representatives, and Gov.
Lincoln C. Almond, a Republican, has said he will sign it.


Different Paths, Pressures For Tonight's Final Two
The journeys they have made, and the burdens that have accumulated along the way, began decades apart.
The route U.C.L.A. took to the championship game of the national collegiate tournament can be traced to a Monday night 20 years ago, before four of the current Bruins were born, when the school won its 10th and most recent championship.


Accounts
*
Lechmere, Woburn, Mass., has kept Houston Effler Herstek Favat, Boston, on its account after a review conducted by the retail chain's new parent, Montgomery Ward.
The billings were estimated at $10 million.
Houston Effler retained the account after a creative shootout with David Cravit/CME, Chicago, the Ward agency.
*
Beaver Reitzfeld, New York, was awarded three projects with combined billings estimated at $2.5 million to $3 million: Amerex; The Asian Wall Street Journal Weekly, owned by Dow Jones &amp; Co., and Shaw Travel Guides, all of New York.


INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY: Digital Commerce; Dreamworks' founders seem incapable of thinking ugly, which is the only way their venture will succeed.
A SPECIAL-EFFECTS Oscar should go to the reality-distortion field that surrounds the latest mad coupling of Hollywood and the technology elite.
For those just beamed in from another galaxy, the new entertainment company controlled by Steven Spielberg, Jeffrey Katzenberg and David Geffen -- Dreamworks SKG -- recently took a $500,000 investment from Paul Allen, co-founder of Microsoft, and a few days later announced Dreamworks Interactive, a joint venture with Microsoft's chairman, Bill Gates.


Eating Blues
To the Editor:
I read with interest your editorial (March 30) about M&amp;M/Mars turning the Empire State Building blue.


U.S. Gives Russia Secret Data on Iran to Discourage Atom Deal; Perry Favors Aid
Secretary of Defense Perry said today that American aid to Russian military conversion programs should continue, despite the fierce opposition by the United States to the Russian plan to build nuclear reactors for Iran.
"We cannot put other programs, which are very, very important to us, at hostage every time we have a disagreement," Mr.
Perry said after touring a Russian defense plant in Moscow that is beginning to produce hearing aids in a joint venture agreement with an American company.


Underwriting on Wall Street Remained Sluggish in Quarter
Beset by layoffs and losses, Wall Street has been hoping that its bread-and-butter business -- the underwriting of stocks and bonds -- may finally have hit bottom.
There is, therefore, a glimmer of hope for the securities industry from its sales of stocks and bonds for the first quarter of 1995.
The industry's underwritings of such securities rose 17 percent to $138.7 billion, compared with $118.9 billion in the last quarter of 1994, according to statistics compiled by the Securities Data Corporation.


Welfare Reform Will Fix a Mindless System
To the Editor:
Re Bob Herbert's "What Special Interest?" (column, March 22): The Republican welfare reform plan consolidates school lunch and breakfast programs into a capped entitlement to the states, cutting the Federal bureaucracy.
We also target the truly needy -- those earning 185 percent of the poverty level or less.
Currently, the children of Donald Trump could get a subsidized school lunch.


RESULTS PLUS
N.B.A.
What Barkley Message?
David Robinson hit two free throws with 20.7 seconds remaining and the San Antonio Spurs overcame Charles Barkley's season-high 45 points to win their 11th straight game yesterday, beating the visiting Phoenix Suns by 109-106.
The Spurs improved to 52-18, the best record in the Western Conference, and extended their lead over Utah in the Midwest to 1 1/2 games.
"I sent them a message today," Barkley said.


Pledge of Protection Halts Hutu Flight From Burundi
Tens of thousands of Rwandans fleeing refugee camps in Burundi halted their flight today after their leaders became convinced that the Tanzanian Government would not open its borders and that the Burundian Army would protect them, United Nations officials said.
The exodus began last week when about 41,000 mostly Rwandan Hutu refugees, afraid of being caught in growing violence between the majority Hutu and minority Tutsi in Burundi, packed up their belongings and abandoned Magara camp in northern Burundi after armed militias or bandits killed 12 refugees in a nearby camp.
They were joined by about 10,000 Rwandan Hutu from other camps.


School for Assassins, or Aid to Latin Democracy?
To its supporters, it is a school to teach professionalism to Latin American soldiers and to strengthen fledgling democracies.
To its most severe critics, it is an academy of assassins.
A long-simmering debate over the merits of the School of the Americas, an elite United States Army academy here, has boiled over.
A Guatemalan Army colonel who graduated from the school in 1990 has been linked to the killing that year of Michael DeVine, an American innkeeper who lived in the Guatemalan jungle, and to the death in 1992 of Efrain Bamaca Velasquez, a leftist guerrilla who was the husband of an American lawyer.


Kenya Acts to Curb Its Opponents and Press
Recent actions by Kenya's Government have been perceived by Western diplomats as the most serious crackdown on the opposition and the press since multiparty elections in 1992.
In the last month, President Daniel arap Moi has ordered the arrest of anyone who insulted him and he declared that a guerrilla movement was poised to invade from neighboring Uganda.
At the same time, the governing party's newspaper has published reports about the February 18th Movement, described as a Communist rebel group led by an exile named John Odongo.
The Government has also accused the opposition of colluding with the rebels.


Hillary Clinton Meets Man Who Gave Her 2 L's
Hillary Rodham Clinton has practiced law, raised a daughter and tried to change one-seventh of the American economy by reshaping health care.
But in the last 24 hours she has ridden a bull elephant with Secret Service radio escort, and met the man responsible for making her a Hillary with two l's.
At an airstrip in Katmandu, Nepal -- just after an overnight tiger safari and just before her departure for this poverty-ridden pocket of South Asia -- Mrs.
Clinton shook hands with Sir Edmund Hillary, the New Zealander who conquered Mount Everest with Tenzing Norgay in 1953.
He was passing through town on his way to visit schools and a hospital in the Himalayan highlands financed by a foundation he heads.


. . . and a Protector of Profits Takes the Helm
In his first week as chief executive of one of the country's biggest newspaper companies, P. Anthony Ridder was asked what his era at Knight-Ridder Inc. might someday be known for.
He replied: "I would hope people would say, 'They even moved to higher heights. The quality of the journalism was better when he stepped down than when he became C. E. O. The newspapers became better; circulation rose.' "


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  JET CATCHES FIRE AT KENNEDY
The tail engine of a Caribbean-bound American Airlines jet caught fire on a taxiway at Kennedy International Airport and, while the flames were quickly extinguished, the aircraft was halted, emergency chutes were deployed and all 108 passengers and crew members were safely evacuated onto the tarmac.
While the fire's cause was not immediately determined, airline officials said it appeared to be a flare-up of residual fuel in the engine's exhaust, similar to a car backfiring.
B3.
TAKING STOCK OF A SPIRITUAL PILGRIMAGE
Dreams and faith were almost all that 33 German immigrants had on April 6, 1845, when they gathered in a rented parlor on the Lower East Side to start a Reform Jewish congregation, the first in New York City and only the third in the United States.
On Sunday, about 100 of their spiritual descendants ventured back in time, making a pilgrimage to the places the congregation has called home: from that first humble site at Grand and Clinton Streets, to the current Synagogue Emanu-El at Fifth Avenue and 65th Street, on the corner where the Astor Mansion once looked onto Central Park.
B3.
END OF THE LINE FOR THE TRANSIT POLICE
At the stroke of a new day, Robert Zink, a boyishly good-looking former high school linebacker, got a new identity.
After nearly 10 years patrolling the city's subways as a transit police officer, often wincing at being asked whether he was a real policeman and whether he was allowed to carry a gun, he suddenly joined the ranks of the New York City Police Department, one of the largest and most prestigious forces in the world.
B2.
BACTERIAL MENINGITIS SUSPECTED IN DEATH
An 8-year-old Queens boy has died of what authorities are calling a likely case of bacterial meningitis, a highly contagious disease that has recently appeared in the United States in a new, fast-moving strain.
New York City Health Department officials said that they had taken steps to prevent the spread of the disease, giving antibiotics to anyone who had come in contact with the child during the period he was believed to be infectious.
Officials said they would not know for sure if the boy died of bacterial meningitis until a medical examiner's autopsy is conducted.
B2.
FOR SOME FANS, PEACE TINGED WITH ANGER
In the dust and dirt of a city playground, pure baseball is played without hot dogs, heroes or joyless thoughts of Major League squabbles.
After a season without a World Series, the sandlot is one of the only retreats for fans and players who confess that they feel more loyalty to a scuffed and battered baseball than to the men who throw them.
Not even the talk of a baseball settlement brings peace.
C2.
REGION  MURDER TRIAL SET IN JORDAN
A Jordanian-American who confessed to strangling his wife in her New Jersey apartment after a fight over their two children is scheduled to go on trial in Amman, Jordan, on Monday for murder.
Mohammed Ismail Abequa, 46, was arrested in Jordan, where he had fled with his daughter and son shortly after the July 4 killing.
He has been in custody since then.
Mr.
Abequa will be tried by a three-judge, no-jury criminal court on charges of premeditated murder and kidnapping.
B5.
A NEW AUDIENCE FOR BASKETBALL
It was a typical gathering of basketball fanatics: tortilla chips and bean dip, a mammoth television broadcasting the game, and feverish fans whooping their devotion.
But these were not baritone-voiced fans cheering on slam-dunking players.
They were sisters rooting for their undefeated University of Connecticut women's basketball team -- graceful athletes who have become role models for girls across the state, capturing the hearts and minds of a normally untapped audience.
B5.
URBAN RENEWAL SPURRED BY DYNAMITE
They once represented the promise of urban renewal.
But two buildings in the Christopher Columbus Homes in Newark have been turned to dust, a symbol of well-intentioned housing policies turned bad.
The Newark Housing Authority dynamited the two long-vacant high rises to make way for new homes at the site.
The 13-story buildings, each with 200 apartments, collapsed upon themselves, just as the demolition experts had planned.
B5.
Chronicle B4


Treasury to Auction Only Bills This Week
The Treasury's schedule of financings this week is confined to today's regular weekly auction of three- and six-month bills.
By the close of the New York cash market on Friday, traders said, the rate on the outstanding three-month bill was 5.69 percent and a six-month bill was at 5.83 percent.


Equity Offerings Expected for This Week
The following equity and convertible-debt offerings are expected this week:
Amerisource Health Corp., Malvern, Pa., is making an initial public offering of 6.6 million shares, 5.28 million in the United States and Canada.
Donaldson, Lufkin &amp; Jenrette Securities, a unit of the Equitable Companies.


Oliver Rea, 71, Theatrical Producer
Oliver Rea, a theatrical producer who was a co-founder of the Tyrone Guthrie Theater in Minneapolis, died on Friday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 71.
The cause was cardiac arrest, said his wife, Natalie.


Arrests in Manila Tied to Bomb Suspect
The police in the Philippines have arrested six Arab men they say are linked to the accused ringleader of the 1993 bombing of the World Trade Center, and seized a cache of weapons and explosives from their Manila apartments.
The Philippine National Police said in a statement that the six men arrested Saturday were Muslim extremists who were "believed to be affiliated" with Sheik Omar Abdel Rahman, the Muslim cleric who is on trial in New York on charges that he plotted to blow up major sites in the city.


CHRONICLE
George Armstrong Custer's personal battle flag, his campaign shirt and other artifacts -- including arrows pulled from his brother's body -- will be auctioned in San Francisco tomorrow.
But the feature attraction could be a 190-page manuscript written by a lowly trooper who survived the Battle of Little Bighorn on June 25, 1876.


The Schubertiade, Bravely Evolving
The Schubertiade project at the 92d Street Y, once aimed in a straight line toward the Schubert bicentenary in 1997, has taken detours and shortcuts, but it perseveres.
The original idea was to lay out in chronological order the entire work of the short-lived but amazingly busy composer.
This has been abandoned in favor of annual mix-and-match concerts like the first of three this season held on Saturday night.
Hermann Prey is still around as leading performer and overseer.
In a remarkable performance of the "Erlkonig" at the end of this well-attended event, the German baritone reminded listeners that true recital singers, stationary and in ordinary concert dress, can create vivid theater with the voice alone.


Senate Takes Up Change in Civil Suits
The differences between the Republican majorities in the two houses of Congress will be thrown into sharp relief this week when the Senate takes up the high-stakes battle over whether to change fundamentally the nation's system for resolving civil disputes in court.
The Republican majority in the House, energized by the tide of freshmen elected under the promise to overhaul the nation's legal system, passed a legislative package last month with breathtaking speed.
All three measures in the package were enacted within a week, a major victory for the nation's business community, the principal beneficiaries, and a defeat for trial lawyers and consumer groups, its major opponents.


Oshawa Group reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 28


A Walk Down 150 Years Of Faith and Tradition
From its massive limestone facade to its soaring sanctuary, the synagogue of Congregation Emanu-El is a place of superlatives.
But even within the grandeur of the world's largest synagogue, perhaps nothing soars higher or runs deeper than the dreams and faith of its founders.
Dreams and faith were almost all that 33 German immigrants had on April 6, 1845, when they gathered in a rented parlor on the Lower East Side to start a Reform Jewish congregation, the first in New York City and only the third in the United States.


DANCE
Perchance to Dream, Or Bicker, or Scramble  Colloquium Contemporary Dance Exchange Merce Cunningham Studio
The Colloquium Contemporary Dance Exchange, an organization directed by Robin Staff that seeks to present new works, offered four premieres on Friday night.
By sheer chance, two of them featured beds.


A Park Called Megan's Place
Megan Kanka's terrible death gave rise to a law named after her.
Now she will be remembered in a happier way.
Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman will break ground tomorrow for a park to be named after her.
When Megan, 7, was raped and slain last summer -- by a neighbor, the police said -- people were furious that no one had been warned that a man with a record of sexual offenses against young girls was in their midst.
The reaction spurred "Megan's Law," requiring sex offenders to register with the police upon release from prison and allowing notification of the community.


INSIDE
U.S. Shares Secrets on Iran
The United States has provided Russia with an intelligence report that says Iran's nuclear arms program would be speeded if Russia builds planned reactors there.
Page A9.
6 Linked to Bomb Suspect
The police in Manila arrested six men linked to the accused ringleader of the 1993 bombing of the World Trade Center, and seized a cache of weapons and explosives.
Page B3.
Concern in Haiti
Despite the United Nations mission to establish a "safe and stable environment" in Haiti, there is nervousness about the future.
Page A8.
The Military: Ready or Not
With Pentagon spending at its lowest in 50 years, and many lawmakers and senior officers ask if the armed forces are prepared.
Page B7.
The Art of Still Dealing
Documents submitted by Donald Trump for a plan to sell stock and debt in a casino show how vulnerable his financial situation is.
Page D1.


CLASSICAL MUSIC
When Determination Guides a Performance  The Lark Quartet Weill Recital Hall
The Lark Quartet, which played Beethoven, Mozart and Schoenberg on Friday night, is earnest and determined to a fault.
Its members are fine ensemble players; they also have the enterprise to take on Schoenberg's long, winding and ultimately rewarding First Quartet.
If only these musicians would acknowledge that music embraces all human moods, casualness and humor included.


Paris Journal; Notre Dame's Organ and Computer Are No Duet
After spending $2.2 million to bring the celebrated 19th-century pipe organ in Notre Dame Cathedral into the computer age and announcing success with great fanfare in December 1992, the French Ministry of Culture has a problem: the modern technology is not working.
"It's painful and embarrassing, and it's not good for our image," said Jean-Pierre Leguay, who as an organist for the cathedral holds one of the most prestigious positions in French music.
The organ now uses computer digital technology rather than mechanical connections to relay commands from the keyboards and pedals to the pipes.


Yankees in Good Shape For Start of Real Games
Buck Showalter did not want to waste a minute of possible preparation time.
Before he knew the details of today's ownership meetings in Chicago, Showalter said he hoped the real Yankees would work out informally Monday and Tuesday in Florida and then have a supervised workout with the coaching staff Wednesday.
The Yankee manager might have been too eager.
Paul O'Neill and Steve Howe are the only players who worked out in Fort Lauderdale, Fla., last weekend and Joe Ausanio said his impression after participating in a conference call today was that many Yankees were planning to arrive on Wednesday.


Mischief on Mexico
Senator Alfonse D'Amato of New York is recklessly threatening to block the Administration from providing Mexico loans and loan guarantees.
The threat by the chairman of the Senate Banking Committee could be enough to scare off skittish foreign investors, driving the peso lower and worsening Mexico's recession.
If Mr.
D'Amato got his way, and Congress cut off the loans, the Mexican economy could collapse.
The Clinton Administration, fearing imminent bankruptcy and Congressional inaction, decided in February to use $20 billion in a Treasury fund under its control to aid Mexico.
Mr.
Clinton received support from Speaker Newt Gingrich, Bob Dole, Senate majority leader, and Democratic leaders.
The maneuver was justified because financial collapse in Mexico would hurt the United States.
Tens of thousands of workers here would lose jobs in export industries, and citizens, whose pensions and savings are in mutual funds, would see their wealth drop.
Mr.
D'Amato's charge that the bailout serves only currency speculators is wide of the mark.


Tribal Shootout: Rival Factions Behind Conflict
Once the most feared warriors along the Niagara frontier, the Senecas, like other Indian tribes in America, had long suffered hard times.
Then, in the last half-dozen years, quirks in the laws of the white men who had taken their forests and fields showered tens of millions of dollars on their bleak reservation, with the possibility of even more to come.
But the money has brought bitter division, and now bloodshed and death.


Sports of The Times; There's No Winner, Only a Big Loser
FOR all the rhetoric from the owners and the players regarding their treaty to open the baseball season on April 26, the bottom line of this laborious labor dispute is that there is still no bottom line.
Meaning no settlement.
Without a collective bargaining agreement, without a no-strike pledge by the players and a no-lockout pledge by the owners, a strike or lockout could develop anytime this year, possibly canceling the World Series again.


DANCE
A Choreographer Analyzes The Nature of Virtuosity  Tere O'Connor Dance Bessie Schonberg Theater
Some years ago, an assistant to Ruth Page, the doyenne of Midwestern American ballet, lost patience at a performance by two then-unknown post-modernists.
Exclaiming loudly, according to local newspaper accounts, she attempted to leave, only to discover she was locked in.


W. J. Villaume, 80, Lutheran Minister
The Rev.
Dr.
William J. Villaume, a Lutheran minister who pursued prominent parallel careers as pastor, educator and national religious administrator, died last Monday at his home in Corpus Christi, Tex.
He was 80.
The cause was emphysema, his family said.


The Man Who Would Save NY for NYNEX
Ivan G. Seidenberg still regularly drops in on his pals at the old New York Telephone garage on Bronx River Avenue, where he started in 1966 as a cable-splicer's helper, fresh out of Evander Childs High School.
Now that he's head of the whole company, Nynex, such visits could easily seem like the calculated effort of a chief executive to bond with his troops.
But the linesmen and splicers who go out for coffee with Mr.
Seidenberg -- some of whom started out with him in '66 -- insist he's the genuine article: the first born-and-bred New Yorker to run Nynex and the man who will lead the company's defense of its hometown franchise.


Familiar Attitudes on Gay Life Paint a Clear-Eyed Portrait
Most gay men can probably complete the sentence fragment that is the title of "The Only Thing Worse You Could Have Told Me. . . .," Dan Butler's very funny, very moving one-man show.
It is part of a classic parental response to the announcement of a son's homosexuality, and it has made its way into the repertory of mordant, double-edged gay jokes.
Yet as Mr.
Butler delivers it, while recounting a conversation one of his characters had with his father at Christmas, you are forced to consider its implications anew.


Mercer Intl.(MERCS,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Kenneth Gay, 83, Curator of Poetry
Kenneth Gay, who was the curator of the Poetry Collection of the State University College at Buffalo for 10 years and a longtime friend and assistant to the writer Robert Graves, died on March 26 in Palma, Mallorca.
He was 83.
Mr.
Gay was the curator of the poetry collection -- 20th-century works written in or translated into English -- from 1968 until he retired in 1978.
The collection, which includes manuscripts, periodicals, books and recordings, has sizable holdings of Mr.
Graves's manuscripts and publications.
During Mr.
Gay's tenure, the overall collection more than doubled in size, to more than 65,000 items.


Worries About Military Readiness Grow
The Pentagon is spending less on new weapons and equipment than at any time in nearly 50 years, prompting many lawmakers and senior officers to warn that the Clinton Administration may soon jeopardize combat readiness.
The debate over military preparedness poses a vexing problem for the White House.
Last year, the issue focused on Republican accusations that the Administration was cutting the Pentagon budget too far, too fast.
Subsequent Congressional hearings suggested that such concerns were exaggerated, but to avoid appearing weak on military matters, the White House added more than $10 billion for training, spare parts and salaries.


In Frail State, Knudsen Taps A Rescue Pro
The Morrison Knudsen Corporation, struggling with the worst crisis in its 83-year history, yesterday named Robert S. Miller Jr. as its new chairman.
Mr.
Miller, 53, a former vice chairman of the Chrysler Corporation, helped negotiate the auto maker's financial rescue in 1980.
He also advised Olympia &amp; York Developments Ltd., the Reichmann family's real estate empire, during its protracted debt negotiations in 1992.


Critic-Turned-Conductor Finds A Mission in Handel's Operas
A promise to present all 37 of Handel's operas is a little like taking out a long-term mortgage.
One makes the appointed payments and hopes to be around for the last one.
Will Crutchfield, who tonight begins this project at the Manhattan School of Music with "Deidamia," thinks the idea of "all" is necessary.
"To understand Verdi or Wagner you have to know everything they wrote," he said between rehearsals last week.
"Handel is the same."
The Handel Project -- "one or two" operas a year surrounded by peripheral performances and classroom investigations of Handelian style -- seeks the divide between full-blown staging and the in-concert format.
Borden Auditorium's stage will house Mr.
Crutchfield and his orchestra stage right and the players stage left.
There will be minimal sets and props, costumes sometimes, and parts acted out and sung from memory.


DANCE
Weaving Bodily Structures Amid Mounting Tension  Annabella Gonzalez Dance Theater Theater of the Riverside Church
Annabella Gonzalez locked dancers into tight patterns in the works that her Annabella Gonzalez Dance Theater presented on Thursday night.
At their most effective, these formal structures intensified the choreographic tension.


Presbyterians, in Peace Forum, Tell Their Fears of Dublin
A delegation of Presbyterian ministers came to Dublin last month and told a group of people what many Protestants detest about this overwhelmingly Roman Catholic country.
Part of their goal was to explain why so many people in Northern Ireland, which has a Protestant majority, fear proposals for union with the Irish Republic.


Amid Technicals, Fouls And Ejections, a Victor
Today's Knicks-Nets feud featured the trash-talking and posturing that both teams feel compelled to engage in.
Patrick Ewing and Rick Mahorn were ejected late in the second quarter after a brief shoving match.
Derek Harper and Benoit Benjamin were ejected during the final minute.
There were eight technical fouls, one flagrant foul, and while some of the trash-talking was good-natured, it never stopped until the final buzzer.


Goran Capital reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


From Byrne to Basilone Arena?
A bridge, a statue and a high school football field now honor John Basilone, a Raritan native who was a Marines Corps hero on Guadalcanal and on Iwo Jima, where he was killed.
Now several Republican lawmakers want to name the arena in the Meadowlands complex after him.
The trouble is, it is already named after Brendan T. Byrne, the former Democratic Governor, who, incidentally, served with distinction in the Army Air Corps in World War II.


CHRONICLE
The actor DENNIS FRANZ , a star of "N.Y.P.D. Blue," married his girlfriend of 13 years in a private ceremony on Saturday.
It was the first marriage for Mr.
Franz, 50, and the second for his girlfriend, JOANIE ZECK , 47.


Owners End a Battle, But the War Isn't Over
As Bud Selig tried to walk away at last from the most ignominious chapter in the history of sports labor relations, a lone voice called out to baseball's harried interim commissioner with some unsolicited advice yesterday.
"Lock 'em out, Bud."


Falcon Holding Group L.P. reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Swan Lake Has Its Odette
In the early hours of March 26, as one of the town's mute swans sat guarding her eggs on her lakeside nest, she was clubbed with a baseball bat.
Then her head was severed with a crosscut saw and thrown into the lake.
Two men who live in a nearby motel and a 14-year-old boy have been charged.


CHRONICLE
The principles established at the Nuremberg war-crimes trials have done little to prevent crimes against humanity in the 50 years since, one of the former prosecutors says.
"They had important symbolic value," the prosecutor, WALTER ROCKLER , said, but "no substantial impact."


An Old Sport Has Seen the Future, and Its Name Is Ernie Els
On the beach in Montego Bay, Ernie Els assumed the position.
His powerful legs were bent slightly at the knees and his thick arms hung, natural and relaxed, from wide shoulders, like pythons from a tree limb.
It is the classic athletic posture, and from it Els could spring up for a rebound, take on a pulling guard, drive a fastball, stop a penalty kick, hit a 120 mile-an-hour tennis serve or -- as was the case on this afternoon -- smash a cricket ball.
It isn't that Els actually does all those things.
He doesn't.
It is that he could do them.
Els, 25, the reigning United States Open golf champion and one of the favorites to win the Masters this week at Augusta, Ga., is, first and foremost, an athlete.
Had he grown up somewhere in Middle America rather than Johannesburg, he might have been on strike these last eight months with the major league baseball players, or playing in the National Football League.


Gibson Greetings Inc.(GIBG,NNM) reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Edwards (A.G.) Inc.(AGE,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


Burkhardt &amp; Christy Sells Equity Interests
Burkhardt &amp; Christy in New York has sold equity interests to two top executives and has been renamed Burkhardt Christy MacDougall Mitchell.
The terms were not disclosed.
The new equity partners are Marty Mitchell, 55, president and chief operating officer, and Mal MacDougall, 63, chief creative officer.
Mr.
MacDougall was most recently vice chairman and chief creative officer at Ally &amp; Gargano in New York; he will serve as a creative consultant to Ally on certain accounts.


Will Edney Or Beck Lead the Charge?
Tyus Edney, the U.C.L.A. point guard, and the Arkansas floor leader, Corey Beck, were no-shows for a news conference this afternoon at the Kingdome.
Edney was receiving treatment on a sprained right wrist.
Beck was resting with a minor case of asthma.
Apparently, there was no need to waste energy speaking to a group of reporters.
Better to save their strength for what could be a classic confrontation in Monday night's national championship final.


What to Expect This Week
SENATE -- The Senate is to vote today on a resolution filed by the Republican majority leader, Bob Dole of Kansas, to cut off debate on an income tax measure.
A Democratic effort to prolong debate on that bill has blocked Senate action on midyear budget cuts, which are known as rescissions.


Corrections
An article on Thursday about a report in a medical journal -- questioned by some experts -- that a baby infected with the AIDS virus cast off the infection by the age of 1 misstated the number of times the virus was cultured from the baby.
It was found in two tests, not four.


Abroad at Home; Never Again
On April 6, 1992, Serbian forces besieged the capital of Bosnia, Sarajevo.
It seemed grotesque, then, that a city known for its relaxed charm, its easy mix of Muslims and Serbs, Croats and Jews, should be under attack by virulent nationalism.
Surely such anachronistic savagery could not go on for long.
The world would not allow it.
Three years later the siege of Sarajevo continues.
Serbian guns have destroyed the city's most prominent buildings.
The Serbs hold 70 percent of Bosnia, and have "cleansed" that territory of many of its non-Serbian inhabitants.
And the world has done nothing -- nothing effective -- to stop them.


8 Are Killed in Gaza Explosion Seen as Hamas Bomb Accident
At least eight people were killed today when a bomb blew up in a Gaza City neighborhood that is reputed to be a stronghold of Hamas, the militant Palestinian group, the Palestinian police said.
Officials of the Palestine Liberation Organization, which administers Palestinian self-rule in the Gaza Strip, said they believed that one of the dead was Kamal Kheil, a leading figure in Hamas.


Joining Forces, Police Officers Don't Miss a Beat
At the stroke of a new day yesterday, Robert Zink, a boyishly good-looking former high school linebacker, got a new identity.
After nearly 10 years patrolling the city's subways as a transit police officer, often wincing at being asked whether he was a real policeman and whether he was allowed to carry a gun, he suddenly joined the ranks of the New York City Police Department, one of the largest and most prestigious forces in the world.


Boy's Death Is Linked to Bacterial Meningitis
An 8-year-old Queens boy died yesterday of what authorities are calling a likely case of bacterial meningitis, a highly contagious disease that has recently appeared in the United States in a new, aggressive strain.
New York City Health Department officials said yesterday that they had taken steps to prevent the spread of the fast-moving disease, giving antibiotics to anyone who had come in contact with the boy during the period he was believed to be infectious.
Officials said they would not know for sure if he died of bacterial meningitis until a medical examiner's autopsy set for today.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Seagram Said to Be Close To Selling Du Pont Shares
Seagram is close to a deal to sell its nearly 25 percent stake in Du Pont back to the company for nearly $10 billion in cash, several people familiar with the negotiations said.
There has been speculation that Seagram's president, Edgar Bronfman Jr., is interested in using the money to try to buy MCA from Matsushita.
But whether his father, Seagram's chairman, would go along is unclear.
A1.


Losing Hope of Regaining Senate, Democrats Focus on House
Many leading Democrats have all but given up hope of regaining control of the Senate in 1996 and are concentrating on persuading wavering House members to run again in the hope of recapturing that chamber.
The Democrats' worries, which have been building since last November, intensified when 73-year-old Howell Heflin of Alabama announced last week that he would retire from the Senate after three terms.
He will be the fourth Democratic Senator to retire next year, and others may well follow.


Toxic Logic in Albany
To the Editor:
Instead of having a corporation that dumps toxic waste in New York State pay for the mess, Michael D. Zagata, Commissioner for Environmental Conservation, wants the consumer to pay (news article, March 25).
If his logic prevailed in the criminal justice system, the victim would go to jail, and the criminal would be free to commit more crimes.


The Rangers' Cup Defense, May Fail Before Playoffs
Having suffered what is possibly the beginning of another losing streak, the Rangers headed today to Florida.
There, they will prepare to face a team that is playing at their level.
Check that.
The Panthers, the second-year Panthers, the expansion Panthers who clutch and grab in their neutral-zone trap, a team made up mostly of castoffs -- yes, those Panthers -- are having a better season than the defending Stanley Cup champions.


A New Mirror on Roosevelt's Moods in the War
CLOSEST COMPANION The Unknown Story of the Intimate Friendship Between Franklin Roosevelt and Margaret Suckley Edited and Annotated by Geoffrey C. Ward Illustrated. 444 pages.
Houghton Mifflin. $24.95.
Margaret Lynch Suckley first met Franklin Delano Roosevelt in the spring of 1922, when Roosevelt's mother invited the young woman to tea at her Hyde Park home, where her son was recuperating from polio and felt starved for companionship.
If Franklin and Daisy, as he called her, began to enjoy each other's company, that was fine with everyone, including Franklin's wife, Eleanor, who had already begun to find caring for him as onerous as he found tiresome her exhortations to exercise.


OPENING DAY IS SET FOR APRIL 26; Replacements Ambling Back To Anonymity
They ambled across the marble floors of the hotel lobby in their suits and ties this morning, still acting like members of the New York Yankees yet still wondering where their charter plane was headed.
The Yankees had not officially told their replacement players where they were flying.
Some carried briefcases that held their minor league contracts, some made telephone calls to their wives describing their anxiety and some sipped coffee, boasted about the experience and called it the most exhilarating six weeks of their once-dormant careers.
The 36 replacement players figured that their status as Yankees would disappear by the time they arrived in Fort Lauderdale, Fla., tonight.


Midtown Dresses Up for Fashion Week


Unhappy Trails: A Clash of Nature Lovers; Hikers Claim Mountain Bikers Are Disturbing the Peace but Bikers Won't Backpedal
The mountain bikers gathering at Mianus River Park were from all over, but they had one thing in common besides their fat-tired bicycles.
They loved the quiet trails in the park, 215 acres of undisturbed woods in the heart of busy Fairfield County.
"I lived on Cat Rock Road near here when I was growing up," Barry Biondo of Stamford said as he lifted two bicycles off the rack of his Porsche Carrera.
"When I got my mountain bike, I remembered this and thought, 'Wow!'


Benefit for Danspace Features Meredith Monk
Meredith Monk and the cast of "Stomp!" will be the featured performers in a benefit on April 25 at 7 P.M. for the Danspace Project, which produces dance performances at St.
Mark's Church.
Robert Crane, vice president of the Joyce Mertz-Gilmore Foundation, will be honored for his leadership in cultural philanthropy.
Tickets for the event, which will take place at the church (Second Avenue and 10th Street, East Village), start at $150 and include cocktails, dinner and the performance.
Information: (212) 674-8112.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Big-name advertisers like Nestle and Nike make big changes on accounts totaling $200 million.
MARCH went out like a lion on Madison Avenue, as advertisers like AT&amp;T, F.T.D., Mobil, Nestle and Nike made changes late last week on advertising, media and interactive accounts with billings estimated at more than $200 million.
On the ad front, Florists' Transworld Delivery in Southfield, Mich., known as F.T.D., has named Grey Advertising in New York to handle its account.
The billings, estimated at more than $20 million, could increase to as much as $35 million.
F.T.D. began a review in January after being bought by Perry Capital in New York; under its previous ownership, the account was divided among J. Walter Thompson Detroit, a unit of the WPP Group; D'Arcy Masius Benton &amp; Bowles in Bloomfield Hills, Mich., and Wunderman Cato Johnson in Detroit, part of Young &amp; Rubicam Inc.


Gingrich Is Seeking To Restore Gay Ban In Military Services
The Speaker of the House, Newt Gingrich, said today that Congress would reopen the issue of homosexuals in the military and would seek to undo President Clinton's two-year-old policy, known as "don't ask, don't tell, don't pursue."
The old policy, which flatly prohibited homosexuals from serving in the armed forces, has been ruled unconstitutional several times in the last three years.
And last week, a Federal judge in New York struck down Mr.
Clinton's new policy, enacted in 1993, saying it was discriminatory and played to the fears of heterosexual troops.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Publishing; On both sides of the political spectrum, the battle over censorship of books continues to rage.
IT must be a backlash against the backlash against the backlash against the "anything goes" mood of the 1960's.
Whatever the case, personal politics and books are tangling more than ever these days, eliciting cries of censorship from one side or the other, or both.
Censorship is a loaded word, one that annoys the parents or teachers who want to zap offending books as well as the author who offends.


Welfare Reform Will Fix a Mindless System; Surviving in America
To the Editor:
I would like to write in comment on the so-called welfare reform notions that are being debated from the perspective of someone who was helped immensely by Federal social welfare programs along the way.


Conner's Boat Stays Alive, on The Water
The burden of losing shifted from the protest room to the race course today for Dennis Conner and his waning America's Cup campaign.
But like a sudden cloud break on an overcast day, the 52-year-old Conner pulled out a victory when he least expected it.
Having forced his enduring adversary, Mighty Mary, over the start line early, Conner and his Stars &amp; Stripes crew sailed off by themselves up the course.


Is Bell Atlantic in Nynex's Future?
Is Nynex destined to be acquired by Bell Atlantic?
It is a tantalizing suggestion -- and not altogether implausible, given the growing web of ties between the two regional Bell operating companies.
On Wall Street, where speculation about deals is a favorite pastime, several analysts said that such a merger makes sense.


Friends Meet in Little Rock


Walker Signs With Giants
The Giants and Herschel Walker agreed on a contract yesterday that will return the running back to Giants Stadium, according to Pat Hanlon, Giants director of public relations.
Terms of the contract were not disclosed.
The team will hold a news conference at Giants Stadium today to announce the signing.
Walker started his professional career with the New Jersey Generals of the United States Football League and played three seasons with the team at Giants Stadium.
Walker signed with Dallas in 1986 and was traded to Minnesota in 1989 in one of the largest trades in National Football League history.


Seagram Is Believed To Be Close to Sale Of Du Pont Shares
The Seagram Company is close to a deal to sell its nearly 25 percent stake in E. I. du Pont de Nemours &amp; Company back to the company for nearly $10 billion in cash, several people familiar with the negotiations said last night.
There has been speculation that Seagram, which owns nearly 15 percent of Time Warner Inc., is also interested in acquiring MCA Inc., the American entertainment company that is owned by the Matsushita Electric Industrial Company of Japan, which bought it for $6.6 billion in 1990.


Buy Space on a Park Bench?
Township council members want to raise money, but they would rather not raise taxes, at least not much.
So they are weighing a plan to sell advertising space on park benches, tennis courts, fences, municipal vehicles, even trash cans.
S T &amp; L Advertising, a township-based firm that has been working with the council, says selling ads could bring in $225,000 a year.
The council will review bid specifications next Monday.
DAVID STOUT


Raritan Ferry Site Inspected
Months ago, the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey said it was considering passenger ferry service to Manhattan from the Edison docks along the Raritan River.
Last week, the authority's supervisor of ferry service, Donald J. Lilioa, inspected the docks.


DANCE
Woman or Goddess Facing the Underworld  Nancy Zendora St. Marks Danspace
Nancy Zendora has a look of hyperalert entrancement.
And that quality pervaded the three mysterious dances she presented on Friday night.


New York City Tourism
By all indications, 1994 was a banner year for tourism in New York City.
The weak dollar, an improving economy and big events like soccer World Cup and the Gay Games healped attract almost 25 million visitors to the city.
Travel experts also credit the continuing decline in crime and the reduction in the tax for hotel rooms for the surge in tourism.
The combined city and state tax fell to 13.25 percent plus $2 a room from 19.25 percent plus $2 on Dec. 1.
But hotels and travel agents began to see an increase in bookings months earlier, when the cuts were announced.


N.C.A.A. TOURNAMENT: Sports of The Times; As Always, the Huskies Can Rely on Lobo
REBECCA LOBO's parents hadn't spoken with her before the game, the game yesterday afternoon that would decide the N.C.A.A. women's national basketball championship between Connecticut and Tennessee.
"We rarely do talk with her beforehand," said her mother RuthAnn, in section 129 of the Target Center arena.
"But we can guess how she's feeling: anxious."


Great American Management &amp; Investment Inc.(GAMI,NSC) reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Symbols of Policy Ills, Public High Rises Fall
They once represented the promise of urban renewal.
But today, two buildings in the Christopher Columbus Homes here were turned to dust, a symbol of well-intentioned housing policies turned bad.
The Newark Housing Authority dynamited the two long-vacant high rises today to make way for new homes at the site.
The 13-story buildings, each with 200 apartments, collapsed upon themselves, just as the demolition experts, Controlled Demolition Inc., of Phoenix, Md., had planned.


Success in Film A Mixed Blessing In the Theater
Movie success doesn't come cheap, the price sometimes being the loss of family, friends, even the face one was born with.
In the case of Ralph Fiennes, the cost has been a certain credibility, at least in the local press.
If his back-to-back performances in "Schindler's List" and "Quiz Show" had not won him such attention, he wouldn't now be headed for Broadway as the star of the new, three-hour "Hamlet" that opens at the Belasco Theater on May 2.
With his dour good looks and darkly ambiguous film persona, the English actor has become that very rare, most ephemeral commodity movie people call box office.


Cherry Blossom Time


Patents; Which Companies Had the Most Patents in 1994? It Depends on Which Set of Statistics You Believe
WHEN trying to make sense of the rankings released last week of top holders of United States patents issued in 1994, perhaps it is wise to keep in mind Samuel Clemens's admonition that there are "lies, damned lies and statistics."
Both the Patent and Trademark Office and the Intellectual Property Owners, a Washington-based trade association representing corporations, have for the second year in a row anointed I.B.M. as the company receiving the most United States patents.


Anderson Imagines Staying
Likening himself to one of the game's great small players, Kenny Anderson said today that he sees himself staying in New Jersey beyond the 1995-1996 season.
"I look at the great players like Isiah Thomas," said Anderson, whose contract expires next season.
"He stayed with Detroit 13 years. Turned it around. Sometimes I look at myself: born and raised in the metropolitan area. I say to myself, 'Man, I could do that.' "


Bridge
Two Californian experts won the Open Pairs title at the American Contract Bridge League's Spring Nationals here on Saturday night.
Evan Bailey and John Strauch, both of San Diego, who have been playing together for nearly a quarter of a century, led after the qualifying stage on Friday and held on to win their first national championship by just four match points.
The standings were: first, Bailey and Strauch, 2169.31; second, Seymon Deutsch of Laredo, Tex., and Tony Forrester of Winter Park, Fla., 2164.85; third, Howard Weinstein of Chicago and Ralph Katz of Burr Ridge, Ill., 2164.0; fourth, Jeff Schuett of Riverwoods, Ill., and Dick Bruno of Chicago, 2111.19; fifth, Justin and Jason Hackett of Manchester, England, 2056.12.


Dressing Up a Sitcom Idea With Metaphoric Accessories
Whatever Doug Wright's "Watbanaland" lacks (charm, credible characters, any certainty of tone), it definitely has symbols to burn.
The comedy, a feverish meditation on fertility and sterility, revolves around a spiritually arid municipal-bonds trader named Park (David Chandler); Flo (Lisa Emery), his high-strung wife, who teaches children while longing for one of her own, and Marilyn (Emily Skinner), his vital, blue-collar secretary, with whom he has had a baby.


Health Systems Accepts Offer From Wellpoint For $1.8 Billion
Fending off a hostile takeover bid by California Blue Shield, Wellpoint Health Networks and Health Systems International signed a definitive agreement over the weekend under which Wellpoint would acquire Health Systems for $1.8 billion, people close to the accord said yesterday.
The stock-swap transaction, which would create one of the nation's biggest health maintenance organizations, would be a victory for Leonard Schaeffer, chairman and chief executive of both Wellpoint and Blue Cross of California, which owns 80 percent of Wellpoint.
Mr.
Schaeffer would be chief executive of the combined company.


Market Place; Kodak, taking the digital plunge, will line up with computer giants.
DESPITE misgivings by some analysts, the stock market appears to be applauding Eastman Kodak's decision to plunge into digital photography using alliances with some of the big players in the computer world.
The price of Kodak's shares has been rising since early this year, when it became clear that the company planned to deal aggressively with the new computer-based technology, whatever the repercussions on its still lucrative chemical- film and sensitized-paper businesses.
The shares, which were selling for about $46 late last year, had climbed to the low 50's before last week's announcement, and ended the week at $53.25.


Rebroadcasting of 'My So-Called Life'
While fans of the ABC drama "My So-Called Life" wait to learn whether the show will be renewed, the 19 episodes that have appeared on ABC Television will be shown on MTV, the rock-music cable television network, starting next Monday.
MTV will broadcast them from 7 to 8 P.M. on consecutive weeknights under a one-time licensing agreement with ABC.
ABC suspended the program last month because of poor ratings, saying it would announce in May whether new episodes would be ordered.


Schneider Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 18


Many Haitians Fearful Despite U.N. Presence
Despite the new United Nations mission of establishing a "safe and stable environment" in Haiti, there is growing nervousness among its people about the future.
The unease stems from an increase in crime and the lack of any immediate and widespread economic relief nearly six months after Jean-Bertrand Aristide was restored as President.
"On balance, the American presence here has been positive," said Necker Dessables, executive director of the Justice and Peace Commission, the human rights arm of the Roman Catholic Church in Haiti.


Trying to Cut Welfare the Ohio Way
When Gov.
George V. Voinovich of Ohio proposed deep cuts in welfare benefits for able-bodied adults four years ago, he predicted that many recipients would finally get off the dole and find a job.
Welfare advocates, meanwhile, spun doomsday scenarios about large increases in homelessness, crime and even death on the streets.
Neither prediction came true, according to welfare officials and researchers here.
But in New York, where Gov.
George E. Pataki is pushing for similar cuts, the same arguments are now framing the debate.


Trump Walks a Tightrope In Plan to Sell Casino Stock
In recent years Donald J. Trump has announced his return from the financial troubles that denied him the enormous yacht, the Boeing 727 and the helicopter he so adored.
But a close reading of the documents he released last week as part of his plan to sell stock in his least troubled gambling casino shows the financial tightrope he is walking.
The announced purpose of the plan was to raise more than $250 million to double the gambling space at the Trump Plaza casino in Atlantic City and to develop a riverboat casino in Gary, Ind., documents filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission state.


For Slain Singer's Father, Memories and Questions
Abraham Quintanilla still sees his daughter not as the 23-year-old Tejano music star who was gunned down on Friday but as a little girl, twirling to the sound of her own voice on the lawn behind their home in a modest neighborhood.
"My mind's been going a hundred miles an hour since this happened, and I just keep replaying the same thing over and over in my head," he said today, two days after her death.
"That's the way I keep seeing her: singing and dancing as a little girl."


Manhattan Business Districts Lift Quality of Life at Small Cost
To the Editor:
Re your report on Manhattan business improvement districts (news article, March 27).
As I advised you before that:


BASEBALL OWNERS QUIT FIGHT; OPENING DAY IS SET FOR APRIL 26
Major league baseball owners, faced with no viable alternative, today accepted the players' offer to return to work, ending the longest work stoppage in professional sports history on the day the 1995 season was supposed to open.
The owners' decision, announced after a four-and-a-half-hour meeting, ended the players' strike after 234 days, or 9 days short of eight months.
The longest previous work stoppage was the 50-day baseball strike in 1981.
The National Hockey League locked out its players for 103 days at the start of this season.


A New Mirror on Roosevelt's Moods in the War
CLOSEST COMPANION The Unknown Story of the Intimate Friendship Between Franklin Roosevelt and Margaret Suckley Edited and Annotated by Geoffrey C. Ward Illustrated. 444 pages.
Houghton Mifflin. $24.95.
Margaret Lynch Suckley first met Franklin Delano Roosevelt in the spring of 1922, when Roosevelt's mother invited the young woman to tea at her Hyde Park home, where her son was recuperating from polio and felt starved for companionship.
If Franklin and Daisy, as he called her, began to enjoy each other's company, that was fine with everyone, including Franklin's wife, Eleanor, who had already begun to find caring for him as onerous as he found tiresome her exhortations to exercise.


Throngs of Boat People to Be Sent Home to Vietnam Soon
Governments throughout Southeast Asia are to begin sending Vietnamese boat people home within weeks, with the United Nations breaking tradition to help in the effort to push tens of thousands of the migrants back to Vietnam by the end of the year, diplomats and United Nations officials say.
Alarmed by violence this month among Vietnamese detained in Hong Kong and the Philippines, governments across the region are beefing up the police presence in the detention camps, where most of the 46,000 boat people are expected to face eviction by the end of the year.


Lady Huskies Win It All, and Girls Across Connecticut Cheer
It was a typical gathering of basketball fanatics, with tortilla chips and bean dip, a mammoth television broadcasting the game and feverish fans whooping their devotion.
But these were not baritone-voiced fans cheering on slam-dunking players.
They were young sisters rooting for the undefeated University of Connecticut women's basketball team -- graceful athletes who have become role models for girls across the state.


Aegon N.V. (AEG,N) reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Corrections
An article yesterday about the smuggling of fuel from Albania to Yugoslavia misstated the volume of the illegal trade estimated by international monitors.
They said the smuggling had reached nearly 1 million liters a day at times, about 264,000 gallons, not 1 million gallons.


Sports of the Times; Arkansas-U.C.L.A.: A Championship That Deserves the Name
BASICALLY, the Final Four boils down to this for me: The attraction is not the fanfare, not the idea of "being there." I like championship things.
Basketball, men's or women's; tennis, men's or women's.
Marbles.
Double Dutch.
Championship instances thrill me: the best competing for high stakes in world-class, no-tomorrow-type situations.
Yesterday, I watched No. 1 Connecticut pull itself off the deck against No. 3 Tennessee in a ferocious battle the Huskies won for the women's basketball championship.


For Stocks, Winners Outnumbered the Losers by 2 to 1 in This Year's First Quarter
After a dismal 1994, investors may have needed a reason to party.
So far this year, they certainly have, celebrating the least bit of good news by sending the stock market to new highs and individual issues soaring in the first quarter.
The Standard &amp; Poor's index of 500 companies, which serves as a general proxy for the market, rose 9 percent in the first three months of 1995, compared with a loss of 1.3 percent last year.
The general euphoria seems to have extended to most of the stocks trading at more than $5 a share on the three major markets: the New York and American stock exchanges and the Nasdaq market, according to data compiled by Media General Financial Services.
The number of winning stocks outnumbered the losers by the rate of almost two to one.
Among the 6,014 issues tracked by Media General, 3,853 closed up in price, compared with just 1,959 losing stocks.


Police See Link to Sheik In 6 Arrests
The police in the Philippines have arrested six Arab men linked to the accused ringleader of the 1993 bombing of the World Trade Center in New York, and seized a cache of weapons and explosives from their Manila apartments, the police announced today.
The Philippine National Police said in a statement that the six men arrested Saturday were Muslim extremists who were "believed to be affiliated" with Sheik Omar Abdel Rahman, the Muslim cleric who is on trial in New York on charges that he plotted to blow up several landmarks in the city.
The police also said the men have ties to Ramzi Ahmed Yousef, who is accused of being the leader of the World Trade Center bombing in 1993.


Edisto Resources Corp.(EDS,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Campbell Mithun Loses Executive
Pat Burnham, an executive vice president and executive creative director at Campbell Mithun Esty in Minneapolis, a unit of Cordiant P.L.C., will leave that agency, where he has worked for six months, to join McKinney &amp; Silver in Raleigh, N.C., as executive vice president and creative director.
"It's an opportunity I couldn't pass up," Mr.
Burnham, 47, said on Friday, because McKinney is "the right size agency with the right amount of accounts." The agency handles accounts like Audi automobiles, marketed by Volkswagen A.G.; Five Alive juice drink, marketed by Coca-Cola Foods, and Philips lighting products, marketed by Philips Electronics N.V.


A New Definition of Friendly Rivalry
The Net reserve center Jayson Williams was asked to describe what went down today between the Knicks and the Nets, why two franchises from opposite ends of the league cannot seem to get along on the floor, how they always end up behaving, well, the way Rick Mahorn usually behaves.
"Everybody's selling woof tickets," Williams said, referring to the amount of refuse spoken by both teams.
"People's pride gets hurt sometimes, but we don't mean nothing by it. It's good for the ratings.


Clipping Files Can Go Directly Into the PC
A RECENT project required clipping articles from newspapers and magazines to refer to later, sometimes months later.
The problem was finding them when they were needed.
The computer's "desktop" and "filing cabinets" are organized far better than the real desktop and filing cabinets.
The computer's hard disk holds much more material than a home office or small office can. (Admittedly, if a hard disk is not kept organized it can get messier than a desk littered with dozens of to-do lists and "while you were out" slips or a file cabinet stuffed with dirty socks and empty beer cans.)


Beard Asks For Some New Nets Next Year
His conversation was laced with frustration, but there was a sound of hope in his voice -- hope that he won't have to deal with many of the same players again next season.
Butch Beard never mentioned names, but for the first time this season he made his desires known.
For the Nets to turn the corner, he said today, major personnel changes will have to be made during the off season.


Sports of The Times; John Wooden Celebrates Harrick Era
HE would not visit the U.C.L.A. dressing room.
He did not think it would be "appropriate" -- a nice old-fashioned word, but then again, John Wooden is a nice old-fashioned man.
The U.C.L.A. players had said they would be thrilled to hear from a man who won 10 of these things.
But John Wooden knew U.C.L.A. was in good hands.
Now there is another era in the Westwood section of Los Angeles.
The Jim Harrick era began with the national championship the Bruins won last night by beating Arkansas, 89-78, as John Wooden watched benignly, with a sweet smile on his face and an occasional mild patter of applause.


Southwestern Public Service Co.(SPS,N) reports earnings for 12mos to Dec 28


Walker's Role With the Giants Is Undefined -- for Now
Both Herschel Walker and Giants Coach Dan Reeves tiptoed around the question of just what the versatile running back will do on the team.
And Reeves was even more careful to say that Walker was not necessarily a replacement for the multipurpose back David Meggett, who signed with the Patriots as a free agent.
But quarterback Dave Brown cut right to the heart of why the Giants decided to give Walker $4.8 million over the next three years (with $1.8 million as a signing bonus).


What Baseball Needs
Napoleon is supposed to have sacked generals he said were unlucky.
Perhaps baseball owners will explain what just happened to them as "bad luck"-- though of course none of them will be sacked.
But bad luck cannot account for the absurd events of the last seven months since the players went on strike and the owners vowed to get a salary cap.
Now, as "real" baseball returns, we have the acting commissioner expressing pleasure that his fellow owners accepted the players' "unconditional" offer to return to work.
That's like Custer saying the Sioux unconditionally offered to come to the battlefield.
Heading into this negotiation, the owners felt cornered by factors beyond their control.
They believed the union was powerful, selfish and led by ideologues who cared little for the game.
Their operating losses, said to be over $400 million in 1994, would reduce franchise values.
Most of all, they believed this negotiation represented their final chance to fix things.


Corrections
A music review in Weekend on Friday about the New York Philharmonic's presentation of Brahms's "German Requiem" on Wednesday referred incorrectly to an instrument in the concert, and a correction on Saturday misidentified the site.
The organ was a small pipe organ brought in for the concert; it was not electric.
The concert was at Avery Fisher Hall, not Carnegie Hall.


French View Their New Library Warily
Once President Francois Mitterrand had personally chosen the design and had earmarked $1.5 billion for the project, engineers built the new National Library of France in just 19 months.
But it may take far longer for Parisians to warm to the latest change in their city's skyline.
Towering over both the Seine River and the rundown district of Tolbiac in southeast Paris, the new library comprises four 240-foot-high buildings that are L-shaped to resemble open books.
Each high rise in turn stands on the corner of a vast rectangular complex built around a wooded courtyard.


Artful Flower Arranging


Israel's Not to Blame For Stalling Peace
To the Editor:
If only Israeli-Palestinian peace were as easy to attain as Anthony Lewis suggests in recent columns from Jerusalem (March 20, 24, 27).


Science Times E-Mail
Science Times has an electronic mail address for comments from readers about published articles and suggested areas of coverage:
scitimes@nytimes.com.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, the Digital Commerce column in Business Day yesterday, about alliances between technology companies and Hollywood, misstated the size of a recent investment in Dreamworks SKG by Paul Allen, a co-founder of the Microsoft Corporation.
It was $500 million, not $500,000.


New Valley to Buy Ladenburg, Thalmann
The New Valley Corporation, the former holding company for Western Union, said yesterday that it would buy Ladenburg, Thalmann &amp; Company, a small investment bank, for $26.8 million.
In a statement, Bennett S. LeBow, chairman and chief executive of New Valley, said the purchase of Ladenburg would help New Valley "pursue an opportunistic acquisition program." New Valley, which is based in Paramus, N.J., is sitting on more than $300 million in cash after completing a reorganization under bankruptcy protection that included the sale of its biggest asset, the Western Union money transfer business.


Accused Serial Killer And 92 Days of Freedom
On July 7, Reginald McFadden walked out of a Pennsylvania state prison to a world of freedom he had not seen since he was a teen-ager 25 years before.
His life sentence for the murder of an elderly Philadelphia woman when he was just 16 had been commuted by Pennsylvania's Governor after the Board of Pardons judged Mr.
McFadden an excellent risk for release.
To make sure that he acclimated himself to life on the outside, the board required that Mr.
McFadden live in a supervised work release program for two years, such as a halfway house that is locked at night.


Yesterday in Washington
TAXES -- Speaker Newt Gingrich agreed to demands by dissident Republicans to tie tax-relief legislation loosely to future reductions in the Federal deficit.
That removed a big barrier to House passage of the tax bill later this week.
The dissidents had held the bill hostage for two weeks, obliquely threatening to block a final vote on it unless they were guaranteed that Congress would not rush tax cuts into law and then renege on its promise to cut spending as well.
The accord yesterday gave leaders assurance that their five-year, $189 billion package of tax cuts would pass an increasingly skeptical House.
HEALTH INSURANCE DEDUCTION -- The Senate agreed to extend a tax deduction for health insurance for self-employed workers.
The measure, contained in a House-Senate conference report, cleared the Senate by a unanimous voice vote and now goes to President Clinton, who is expected to sign it.
The measure would allow an estimated 3.2 million self-employed people to deduct for tax purposes 25 percent of the cost of their health insurance premiums.
MEDICARE -- The Medicare trust fund that pays hospital bills for the elderly will run out of money in 2002, the Clinton Administration told Congress.
The annual report said that Medicare's hospital insurance program was now "severely out of financial balance" and that there was an urgent need for Congress to address the problem.
But it recommended no specific measures.
POLICY ON HOMOSEXUALS -- Gay-rights advocates, senior military officers and even some Republicans expressed surprise at Speaker Newt Gingrich's assertion that Congress would try to undo a two-year-old compromise policy on homosexuals in the military.
"This certainly isn't a part of the Contract With America," said Senator Dan Coats, an Indiana Republican on the Armed Services Committee.
"We firmly believe there is not a problem with the existing law."


Bassett Furniture Industries Inc.(BSET,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


Aid to Fledgling Magazine
U.S.
News &amp; World Report will invest in a new magazine aimed at young people in business called Fast Company, a spokesman for U.S.
News said yesterday.
The magazine is being started by two former editors of the Harvard Business Review, Alan Webber and William Taylor.
A test issue of the magazine in November 1993 was well received, the U.S.
News spokesman said.
U.S.
News will help with distribution and advertising for the new magazine, which expects to publish two issues next fall and then begin a regular publishing schedule next year.


Accused Serial Killer And 92 Days of Freedom
On July 7, Reginald McFadden walked out of a Pennsylvania state prison to a world of freedom he had not seen since he was a teen-ager 25 years before.
His life sentence for the murder of an elderly Philadelphia woman when he was just 16 had been commuted by Pennsylvania's Governor after the Board of Pardons judged Mr.
McFadden an excellent risk for release.
To make sure that he acclimated himself to life on the outside, the board required that Mr.
McFadden live in a supervised work release program for two years, such as a halfway house that is locked at night.


Bittersweet Success; The Failure of Replacement Baseball Is a Labor Victory, and an Exception
In the 1920's and 1930's, deployment of club-swinging company goons stirred sympathy for striking workers and made the American labor movement an institution in the nation's mainstream.
In the eight-month baseball strike that ended on Sunday, management deployed the club of the 1980's and 1990's, the permanent replacement worker.
Other employers are using it right now.
In 1991 the Diamond Walnut Growers in Stockton, Calif., permanently replaced 500 workers who are members of the International Brotherhood of Teamsters, and the workers are still on the picket line, living on charity and minuscule strike benefits.
The Japanese owners of Bridgestone-Firestone, the tire company, have put 2,300 permanent replacements in four factories in the Midwest where the United Rubber Workers went on strike last July.


Mr. Pataki's Resistance to New Voters
There has been a surge in voter registration in New York and other states since the Federal "motor-voter" law went into effect in January that allows citizens to register at motor-vehicle and social service agencies.
That should be heartening news to anyone committed to increasing participation in the democratic process.
But apparently not to Gov.
George Pataki.
As a State Senator with statewide aspirations last year, Mr.
Pataki voted for the bill instituting this popular program.
Now in the Governor's mansion, he is quietly trying to thwart the effort, apparently fearful that adding more voters to the rolls will hurt Republicans.


Retracting Words, White House Halts C.I.A. Money to Guatemala
The Clinton Administration conceded tonight that money was still flowing from the Central Intelligence Agency to Guatemala's military intelligence services and said that the bulk of those payments would be suspended immediately.
Senior officials said that Secretary of State Warren Christopher misspoke when he said on Sunday that the payments had ceased.
The officials acknowledged that the record on the "liaison" payments needed to be corrected.
The payments bought information on military matters, internal Guatemalan politics and the army's long war against a small guerrilla force and included outright bribery.


With a Passion for Tax Cuts, and in Power
WASHINGTON, April 3 -- Dan Rostenkowski's first instinct when it came to tax legislation was that the rich should pay more and the poor less.
Because Congressional committees adopt the coloration of their chairmen, that was the main view of the House Ways and Means Committee, the most powerful committee in the House, during the dozen years Mr.
Rostenkowski dominated it.


Learning to Live With Cougar Neighbors
To the Editor:
Your March 26 news article about the most recent encounter between a human being and a mountain lion in California saddened me because I knew that it would be followed by an article about the mountain lion's unnecessary slaying (news article, March 29).


Almost Anything Goes in Birth Science in Italy
First there were the "granny moms," a series of women who had babies in their 50's, even in their 60's.
Then there was the case in January of baby Elisabetta, who was supposedly conceived from an egg taken from a woman who had died two years before and carried to term by her father's sister.
With these and other tales of artificial fertilization making headlines, the next announcement was not as amazing as it might seem.


Blyth Industries Inc.(BTH,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


2 Troopers Indicted In Hit-Run Cover-Up
Two New York State troopers have been indicted in a scheme to cover up evidence in a 1993 hit-and-run accident where the driver was another trooper's brother, the Westchester County District Attorney said.


It's Not How High a Home Is, but Whether It Measures Up
PEOPLE here say that having two buildings blown to smithereens is the best thing to happen in Newark in a long time.
Harold Walker and Paul Johns watched the big event at the Christopher Columbus Homes housing project the other day with three friends.
They took photos and videotaped the scene for posterity.
"Ooh-ee," said Mr.
Walker.
"It was bee-yoo-ti-ful."


Full Inquiry Into Death Of a Girl, 4
The New York State Health Department said yesterday that it was beginning a full-scale investigation into the death of a 4-year-old girl who bled to death four days after undergoing a tonsillectomy last month.
The girl, Desiree Wade of Manhattan, was a member of the Health Insurance Plan of New York, New York's largest health maintenance organization, and had her surgery at St.
Luke's Hospital in Manhattan.
H.M.O.'s frequently contract with local hospitals to provide surgical care.


Decade-Old Mystery Unravels
Dental records confirmed yesterday that the skeletal remains discovered in a wooded area over the weekend were those of Donna Macho, 19, who vanished in 1984.
She was reported missing from her East Windsor home by her parents.
Her car was found nearby the night she disappeared.


Lilly Industries (LICIA,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


Observer; The Cry Of the Titanic
The Coast Guard has abandoned the Morse code.
Or to express it in an anguished cry of that now obsolete tongue: "Dit-dit-dit, dah-dah-dah, dit-dit-dit."
It has to be said very fast -- "ditditdit dahdahdah ditditdit" -- and means, of course, S O S.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  INQUIRY BEGINS INTO DEATH OF 4-YEAR-OLD
The New York State Health Department said that it was beginning a full-scale investigation into the death of a 4-year-old girl who bled to death four days after undergoing a tonsillectomy last month.
The girl was operated on as an outpatient and was sent home after the procedure, but died four days later, coughing up blood.
B3.
FATHER OF THE BRIDE RECALLS A SHOOTING
Like many a father of the bride, Gerald Schaeffer was "just tagging along" as his wife and two daughters shopped for a wedding dress in a well-known Upper East Side boutique.
But then a man with a silver gun appeared from the stairway and demanded his wallet, and they got into a shoving match.
"We started fussing for a minute," Mr.
Schaeffer testified in a Manhattan court, "and the next thing I know, I'm shot in the stomach." B3.
INFORMER DENIES INVENTING BOMB PLOT
The Government's chief informer in the terrorism trial of Sheik Omar Abdel Rahman and 10 others repeatedly denied that he engineered a conspiracy to blow up buildings, bridges and tunnels in New York.
Under vigorous cross-examination by a defense lawyer in Federal District Court in Manhattan, the informer, Emad A. Salem, a former Egyptian military officer, said it was the men on trial who revealed to him that they were prepared to carry out the scheme.
B3.
CON ED PENALIZED FOR SAFETY VIOLATIONS
Consolidated Edison has agreed to pay a $217,800 penalty for violating worker safety rules in connection with a steam explosion that killed a mechanic and badly burned several firefighters in November 1992 at a generating station in Manhattan, the company said.
B3.
GUILTY PLEA IN KIDNAPPING PLOT
In State Supreme Court in Manhattan yesterday, Fermin Rodriguez pleaded guilty to organizing the kidnapping plot two years ago that left his boss a captive for 12 days in a hole in a hillside overlooking the Hudson River.
B2.
REGION  BLAME FLIES AS TALKS DEADLOCK
Negotiations over a new state budget remained deadlocked as Governor Pataki and legislative leaders spent the afternoon blaming each other for the impasse.
Mr.
Pataki charged that his Democratic opponent, Assembly Speaker Sheldon Silver, was secretly trying to increase spending on welfare and health care programs by $1 billion or more.
Mr.
Silver denied trying to restore money for welfare, saying his primary goal is to soften cuts to higher education and services for the elderly and middle class.
B4.
A LIFE TOO SHORT: AN 8-YEAR-OLD IS SLAIN
When 8-year-old Jakiyah McClain asked if she could play at her best friend's house a block away, her mother said yes -- if she didn't stay too long.
"We never saw her again," her mother, Pamela McClain, 29, of Newark, said as she tearfully described her daughter's abduction and killing on Saturday night.
The suspect, a 29-year-old homeless man, is a childhood friend of Ms.
McClain's fiance.
B5.
NEW PRESIDENT NAMED AT WESLEYAN
Douglas J. Bennet Jr., Assistant Secretary of State for International Organization Affairs and a former head of National Public Radio and the United States Agency for International Development, is to be elected the next president of Wesleyan University, officials at the university said.
B5.
Our Towns by Evelyn Nieves B5


Review/Fashion; The Cool, the Colorful, the Comic
Fashion designers have increasingly been operating like stand-up comics; they identify stereotypes and play off them for the easy score.
Clothes are for the socialite, the club kid, the corporate executive or the creative soul.
As with comedy, the clothes become more interesting when stereotypes are broken, not bought into.
New York designers, whose fall 1995 collections began over the weekend, are great proponents of theme-park collections, and old habits die hard.
With only 30 minutes to define an image for six months of sales, designers become all too dependent on easily discernible codes.


GINGRICH PROMISES TO TIE TAX RELIEF TO CUTS IN DEFICIT
Speaker Newt Gingrich agreed with dissident Republicans today to loosely tie his treasured tax-relief legislation to future reductions in the Federal deficit, removing a big barrier to passage of the tax bill in the House of Representatives later this week.
The dissidents had held the bill hostage for two weeks, obliquely threatening to block a final vote unless they were guaranteed that Congress would not rush tax cuts into law, then renege on its promise to cut spending as well.


Review/Fashion; 'Real' Clothes, Serious to Sublime
Fireworks may be missing from the first days of the fall shows here, but there's no shortage of real clothes with a modern edge.
Yeohlee served up not only the superb coats she is known for but also neat suits with well-cut jackets and evening dresses that managed to be sexy yet ladylike.


Summer Science Camp Deserves City Funds
To the Editor:
On March 24 at the National Science Teachers Association convention in Philadelphia, the Ohaus Corporation presented its Innovation in Science Teaching Award to Midwood High School in Brooklyn for its summer science research program.
This modest program involves teaching laboratory and computer skills on the campus of Brooklyn College to 10th and 11th graders.


Former United Way Chief Guilty In Theft of More Than $600,000
A Federal jury today found William Aramony, the former president of United Way of America, guilty of stealing more than $600,000 from the charity and using the money to pay for vacations, luxury apartments and other benefits for himself and his teen-age girlfriend.
The case has been an embarrassment both to the independent United Way organizations and to the charitable sector generally.
United Way is one of the country's biggest charities, raising more than $3 billion through payroll checkoff plans.
United Way of America, which Mr.
Aramony headed for 22 years, provided the local, independent fund-raising drives with marketing, training and other services.


Top Informer Denies Faking Conspiracy For Bombings
The Government's chief informer in the terrorism trial of Sheik Omar Abdel Rahman and 10 others repeatedly denied yesterday that he engineered a conspiracy to blow up buildings, bridges and tunnels in New York City.
Under vigorous cross-examination by a defense lawyer in Federal District Court in Manhattan, the informer, Emad Salem, a former Egyptian military officer, said it was the men on trial who revealed to him that they were prepared to carry out the scheme.
He denied defense accusations that he had urged the defendants to participate in a plan of his own devising.


Ballot Names Still at Issue
Ballots for the April 18 school board elections must be at the printers tomorrow.
But two candidates are still not sure they can list their names the way they want to: Phyllis Spinelli and Ines Garcia.
Mayor Anthony Russo -- who backs another slate -- says that Mrs.
Spinelli omitted her married name, Evans, and that Ines Garcia Keim included her maiden name, Garcia, to get the votes of Hispanic and Italian residents, who make up a third of this city's population of 33,000.
The dispute ended up before a judge, who said the candidates could list their names the way they wanted.
But the ballots are not inked yet, so the appeals go on.


Yanks Open the Door, And 3 Players Come In
The Yankees opened their parking lot gates and were ready for major league business on a voluntary basis today, but only three players trickled in.
The former replacement players on the premises outnumbered the real Yankees for at least another day as baseball methodically tried creeping back toward some semblance of normalcy.
Reliever Joe Ausanio was actually the only new Yankee to arrive here today, because Steve Howe has been working out since February and Paul O'Neill since last Thursday.
Manager Buck Showalter, who had initially hoped the team would conduct informal workouts today and Tuesday, stepped back from his wish and said several players are expected for Wednesday's voluntary workout.


Man Pleads Guilty in the Kidnapping of His Boss
First, there was the Fermin Rodriguez who worked behind a sewing machine for eight years, making pants for tuxedos.
And then, in State Supreme Court in Manhattan yesterday, there was the Fermin Rodriguez who pleaded guilty to organizing the kidnapping plot two years ago that left his boss a captive for 12 days in a hole in a hillside overlooking the Hudson River.
How one became the other was never explained in the pretrial hearing before Justice Herbert I. Altman, although Mr.
Rodriguez and his conspirators had asked for $3 million in ransom in the kidnapping of Harvey Weinstein on Aug. 4, 1993.


Tokyo Journal; With Cult Under Cloud, It's Still His Guiding Star
For a member of a cult that stockpiled the chemicals to make nitroglycerine and nerve gas, the striking thing about Shinnosuke Sakamoto is that he is smart and likable.
Mr.
Sakamoto is an active member of Aum Shinrikyo, the sect that despite categorical denials is under suspicion for the nerve-gas attack on Tokyo's subway system last month.
But Mr.
Sakamoto's manner and background underscore that the group is much more complex than it seems at first, and that whether or not its members are criminal they are often cerebral.


Plans for SUNY and CUNY Won't Work
To the Editor:
Gov.
George E. Pataki of New York was rightfully angered by the use of campus resources by administrators and mobilization of students by teachers on classroom time to protest proposed budget-cutting measures for the State and City Universities of New York (news article, March 24).
But he offers three proposals that seem to have been spun by the accountants, who have little idea what universities are about.


Fire Guts a Town's Only School
A smoky fire destroyed this town's only school last night, forcing the evacuation of 15 families who live across the street from the school, injuring four firefighters and leaving 130 pre-kindergarten through eighth-grade pupils without a place to attend classes today.
"For a lot of us who grew up in this town, it was very devastating," said Frederick Viteka, emergency management coordinator for the town, which has 1,600 residents.
"Most of the people who live here went to that school, and their children are now going to that school."


Lawsuits Don't Tell Affirmative Action Story
To the Editor:
The draft Labor Department report indicating that affirmative action has not unfairly harmed whites misses the point (news article, March 31).
The study's conclusion rests on the fact that there have been few successful reverse-discrimination lawsuits.
However, the major complaint against affirmative action is not that it is illegal, but that it is legal.


Williamson and the Razorbacks Simply Run Out of Steam
Corliss Williamson's toughest season, perhaps his final one at Arkansas, came to a crushing, exhaustive end last night.
The Razorbacks' wide-bodied junior forward -- pushed, squeezed, surrounded by Bruins -- was held to 12 points as Arkansas failed in its bid to repeat as national champion.


Women's Game Ratings Up
CBS's telecast of the University of Connecticut's 70-64 victory Sunday over Tennessee in the final of the women's National Collegiate Athletic Association basketball championship generated a 5.6 preliminary overnight Nielsen rating, an impressive 93 percent above last year's 2.9 rating.
The game earned its highest rating in Hartford, which posted a 38.0.
Washington rated a 9.3, Kansas City an 8.6, Minneapolis 8.3, Cleveland 7.9 and New York 5.4.
Three National Basketball Association regional regular-season games on NBC drew a 5.0 average.


Lawsuits Don't Tell Affirmative Action Story; Mirror of Diversity
To the Editor:
We write to express our support for affirmative action because we care about the future we want to help create for our children.


U.S. Supports Long Distance For Ameritech
The Justice Department announced yesterday the details of a proposal that would allow a regional Bell company to offer long-distance telephone service to customers in parts of Illinois and Michigan.
But several of the other six Baby Bells immediately criticized the plan, saying that it would impede -- rather than accelerate -- the entry of local phone companies into the $66 billion long-distance business.
The companies also said the proposal was at odds with a sweeping telecommunications bill that the United States Senate is scheduled to debate this week.


Dow Rises 10.72 as U.S. Vainly Tries to Prop Up the Dollar
As the Clinton Administration tried unsuccesfully to keep the dollar from falling to another record low against the yen, the stock and bond markets seemed to respond, if only slightly.
The Dow Jones industrial average rose 10.72 points, to 4,168.41, while the broader Standard &amp; Poor's 500-stock index rose 1.14 points, to 501.85.
The smaller-company Nasdaq composite index rose 0.84 point, to 818.05.


First the Fire; Then Things Got Bad; Two Years Later, a Westchester Co-op Is Still in Limbo
Ruth and Tanweer Khan had saved for six years to buy a co-op apartment in this well-to-do Westchester village.
Like most home buyers, they made the purchase only after a team of lawyers, bank and title company officials, mortgage and insurance experts and even a building inspector signed off on the physical and financial health of 68 East Hartsdale Avenue.
The Khans are not the type to take chances.
"We planned every aspect of our lives from the time we were married," Mrs.
Khan said.


EchoStar Communications Corp. reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Ornda Healthcorp (ORND,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


Gaza Rally Blames Israel for Blast; Police Call It Hamas Accident
Calling for revenge against Israel, thousands of chanting supporters of the militant Islamic group Hamas marched through Gaza today in a memorial procession for Palestinians killed in a bomb blast that ripped through a Hamas hideout in a crowded residential neighborhood on Sunday.
Hamas accused Israel and the Palestinian Authority of engineering the explosion that killed at least five people, including Kamal Kheil, a Hamas gunman wanted for a series of anti-Israeli attacks.


Washington and the Kurds
Turkey's invasion of northern Iraq to hunt down Kurdish guerrillas is now in its third week.
The conflict may appear obscure to Americans, but it is deceptively dangerous.
The military results are unclear, since Turkey has restricted press coverage.
But the fighting has brought new suffering to Kurdish civilians, damaged Turkey's international reputation and complicated Washington's efforts to balance competing interests in a strategically sensitive region.


The Oakland Celebrates Men Together
The Oakland Ballet is a 30-year-old troupe with a solid but uninflected classical style that no doubt allows its dancers to move comfortably through a variety of ballet genres, including major revivals from the Diaghilev period.
Insouciant humor, dreaminess and a plain but poignant look at men and partnering were the keynotes of a program it presented on Saturday night at the Brooklyn Center for the Performing Arts at Brooklyn College.
The centerpiece of the program was Remy Charlip's new "Ludwig and Lou," a 2-part piece for 10 male dancers, set to music by Beethoven and Lou Harrison.
Part of the interest lay in Mr.
Charlip's compositional methods.
The choreographer is also an artist (and costume designer), and for some time he has been creating dances by mail.
Drawings of figures in motion are sent to companies around the world, and the companies create the dances by reproducing the images.


U.S. Intervenes To Back Dollar, But Move Fails
The Clinton Administration ended more than a month of currency inaction and sought to defend the battered dollar today by pouring some $1 billion into markets in Asia and the United States.
But it failed to stem an assault on the currency by speculators around the globe.
The support for the dollar was matched by public statements that seemed intended to dispel perceptions that Washington had no intention of taking drastic action to rein in the large trade and budget deficits that contribute to the dollar's weakness.


Oldest Multicell Organisms Are Reported in Fossil Find
FOSSILS of multicelled organisms that appear to have lived millions of years before any previously known have been found in Mexico, according to geologists led by Dr.
Mark McMenamin of Mount Holyoke College in Massachusetts.
The organisms, resembling small jellyfish, evolved long before the appearance of bones.
They lived an estimated 590 million years ago,about 15 million years earlier than other known fossils of multicellular life, Dr.
McMenamin said.


Olive Branch to Jews From Conservative Christian
In an effort to warm relations between two organizations that have collided loudly of late, the executive director of the Christian Coalition told leaders of the Anti-Defamation League of B'nai B'rith tonight that some Christian conservatives "have been insensitive" to the sufferings that Jews have endured throughout history.
The director, Ralph E. Reed Jr., also said it was a "blatant wrong" for some on the religious right to talk of the United States as a "Christian nation."


Father of Bride Recalls Shooting Horror at East Side Boutique
Like many a father of the bride, Gerald Schaeffer was "just tagging along" as his wife and two daughters shopped for a wedding dress in a well-known Upper East Side boutique.
But then a man with a silver gun appeared from the stairway and demanded his wallet, and they got into a shoving match.
"We started fussing for a minute," Mr.
Schaeffer testified in a Manhattan court yesterday, "and the next thing I know, I'm shot in the stomach."


Q&amp;A
Fabric Softener Sheets
Q.  How does a fabric-softener sheet work?


Rating Is Cut For Prudential
The rating of the Prudential Insurance Company of America was reduced a notch, to "excellent" from "superior," because of weak earnings and lawsuits resulting from improper sales practices at its securities and insurance subsidiaries, the A. M. Best Company said yesterday.
Earlier this year, Prudential announced a $907 million loss for 1994 and plans to sell its mortgage lending business, one of the country's largest.
A.
M.
Best said that Prudential had made significant efforts to improve its profit but that those efforts might not bear fruit for a year or two.


Two Little Words Add Up To One Big Game for Riley
Two simple words.
That's all Pat Riley needed to describe Tuesday night's showdown between the Knicks and Indiana Pacers at Madison Square Garden.
"Big game," the Knicks coach said after practice today.


Corrections
A chart in Business Day yesterday with an article about the performance of Wall Street underwriters mislabeled the rankings of the leading securities underwriters.
They were for the first quarter of 1995, not the second quarter of 1994.


A Growth Industry: Helping Recall Sexual Abuse
Are an adult's memories of childhood sexual abuse believable?
That is a central question of "Divided Memories," a probing and often affecting four-hour documentary that begins tonight on PBS.
But like the memories themselves, Ofra Bikel's report has a far wider reach.
It touches on feminist ideology; fashions and hype in psychotherapy; the responsibilities of therapists and their attitudes toward truth; the impact of accusations of sexual abuse on parents and families, and the ability of the courts to sort out fact from fantasy.
Ms.
Bikel talks with therapists, with their clients, both grateful and disenchanted, and with the clients' parents and relatives.
We hear from those who maintain that past sexual abuse is at the heart of much of the distress that brings people, especially women, into treatment, and from those who say that memories of abuse are being induced and families are being destroyed.


Student Wounded in Schoolyard Shooting
An unidentified youth fired six shots into the schoolyard of Clara Barton High School in Crown Heights, Brooklyn, at about 9:30 A.M. yesterday, slightly wounding a 16-year-old sophomore, said Officer Annamarie Viola, a police spokeswoman.
The wounded student, Robert Spring, was standing near the school's entrance with his 17-year-old cousin, who was not identified, when the gunman, apparently a teen-ager, opened fire with a 25-millimeter automatic, a police spokeswoman said.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Madison Avenue hails baseball's return, but don't try to increase those fees just yet, sports fans.
ONE of the loudest sighs of relief at the end of the longest, most bitter strike in baseball history is emanating from Madison Avenue, which spends an estimated $1 billion annually on sponsoring everything from broadcasts of games to the signs that festoon stadiums.
Yet that enthusiasm is tempered by the realization the strike has seriously damaged Major League Baseball, from the 921 lost games to the records that won't be set because of back-to-back shortened seasons.
Advertisers, teams and the sport itself face a daunting task in trying to restore baseball's luster.


Devils Trade Fetisov
Vyacheslav Fetisov, who pioneered the exodus of hockey players from Russia to the National Hockey League, was traded to the Detroit Red Wings yesterday by the New Jersey Devils, who brought the heralded defenseman to the United States six years ago.
"I'm very happy to go to Detroit," Fetisov said yesterday, hours after the Devils sent him to the Red Wings for a third-round choice in the June draft.
"I talked with Scotty Bowman today and he told me they traded for me because they want me to play."


Rite Aid Corp.(RAD,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 4


Chess
The three remarkable Polgar sisters from Budapest live in harmony despite the competitive nature of chess.
They analyze together and even become each other's seconds for important contests.
But they don't agree on everything.
The highest ranked, the 18-year-old grandmaster Judit, spurns all-women events.
But the 25-year-old grandmaster Zsuzsa no longer does.
She competed in the last cycle of the women's world championship and this time she won the candidates match and will challenge the grandmaster Xie Jun of China for the title.


Harvey Penick, 90, Golf's Top Author, Dies
Harvey Penick, the golf instructor whose little red book of hints and witticisms became the best-selling sports book in history when he was 87 years old, died at his home in Austin., Tex., on Sunday.
He was 90 years old and had been in poor health for some time.
Only a week before Mr.
Penick died, Ben Crenshaw, one of professional golf's top players and best putters, visited the ailing Mr.
Penick at his home.
Frail, hard-of-hearing, and bed-ridden, Mr.
Penick was made aware that Mr.
Crenshaw, his longtime pupil, was having trouble with his putting.


Edney Had To Lead From The Bench
John Wooden was worried.
Jim Harrick was worried.
Everyone was worried, except Ed O'Bannon.
When the U.C.L.A.
Bruins sensed before tip-off that Tyus Edney would not be able to play in the national championship game because of a sprained right wrist, it was O'Bannon, their all-America senior forward, who gathered his anxious teammates and told them not to worry.
"It's just a pickup game," he told them.


It's All Hail UConn, All Night, All Day
The Connecticut women's basketball team was still in Minnesota, still celebrating the championship ending to their perfect season.
Halfway across the country, thousands of supporters were also reveling in the Huskies' victory over Tennessee in the National Collegiate Athletic Association title game on Sunday.


Californians Have Stake in Health Care Merger
To the Editor:
Re "Thorny Issues Are Holding Up a Pivotal Health Care Deal" (Business Day, March 30): Like Wall Street investors, California consumers have a huge stake in a possible health maintenance organization merger between Blue Cross-Wellpoint Health Networks and Health Systems International.


Wizardry Is Alive and Well in Westwood
They embraced a legacy that has frustrated so many others, a collection of championships that may never be equaled as long as the college game is played.
The U.C.L.A.
Bruins paid close attention, listening to the ones that had come before.
They heard of the fun, and the joy, that comes with adding to the banners that hang from the roof of Pauley Pavilion.
And tonight, confronting the daunting circumstance of dealing with a defending national champion while without Tyus Edney, their most important player, the Bruins pushed two burdensome decades into the past and made that joy their own.


Telemundo Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Blackhawks' Roenick Is Out for Season
The Chicago Blackhawks' JEREMY ROENICK can't hate Dallas's DERIAN HATCHER.
"It was just a collision," he said yesterday, the day after Hatcher's hit ended Roenick's season with a knee injury.
"I've got respect for Derian. I don't think he was trying to injure me. He works hard. He's tough. And sometimes, in the spur of the moment, things happen."
Roenick, Chicago's best player and inspirational leader, was in pain.
His left knee in a brace, crutches at his side, he knows he has a long rehabilitation ahead to mend his torn anterior cruciate ligament.
He'll undergo more tests in a few weeks.
"And then I'll find out the real news," he said, "whether it's 4 months or 12."


TRANSACTIONS
CALIFORNIA ANGELS -- Assigned Tony Mack and Darrel Akerfelds, pitchers, and Jose Peguero, infielder, to Vancouver of the Pacific Coast League; Fred Diaz, Tom Redington, J.D.
Ramirez and Joe Urso, infielders, to Midland of the Texas League; Chris Powell, Derrin Doty and Greg Shockey, outfielders, and Shawn Slade and Carlos Castillo, pitchers, to Lake Elsinore of the California League; and Jon DeClue, Tony Fetchel and Dean Locklear, pitchers; Joel Smith, catcher; and Allan Parker, infielder, to Visalia of the California League.
Sent Steve Peck, pitcher, to extended spring training in Mesa, Ariz.
Invited Shawn Boskie, Ken Patterson and Darrel Akerfields, pitchers; Andy Allanson and Daniel Alzuaide, catchers; Carlos Martinez, infielder; and Steve Hosey, outfielder, to spring training.
KANSAS CITY ROYALS -- Released Mike Browning, Tom Dozier, Gary Eave, Mark Huismann, Orlando Lind, Greg Mathews, Kevin Shaw and Rich Simon, pitchers; Rick Allen, Ed Jurak, Bo Kennedy, Steve Kiefer, Mica Lewis and Jim Wilson, infielders; Tony Brown, Mike Loggins, Lonnie Maclin and Jeff Schulz, outfielders; and Jamie Nelson, catcher.
OAKLAND ATHLETICS -- Agreed to terms with Dennis Eckersley, pitcher, on a one-year contract.
Reassigned Jeff Bittiger, Gary Haught, Tom Hostetler, Dan Murphy, Tim Peek, Rob Pierce, Scott Rose, Steve Shoemaker, Aaron Taylor, and Carlos Thomas, pitchers; Garrett Beard and Clay Gunn, catchers; Doug Saunders, Mark Sobolewski and Jim Waggoner, infielders; and Kash Beauchamp, Terance Frazier and Dane Walker, outfielders, to their minor league camp in Arizona.
Released Bruce Arola, Marco Contreras, Jerry Creamer, Larry Melton, Pat O'Brien, Auturo Ontiveros, Gary Painter and Barry Parisotto, pitchers; Tom Carcione, catcher; Mike Hankins, Keith Kimberlin, Ken Shamburg and Ron Witmeyer, infielders; and Pat Brady, Steve DeAngelis, Stu Pederson and Shawn Scott, outfielders.
TORONTO BLUE JAYS -- Assigned Pat Tilmon, pitcher; Warren Sawkiw, outfielder; and Roberto Montalvo and Edgar Diaz, infielders, to Syracuse of the International League; Joshua Spring, pitcher, to Dunedin of the Florida State League; and Aurelio Llanos, infielder-outfielder, to Hagerstown of the South Atlantic League.
National League METS -- Signed Brent Knackert and Bob Stoddard, pitchers, and Herm Winningham, outfielder, to minor league contracts.
CHICAGO CUBS -- Signed Luis DeLeon, pitcher, and Steve Fanning, infielder, to contracts with Iowa of the American Association; Kenny Coleman and Bobby Magallanes, infielders; Jack Johnson, catcher; and Kevin Meier, pitcher, to contracts with Orlando of the Southern League; Matt Connolly, pitcher, to a contract with Daytona of the Florida State League; and Doug Kimbler, infielder, and Scott May, pitcher, to contracts with Rockford of the Midwest League.
COLORADO ROCKIES -- Announced the retirement of Dave Rodriguez, pitcher.
Released Sam Ferretti, infielder; Garland Kiser, Randy Kramer and Mark Ohlms, pitchers; and Timmie Morrow, outfielder.
Football  National Football League  ATLANTA FALCONS -- Signed Bobby Evans, safety, to a one-year contract.
ARIZONA CARDINALS -- Traded Ricky Proehl, wide receiver, to the Seattle Seahawks for a fourth-round draft choice in 1995.
CINCINNATI BENGALS -- Signed Tom Waddle, wide receiver.
GREEN BAY PACKERS -- Traded Terrell Buckley, defensive back, to the Miami Dolphins for past considerations.
Signed Rickey Dixon, defensive back, and James Willis, linebacker.
LOS ANGELES RAIDERS -- Named John Guy defensive assistant coach.
NEW ORLEANS SAINTS -- Signed Richard Harvey, linebacker, to a two-year contract.
NEW YORK GIANTS -- Signed Herschel Walker, running back, to a three-year contract.
Arena Football League  ARIZONA RATTLERS -- Signed Brian Fox, quarterback.
MIAMI HOOTERS -- Traded Junior Lli, lineman, to the St.
Louis Stampede for Junior Tagaloa, wide receiver-linebacker.
ORLANDO PREDATORS -- Waived Bobby Sign, lineman.
Signed Jackie Walker, lineman.
Canadian Football League  MEMPHIS MAD DOGS -- Signed Chris Gardner, placekicker, and Rodney Harding, defensive tackle.


CHRONICLE
MARVIN GAYE 3D became a father on Saturday, the 11th anniversary of the death of his father, the soul singer, The Associated Press reported.
MARVIN GAYE 4TH was born at Cedars-Sinai Medical Center in Los Angeles, his father said on Sunday.
The premature infant was delivered by Caesarean section to Jenny-Joi Fennimore, 20.


Picking a Wallet to Unfold
Everyone agrees that the state needs to refinance the trust fund for road and transit improvements.
But how?
Should the money come from the state's gasoline tax?
Or from a surcharge on motor vehicle registration?
Those questions occupied a joint session of the Senate and Assembly appropriations committees yesterday.
Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman wants to extend the registration surcharge, which costs car owners an average of $22.50 a year.
Senator Bill Haines, a Burlington Republican and chairman of the Senate Transportation Committee, favors using 9 cents from the state's gas tax of 10.5 cents a gallon, because some of that money would come from out-of-state drivers.
"It's a fairer system," he said.


SOCCER REPORT
Italy
Juventus took a giant step toward its first league title in nine years with a 2-0 triumph over reigning champion AC Milan at San Siro last Saturday on goals by Fabrizio Ravanelli and Gianluca Vialli.


Giuliani Calls For More Cuts By Agencies
The Giuliani administration told the heads of city agencies yesterday to prepare for even deeper cuts in spending than Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani had already planned for the next fiscal year.
Commissioners were ordered to submit proposals for $300 million more in savings, on top of $600 million in cuts to agencies that the Mayor had already outlined in his preliminary $30.5 billion spending plan.


Knogo Insider Is Penalized and Fined by S.E.C.
The Securities and Exchange Commission said yesterday that Lawrence Ronald Freedman, an auditor in West Palm Beach, Fla., had consented to giving up potential profits of $11,236 and paying a fine of the same amount for using insider information to buy the stock of the Knogo Corporation last June.
The commission said that when it filed its complaint against Mr.
Freedman yesterday, in United States District Court for the Southern District of New York, Mr.
Freedman agreed to the judgment against him and to an injunction against future violations.


Market Place; As competition heats up, big utilities hunt for acquisitions.
RICHARD B. PRIORY, the president and chief operating officer of the Duke Power Company, the huge utility covering much of North Carolina, is loaded for bear.
He is keeping the utility's balance sheet and borrowing ability strong to be ready to buy weaker and more vulnerable utilities, as the industry enters a more competitive age.


20 Years Later, U.C.L.A. Wins Its 11th Championship


RUSSIA SAYS SALE OF ATOM REACTORS TO IRAN IS STILL ON
The Russian Government made clear today that it would go ahead with the sale of light-water nuclear reactors to Iran over fierce American protests, repeated here by the visiting Defense Secretary, William J. Perry.
Prime Minister Viktor S. Chernomyrdin shares American concerns about Iran's nuclear ambitions, Mr.
Perry said in a news conference this evening, and agreed to arrange meetings of Russian and American experts concerned about the spread of nuclear weapons and the transfer of nuclear technology to Iran.


Justice Back State Tax on Interstate Fares
Brushing aside a decades-old precedent, the Supreme Court ruled today that a state may tax the full value of tickets sold for interstate transportation, as long as the trip originates within the state.
The 7-to-2 decision, in a case from Oklahoma, applied to tickets for interstate bus travel.
While the full implications of the ruling are unclear, the theory the Court endorsed also appeared to authorize states to impose sales taxes on interstate rail and airline travel -- to the extent that Federal law and regulations permit.


I'm O.K., You're Nowhere Near O.K.
IT'S ALL THE RAGE Crime and Culture  By Wendy Kaminer  292 pages.
Addison-Wesley Publishing Company. $22.
Wendy Kaminer's last book, "I'm Dysfunctional, You're Dysfunctional" (Addison-Wesley, 1992), was a terrifically witty, intelligent and cogent assessment of the recovery movement and its implications for American society at large.
In that volume, Ms.
Kaminer not only sketched the history and sources of the current vogue for self-help and public confession, but also performed a devastating deconstruction of the movement's simplistic (not to mention highly narcissistic) ethos of personal growth.
Her latest book, "It's All the Rage: Crime and Culture," purports to take up where "I'm Dysfunctional, You're Dysfunctional" left off.


MDS Health Group reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


New President Of Wesleyan Is an Alumnus
Douglas J. Bennet Jr., Assistant Secretary of State for International Organization Affairs and a former head of National Public Radio and the United States Agency for International Development, will be elected on Friday as the next president of Wesleyan University, officials at the university in Middletown, Conn., said yesterday.
Mr.
Bennet, whose family has had long and close ties to the university, succeeds William M. Chace, who became president of Emory University in Atlanta in August.
Wesleyan's interim president, Joanne V. Creighton, was named president of Mount Holyoke College in South Hadley, Mass., beginning next January.


By Design; Movie Star Handbags
For years, it was the shoulder bag that women preferred.
Then it was the backpack, which is still practical when hands need to be free to carry other things.
But women are rediscovering the traditional handbag, the one that is literally carried in the hand.
It looks good for dress-up occasions and doesn't mar the line of a tailored jacket or a delicate dress.
In recent seasons, the structured handbag with a handle on top has been the accessory of choice for models in fashion shows, usually held by a gloved hand for a touch of old-fashioned elegance.
Think of movie stars like Grace Kelly or Audrey Hepburn boarding a train with a squarish cosmetics case in hand.
The MCM boutique at 57 East 57th Street has an updated leather version in pink, lilac, peach, yellow or pistachio ($570).


13 Lucky Miles for Prodigal Dog
Scott Petty and Whisper are together again.
Whisper is a cocker spaniel who wandered off from the Petty home in Freehold in August 1993.
After months of posting signs and phoning animal shelters, the Petty family concluded that Whisper was not coming back.
But on Saturday, Whisper turned up, badly in need of grooming but otherwise O.K., outside Mr.
Petty's new home here, 13 miles away.
Mr.
Petty, 34, said he did not really believe the dog tracked the family the 13 miles to Jackson Township -- but he is not sure how he got there.
"Honestly," he said, "I think it's a miracle." LAWRENCE VAN GELDER


Lady Luck Gaming (LUCK,NNM) reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Merchant Marine Thefts
Nine midshipmen at the United States Merchant Marine Academy here returned from spring break Sunday night to find that their dormitory rooms had been broken into and that their laptop computers, valued at more than $2,100 each, had been stolen, the Nassau County police said today.
Academy officials said it was the first theft of computer equipment to be reported by midshipmen and the first major theft of any kind at the academy.


COMPANY BRIEFS
BURLINGTON INDUSTRIES INC., Greensboro, N.C., the textile maker, said its denim division signed a tentative agreement with India's Mafatlal Industries, a unit of Arvind Mafatlal Group, to manufacturer and market denim in India.
CINCINNATI BELL INFORMATION SYSTEMS INC., Cincinnati, a subsidiary of Cincinnati Bell Inc., bought X International, an English company that provides software and services for telecommunication companies.
DOSKOCIL COS., Oklahoma City, which produces and sells branded and processed food products, said it had changed its name to Foodbrands America to reflect the company's diverse offerings of perishable food products.
MANHATTAN BAGEL CO., Eatontown, N.J., plans to acquire I. &amp; J. Bagels Inc., a California bakery and retail chain, through a stock swap valued at up to $16.9 million.


Raytheon Offers $2.3 Billion for E-Systems
The Raytheon Company said today that it had agreed to pay $2.3 billion in cash to acquire E-Systems Inc., a military contractor that builds top-secret spying equipment and other advanced electronic gear.
Some analysts said that a competing bidder might still emerge.
But they noted that Raytheon's offer of $64 a share was so much richer than many of the prices previously paid for military contractors that it would be difficult for another company to upset the transaction, a friendly acquisition offer.


Woods Has Shown He Belongs At Augusta
The kid was on the tee at the 15th hole at Augusta National today, sizing up Nick Faldo's action and leaning on his driver.
For Tiger Woods, 19 years old and playing in his first practice round in preparation for his first Masters, it was show time.
Throughout his extraordinary golfing life, Woods has always lived for such moments.
He has been the perpetual phenom, from the time he was 6 months old and watching rapturously as his father hit golf balls into a net, to the moment last August when he became the youngest player, and the first black man, to win the United States Amateur championship.


CHRONICLE
The London theater has no monopoly on romance.
In New York on Saturday, SARAH URIARTE, the actress who falls in love with the beast every night in "Beauty and the Beast" on Broadway, became engaged to MICHAEL BERRY, whom she calls "a prince."
It was no simple proposal though.
Mr.
Berry, a Los Angeles actor, told Ms.
Uriarte he was going to Phoenix for his sister's birthday and asked her to go home after the show for a happy birthday phone call.
He also told her to expect a surprise.


Executive Changes
H.
F.
AHMANSON &amp; CO., Irwindale, Calif., the parent company of Home Savings of America, appointed Fredric J. Forster, the chief operating officer of Ahmanson and president and chief operating officer of Home Savings of America, to the added post of president of Ahmanson.
Kevin M. Twomey, executive vice president and chief financial officer of Ahmanson and Home Savings, was promoted to senior executive vice president and chief financial officer of both companies.
Anne-Drue Anderson, first vice president and treasurer of Ahmanson and Home Savings, was promoted to executive vice president and treasurer of both companies.
BORG-WARNER SECURITY CORP., Chicago, said Donald C. Trauscht, its chairman and chief executive, would retire, and J. Joe Adorjan, a company director, had been elected president and chief operating officer and was expected to assume the titles of chairman and chief executive by the end of the year.
FLORISTS' TRANSWORLD DELIVERY, Southfield, Mich., promoted Margaret C. Whitman, its president, to chief executive.
RURAL/METRO CORP., Scottsdale, Ariz., named James Bolin president, succeeding Robert Manschot, who resigned to pursue other interests.
TEREX CORP., Westport, Conn., appointed Ronald M. DeFeo, its president and chief operating officer, to the added post of chief executive.
VENTURE STORES INC., O'Fallon, Mo., a discount retail chain, named Robert Wildrick president and chief executive.


Accused Serial Killer And 92 Days of Freedom
On July 7, Reginald McFadden walked out of a Pennsylvania state prison to a world of freedom he had not seen since he was a teen-ager 25 years before.
His life sentence for the murder of an elderly Philadelphia woman when he was just 16 had been commuted by Pennsylvania's Governor after the Board of Pardons judged Mr.
McFadden an excellent risk for release.
To make sure that he acclimated himself to life on the outside, the board required that Mr.
McFadden live in a supervised work release program for two years, such as a halfway house that is locked at night.


Japan's Ito Applies for Reinstatement
The former world figure skating champion MIDIRO ITO has applied for reinstatement that would make her eligible for future world championships and the 1998 Winter Olympics in her native Japan.
However, the biggest surprise on the list released yesterday by the International Skating Union was the omission of last year's Olympic gold medalist, OKSANA BAIUL of Ukraine.


Insurance for China, One Door at a Time
"Let's get the boss to sign up," Lily Hua murmured as she strode into the Rainbow Mouth Department Store one recent morning, a thick folder of life insurance forms under her arm.
"If the boss buys, the rest of them" -- she nodded at several sales clerks -- "will be easy."
Miss Hua and more than 3,000 other agents are peddling life insurance door-to-door for American International Group, the first foreign company allowed to sell insurance directly in China.
Using street smarts and traditional business practices, they are carving a solid niche in a fast-growing market.


Bengali Women Are Candid With Hillary Clinton
A group of women of the untouchable class reached across a gulf of language and culture today to pepper Hillary Rodham Clinton with questions about her status and self-reliance as a woman.
"Do you have cattle in your house?" asked one woman in Moishahati, a dusty hamlet in southwest Bangladesh that has been transformed by the Grameen Bank, which makes small loans to poor people without collateral in exchange for promises of productive work and monitoring by other borrowers.


Bosnia Adviser Appointed
The Clinton Admninistration has appointed retired Major General John Sewall as a special military adviser to help integrate the armed forces of the Bosnian Muslims and Bosnian Croats.
Secretary of State Warren Christopher and Secretary of Defense William J. Perry announced the move today to help accelerate the stalled efforts to create a federation between Bosnia's Muslim-dominated Government and the country's Croats.
General Sewall, a former Rhodes scholar who spent 33 years in the Army, is vice director of the Federal Government's elite National Defensive University.
He helped plan combat operations in Panama in 1989 and in the Persian Gulf in 1991.


Trimin Enterprises reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Unifirst Corp.(UNF,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 25


INSIDE
An Unanticipated Proposal
There was widespread surprise that Speaker Newt Gingrich wants Congress to undo a compromise on homosexuals in the military.
Page D23.
Technology vs.
Professors
A dispute over technology displacing professors in the classroom has brought down the chancellor of a major university system.
Page D24.
Verdict Stands in Seles Case
A German judge upheld a widely criticized suspended sentence against the man who stabbed the tennis star Monica Seles.
Page B9.
Crystal at Earth's Core
The earth's center is a crystal of iron 1,500 miles across, scientists suggest on the basis of new computer calculations.
Science Times, page C1.


Guatemala Blast Sets Scene for U.N. Chief
A small bomb exploded two blocks from the Presidential Palace on Sunday night during a dinner honoring Boutros Boutros-Ghali, the United Nations Secretary General.
The explosion killed a man and underscored the tensions gripping Guatemala in the wake of revelations that senior Guatemalan Army officers have received regular payments from the Central Intelligence Agency.


Unofficial Groups Facing Barriers to U.N. Parley on Women
For nearly three weeks, thousands of women and men from around the world have been meeting here to complete a task that would seem simple enough: to draft an agenda and action plan for the fourth international conference on women to be held in Beijing in September.
But the process has been marred from the start by sectarian or political disputes over women's rights, limits to free debate and barriers the Chinese and others have erected to keep nearly 500 unofficial organizations away from the conference.


In a Preliminary Farewell, Poignant Songs of Loss
The sounds of the words "verlorne Gluck" seemed to have a special weight in Elly Ameling's recital at Alice Tully Hall on Sunday night.
Meaning "lost happiness," they appear in Goethe's text for Schubert's "Erster Verlust," or "First Loss." But as they emerged in this finely wrought performance, the vowels seemed to deepen and darken, so the word "Gluck," coming at the end of a phrase, seemed ripe with fulfillment, invoking a memory laden with past pleasure.
This all-Schubert recital, presented to accommodate the soprano's admirers who could not get tickets to her sold-out farewell next Sunday afternoon, was full of similarly potent musical images: a glinting, radiant articulation of the word "Silberflimmer" ("silver glimmer") in "An den Mond" that seemed self-describing; an almost exuberant proclamation of "dahin" ("there, far off") in "Kennst du das Land" that pointed toward a distant goal.


Trial of Her New Jersey Son Begins in Jordan


Earliest AIDS Case Is Called Into Doubt
WHAT was believed to be the earliest known case of AIDS, dating to 1959, may not have been AIDS after all, new scientific evidence shows.
The case of David Carr, a 25-year-old man who died in 1959 in Manchester, England, has taken another perplexing twist.


Senator Can't Stop Elephants
The issue before the Senate today was simple: whether to allow the Ringling Brothers and Barnum &amp; Bailey Circus to offer a free event on the grounds of the Capitol featuring "circus elephants and performers."
It is the type of measure that usually passes in a blink of the eye.
But Senator Robert C. Smith, Republican of New Hampshire, engaged in 45 minutes of soliloquy to try to block the observance of the circus's 125th anniversary at the Capitol this week.


International Briefs; In Brief
*
Opel Belgium, a subsidiary of General Motors Europe, said yesterday that it would invest $106.2 million to improve the production line at its plant in Antwerp, Belgium.
The investment will double the current single assembly line.
The plant produces Opel Astras and Opel Vectras.


Con Edison Penalized $217,800 for Violating Work Safety Rules in '92 Blast
Consolidated Edison has agreed to pay a $217,800 penalty for violating worker safety rules in connection with a steam explosion that killed a mechanic and badly burned several firefighters in November 1992 at a generating station in Manhattan, the company said yesterday.
It will also institute new safety precautions at all its plants that burn oil and natural gas, and open them to broader inspections by Federal safety experts, officials said.


NEW JERSEY DAILY BRIEFING;
The check is not in the mail yet, but eight cities in New Jersey are in line to receive more than $60 million this year to modernize housing projects.
Newark stands to receive the most -- $44.1 million -- from the Department of Housing and Urban Development.
Other grants: Camden, $5.5 million; Elizabeth, $4.6 million; Long Branch, $1.8 million; Harrison, $1.1 million; Orange, $1 million; East Orange, $1 million; and Garfield, $918,000.


Genentech Stock Rises on Approval by F.D.A.
Shares of Genentech Inc. rose 5.6 percent today after the biotechnology company said the Food and Drug Administration had approved a faster intravenous regimen for Activase, the company's heart-attack drug that dissolves blood clots.
The approval reflects data from a 41,000-patient clinical trial concluded last year that showed Activase in its accelerated use to be more effective than streptokinase, a much less expensive drug.
Activase is a genetically engineered version of the naturally occurring hormone tissue plasminogen activator, or t-PA.


Stiff Upper Lip of British Sleuths Grows Wiggly
British detectives and coppers in novels and on television were once part of a rigid class structure that endorsed the traditional notions of a great chain of being extending from aristocratic ladies and gentleman down to the kitchen help.
Forget it.
These days, the proles are taking over, no longer even considering doffing their hats to the toffs.
After taking second place for decades to frisky and adventurous Americans like Joseph Wambaugh ("Police Story" and "The Blue Knight") and Steven Bochco ("Hill Street Blues" and "N.Y.P.D. Blue"), British television is now vividly demonstrating that its concept of the mystery thriller is not limited to the wonderfully old-fashioned capers of Arthur Conan Doyle and Agatha Christie.


Mestek Inc.(MCC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


The Rite of Spring No Longer Wrong
Todd Hundley was taking batting practice against Steve Swisher, a coach.
Bret Saberhagen stood on a pitcher's mound, throwing for Greg Pavlick, another coach.
The scenario at the Mets' camp in Port St.
Lucie, Fla., underlined the notion that baseball was back.
After almost eight months of a strike by major league players and almost two months of a labored effort by replacement players, real baseball began seeping back in Florida and Arizona.
By the end of this week, spring camps will be in full swing.
By next week, exhibition games will be under way.
In three weeks, the season will open.


Francisco Moncion, 76, a Charter Member of New York City Ballet
Francisco Moncion, a charter member of the New York City Ballet who danced its leading roles for nearly 40 years, died on Saturday at his home in Woodstock, N.Y.
He was 76.
The cause was cancer, said a friend, Bentley Roton, the president of the Kaatsbaan International Dance Center in Tivoli, N.Y.


On My Mind; Cover-Up Chronology
The evidence is now in -- not all of it yet, but enough to prove that the U.S.
Government knew a year in advance that Mexico was headed for financial disaster.
The chronology shows that the Administration used the year to keep the information secret and feed the American public a false, knowingly deceptive line about the strengths of the Mexican economy.


Speaker Perplexes Many With Remark on Gay Ban
Gay-rights advocates, senior military officers and even some Republicans expressed surprise today at Speaker Newt Gingrich's assertion that Congress would seek to undo a two-year-old compromise policy on homosexuals in the military.
"This certainly isn't a part of the Contract With America," Senator Dan Coats, an Indiana Republican on the Armed Services Committee, said in an interview.
"We firmly believe there is not a problem with the existing law."


For Conner And Koch, Sailoff Is Last Hope
The way Dennis Conner figures it, his boat, Stars &amp; Stripes, has a 50-50 chance of beating Bill Koch's Mighty Mary in the sailoff Tuesday for a berth in the America's Cup defense finals.
As a 21-year veteran of cup racing, Conner has been on the edge like this before.


White House Attack Case to Jury
Did Francisco Martin Duran intend to kill President Clinton when he began shooting at the White House on a sunny October afternoon last year?
Or was the 26-year-old Colorado Springs man suffering as a paranoid schizophrenic, influenced by an evil mist?
That was the fundamental question facing a Federal jury today, as arguments in Mr.
Duran's two-week trial ended.
The jury in Federal District Court for the District of Columbia will begin its deliberations on Tuesday.


Bronfman Sees More Hope In Films Than Chemicals
News that the spirits and beverage company Seagram wants to sell its 25 percent stake in Du Pont for nearly $10 billion may be a good move for Du Pont investors, who showed their interest yesterday by nudging up the chemical company's shares 50 cents.
But a deal may go down less easily for shareholders of the Seagram Company, whose president, Edgar Bronfman Jr., is said to be interested in using the money to buy all or part of the film and entertainment company MCA Inc.


The Core of the Earth May Be a Gigantic Crystal Made of Iron
NEW clues and theories are illuminating one of the most inaccessible and enigmatic parts of the planet, its inner core, suggesting that this mass of solid iron has a crystalline structure that may be responsible for a series of magnetic riddles observed at the earth's surface.
By weight, the earth is mostly iron.
But relatively little of the metal is found at its surface, which is made principally of lighter elements like oxygen and silicon.
Billions of years ago, during the planet's fiery birth, most of the iron sank to the planet's deep interior because of its enormous weight and eventually formed a core there, or really two of them.


Russian AIDS Law Requires Testing for Most Foreigners
President Boris N. Yeltsin has signed a new AIDS law that imposes mandatory testing on almost all foreigners living here.
The law, which was made public today, requires foreigners who plan to spend more than three months in Russia to provide documentation that they are not infected with H.I.V., the virus that causes AIDS, when they apply for a visa.
Diplomats will be exempt, but the law does not specify whether foreigners already living in Russia will have to be tested before renewing their visas.
Russians who work in certain professions, as yet unspecified, will also undergo mandatory testing.


Chicago Journal; Remembering the Dead in a Vigil Against Violence
On the first Sunday of every month since 1993, a diverse group of "neighbors" has gathered under the street lights of the city's South Side to mourn the dead, many of them children and teen-agers killed on the urban battlefields nearby.
It is a vigil against violence, a rally to save the children who survive.


Review/Fashion; When 'Sexycool' Means Sensuous
There were plenty of interesting ideas on display over the weekend as emerging designers began staging shows around the city.
But the lack of resources that kept many out of the Bryant Park show spaces was also evident in their work.
The most polished collections among this group, those of Kenneth Richard and Robert Danes, were showcased under the Seventh on Sixth umbrella within the New York Public Library itself.


Doubts About Dollar Limit A Rally in U.S. Bond Prices
Treasury securities rallied yesterday on data suggesting that the economy's growth is slowing and that inflation remains subdued, but a weaker dollar limited the day's gains.
A higher-than-expected index report for March by the National Association of Purchasing Managers showed the monthly production component fell to 51.4 from 54.5 in February -- the lowest level since September 1993.
Economists had expected the index to drop to 52.9.
Other parts of the report showed inflation and employment were down.


No Headline
"My hypothesis is that it's like a diamond in the center of the earth, just one single crystal." -- DR.
RONALD E. COHEN, a geophysicist, describing the earth's inner core.  [ C1:5 ]


Helping Children Avoid Mudholes
THE Senate Commerce Committee has given strong support to a measure to ban sleaze in cyberspace, arguing that children need protection from obscene, lewd, salacious, filthy or otherwise nasty material found on the Internet and other on-line services.
Before venturing out again on our periodic tours of the on-line services, then, it seems appropriate to assess the level of risk for children and sensitive adults and to discuss ways to minimize the risk of encountering material that a user, or a user's child, might find objectionable or harmful.


Postal Service To Expand Roster
The United States Postal Service said yesterday that it was seeking to add two or more shops that specialize in sales promotion and direct marketing to its agency roster, which until now has been limited to units of Young &amp; Rubicam Inc. in New York.
"We want to get experts in those two fields," said Robin Minard, a spokeswoman for the Postal Service in Washington, adding that the shops would work together with Y.&amp; R. on the account, with total billings estimated at $60 million to $80 million.
Advertising will continue to be handled solely by Y.&amp; R., she said.


Connecticut Found the Perfect Mix
The Connecticut team had outstanding players, but in women's basketball, that's not enough.
This game, much more than men's, is a team game.
And the Huskies played together so well they won a national championship without losing a game all season.
Connecticut's 70-64 victory over Tennessee Sunday in the final of the National Collegiate Athletic Association tournament here was truly the crowning glory of a 35-0 season.
It was a tribute to Geno Auriemma, a coach who recruited good but not always top-level players.
He made them better and made them realize that a team that plays together wins together.


Mets Make Franco an Offer
The Mets took the first step toward re-signing John Franco, their free-agent closer, today when General Manager Joe McIlvaine offered him a two-year deal worth just over $2 million a season.
Franco has interest from a handful of other clubs, including the Orioles.
But Franco said today that he is most interested in returning to the Mets.
"I'm comfortable with the organization," said Franco, who said he would wait at his home in Staten Island until he signs a deal and not participate in free-agent workouts in Homestead, Fla.


Stride Rite Corp.(SRR,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 3


Players and Clubs Still Need Pact
Last summer baseball owners set out to get a salary cap, and the players were determined to hold on to the old free-market economic system.
Players are going back to work this week under the old system.
They may have that system for just one more season, but the owners don't have their salary cap at all.
They don't even have the payroll tax that they substituted for the cap.


Tax Cuts for Political Gain
Speaker Newt Gingrich says the House will pass a big tax cut this week because "every person in the U.S. is overtaxed." Other Republican leaders offer the same justification, but they ignore an inconvenient fact.
The United States ranks next-to-last among the 24 leading industrialized countries in rate of taxation on income.
The Republican tax-cut bill is not about alleviating onerous tax burdens, sparking investment or any other lofty purpose.
It is a political maneuver.
The Republicans want to promise tax cuts no matter how damaging the long-term consequences, then watch President Clinton squirm as he either signs the bill or tells voters he took away their tax cut for the sake of long-run prosperity.


Explosive Is Dismantled at Halfway House
The New York City police yesterday dismantled a small, partly completed explosive device found in a halfway house for teen-agers on Staten Island, the police said.
"The incompleted bomb was dismantled at the location," said Officer Annamarie Viola, a police spokeswoman.
She said the halfway house is in a private building at 19 David Place in Mariners Harbor.


Utility Discount Is Considered
If big companies get discounts on electric rates, will everybody else have to pay more?
Maybe, maybe not, says the president of the State Board of Public Utilities, Herbert H. Tate Jr.
But Mr.
Tate said at a briefing yesterday that if big industries leave the state because energy costs too much, everybody will have to pay more to cover the cost of power plants, power lines and other capital investments.
Mr.
Tate's staff helped prepare legislation, introduced last week, that would permit discounts to commercial electricity customers.


George Darling, 89; Ecologist Studied Effects of A-Bomb
George Bapst Darling, a Yale University ecologist who studied the long-term radiation effects of the American atomic bombing of Japan, died on Thursday at his home in Hamden, Conn.
He was 89.
He had been in declining health for some time, the university said.


Immortality for Sale: The Price Is Only $35
"LEAVE something of yourself for tomorrow. Pass your unique collection of genes on to the future."
That's the pitch of Third Millennium Research Inc., a Seattle-based enterprise that offers to preserve a person's complete gene set in a glass capsule, complete with engraved storage case.


Professors Battling Television Technology
Questions about the extent to which technology will displace college professors have led to the resignation of the chancellor of the University of Maine in what some see as a forerunner to conflicts at other colleges.
Under a plan by Chancellor J. Michael Orenduff, the University of Maine would have created an eighth campus, this one with no buildings or professors, only two-way televised classes.
Rather than adding a class in, say, economics at one campus, a class from another campus would simply be broadcast to students.
Ultimately, some students would get their degrees from the video campus.


Helene Curtis Industries Inc.(HC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


New Partners In Health Care Focus on Cost
Wellpoint Health Networks and Health Systems International said yesterday that they had agreed to combine and use their merged power to sell lower-cost, California-style health care to employers across the country.
The agreement would create the nation's largest publicly traded managed health care company, with 4.4 million members, evenly divided between health maintenance organizations and other more loosely organized arrangements.
The new company would have at least $5.43 billion of revenue, based on their 1994 results.


Patterns
Support for the Tents
It seemed as if restless designers might be the undoing of the Bryant Park tents, which went up last week for the New York fashion shows: this season saw the departure of Isaac Mizrahi, Michael Kors and Ghost, among others.
Now, a more immediate threat has emerged from the Bryant Park Grill, which is scheduled to open in the park in May and has some problems with the fashion shows in the park.
But when Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani toured the tents yesterday, he said he would intervene to keep the tents in place.


Publicis in Accord With New Saatchi
The New Saatchi Agency in London and the Publicis Communication unit of Publicis S.A. in Paris said yesterday that they had agreed to a nonequity cooperation agreement beginning with a joint presentation for the British Airways account, with billings estimated at $130 million.


Corruption Is Called Broad in Honda Case
A former executive at the American Honda Motor Company testified today that he believed the company's president knew he was taking bribes from dealers but did nothing to stop him.
Indeed, the executive, Stanley James Cardiges, said in a criminal trial here that he suspected the president and other Japanese executives of also accepting bribes -- including a Mercedes-Benz, a Rolex watch and a painting worth $50,000.
He said in court that he believed they joined in what he called the widespread corruption of the company's sales force in America during the 1980's and early 1990's when Honda cars were wildly popular and in short supply.


Purcell Unstaged, the Better to Be Heard
In an ideal world like the one envisioned by Purcell at the end of "King Arthur," William Christie would have been able to conduct this supple, sensuous score in the fully staged production that he led in Paris a few months ago.
That acclaimed staging came complete with Graham Vick's vision of battling armies and floating spirits, and a restored version of John Dryden's text.
As it turned out, only a concert version could be financially justified during Mr.
Christie's weeklong visit to the Brooklyn Academy of Music with his group, Les Arts Florissants.
So on Friday night, the characters of King Arthur, his beloved Emmeline and his nemesis, the pagan King Oswald, were reduced to brief impersonations by two actors -- Philip Franks and Sylvestra le Touzel -- and the text itself was summarized by some cursory, comic and slightly campy commentary written by Jeremy Sams.


Video Lottery Technologies Inc.(VLTS,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Editor Named for Revived House &amp; Garden
Leaping from a battered ship to a venerable vessel being raised from the magazine graveyard, Dominique Browning was named yesterday as editor in chief of Conde Nast's House &amp; Garden, which is to be revived in September 1996.
Ms.
Browning became editor in chief of Mirabella, the sophisticated women's magazine, just three months ago.
She had scarcely begun to shape the magazine when word came that it would be closed or sold; last week, Hachette Filipacchi Magazines bought Mirabella from Rupert Murdoch's News America Publishing Inc. and said it would be published six times a year instead of monthly.


Eisenhower Park to Get Veterans Monument


Westmoreland Coal Co.(WCX,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Do Transit Rail Cars Need U.S. Label?
The mounting problems at the Morrison Knudsen Corporation have raised an important if little noticed question about America's industrial future: Does this country need a passenger rail car manufacturer?
Morrison Knudsen is the country's last producer of rail cars, the last of an industry that once included the Pullman Company, St.
Louis Car and the Budd Company.
American companies were leaders in the industry as recently as the 1970's, but most have now been sold or shut down and the leaders come from Canada, Japan and Germany.


Focus Shifts to Physical Evidence in Simpson Case
The focus of the O. J. Simpson case shifted fundamentally today as prosecutors finally began to discuss the physical evidence -- blood drops, hair samples, footprints, a blue knit cap and a pair of leather gloves -- that they believe ties Mr.
Simpson to the killings of Nicole Brown Simpson and Ronald L. Goldman.
With the appearance of Dennis Fung, the Los Angeles Police Department's chief criminalist in the case, testimony shifted from the stormy nature of the Simpsons' marriage and Mr.
Simpson's activities last June 12 to the manner in which the department collected and preserved evidence and just what that evidence might prove.


Accused Serial Killer And 92 Days of Freedom
On July 7, Reginald McFadden walked out of a Pennsylvania state prison to a world of freedom he had not seen since he was a teen-ager 25 years before.
His life sentence for the murder of an elderly Philadelphia woman when he was just 16 had been commuted by Pennsylvania's Governor after the Board of Pardons judged Mr.
McFadden an excellent risk for release.
To make sure that he acclimated himself to life on the outside, the board required that Mr.
McFadden live in a supervised work release program for two years, such as a halfway house that is locked at night.


Hearing Allen's Voice Is Always a Pleasure
Mel Allen tooled his sister's Ford Taurus through Greenwich, Conn., yesterday, talking about opening day, which will arrive late this year.
"It's like daffodils," he said in the same warm and bracing Alabama twang that once greeted Yankees fans with a "Hello there, everybody!" on radio and TV.
"Like life after a dead winter, like things sprouting out of the ground."


Buckley and Proehl Are Traded
Defensive back TERRELL BUCKLEY and wide receiver RICKEY PROEHL were traded yesterday, and TOM WADDLE, also a wide receiver, left the Chicago Bears to sign with the Cincinnati Bengals as a free agent.
Buckley, passed over in the National Football League expansion draft, was traded from the Green Bay Packers to the Miami Dolphins for past considerations.
He was a first-round draft pick of the Packers in 1992 out of Florida State and started 46 games over three seasons, with 10 interceptions, including 5 last year.


Talisman Energy reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Heideman Succeeds Bennett at Green Bay
MIKE HEIDEMAN decided to succeed DICK BENNETT as men's basketball coach at Wisconsin-Green Bay rather than follow him to Wisconsin as an assistant.
"It's been a dream of mine to be a Division I coach," Heideman said yesterday after being hired for the Green Bay job by Athletic Director OTIS CHAMBERS.
"It's my time to step up to the plate. I needed to do that." (AP)


Sybase Says It Expects Low Earnings, and Share Value Falls 25%
Shares in Sybase Inc. lost nearly a quarter of their value in after-hours trading late today after the company said its first-quarter earnings and revenues would be far below Wall Street analysts' estimates.
Sybase, a leading producer of data base management software, said it expected to earn 3 cents to 6 cents a share in the quarter, excluding approximately $25 million in one-time pretax charges associated with the company's recent acquisition of the Powersoft Corporation.
Analysts had expected earnings of 27 cents to 28 cents a share.


Snap! Crackle! Pop! Mets Are Swinging
On the field, Todd Hundley was taking batting practice against Steve Swisher, a New York Mets coach who works primarily with catchers.
Perhaps a hundred yards away, Bret Saberhagen stood on a pitcher's mound, throwing for Greg Pavlick, the team's pitching coach.
Hundley hit a half-dozen balls over the fence at Thomas J. White Stadium, the Mets' spring complex.
Saberhagen threw at perhaps 75 percent of his velocity.
But with eyes closed, one could hear the thwack of the bat hitting the ball, the pop of the ball hitting the mitt, sounds distinctly less pronounced the previous seven weeks.


Power Financial reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


The 2 Sides Agree on Back-to-Work Plans
They went through nearly eight months of a strike without reaching agreement, but on the first day after the strike ended, lawyers for the players and owners reached one yesterday.
They completed the back-to-work agreement, creating a timetable for on-field games and off-field mechanics.
"We are pleased to be hopefully ending this chapter and be returning to work under the old terms," Lauren Rich, a union lawyer, said.
"The only thing that would make us happier would be to get a longer term agreement, and now is the time to do it."


Seles's Assailant Gets Suspended Sentence
An appellate judge in Hamburg today upheld a widely criticized suspended sentence against the man who stabbed the tennis star Monica Seles in 1993.
Judge Gertraut Goring said a harsher sentence was not justified in view of the assailant's full confession, lack of former arrests and "abnormal personality structure."


A Life Too Short: A Newark Girl, 8, Is Slain
When 8-year-old Jakiyah McClain asked if she could play at her best friend's house a block away, her mother said yes -- if she didn't stay too long.
"We never saw her again," her mother, Pamela McClain, 29, of Newark, said today as she tearfully described her daughter's abduction and killing on Saturday night.
The suspect, Rasheed Muhammed, a 29-year-old homeless man, is a childhood friend of Ms.
McClain's fiance.


SCIENTIST AT WORK: Terry DeBruyn; Black Bears Up Close And Personal
SNOW fell steadily.
It was already 20 inches deep one day last month when Terry DeBruyn scrabbled barehanded in numbing cold to open up the entrance to the den of a black bear.
Soon he was slithering into the dark lair armed only with a flashlight.
His quarry, her powerful jaws inches from his face, was a 5-year-old female and her yearlings.
Not to worry, they were in semihibernation, eyes open, but not stirring much.
Even fully awake, black bears are much more likely to flee than to attack humans.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Common *
Garden Ridge Corp., Houston, filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission to sell 2.6 million shares in an initial public offering through Dillon, Read &amp; Co. *
Nexgen Inc., Milpitas, Calif., filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission to sell 3.4 million shares in an initial public offering through Paine Webber Inc.


Sunshine-Jr. Stores Inc.(SJS,A) reports earnings for Year to Dec 29


A Child's Death Worries His Classmates' Parents


CHRONICLE
It was a triumph for "She Loves Me," a small-scale musical, which was showered with five Laurence Olivier Awards on Sunday in London, beating out extravanganzas like "Sunset Boulevard."
RUTHIE HENSHALL and JOHN GORDON SINCLAIR were named best actor and actress in a musical, beating out Betty Buckley of "Sunset Boulevard" and Jonathan Pryce of "Oliver." "She Loves Me" was named best musical revival and garnered awards for Scott Ellis as best director of a musical and Tracie Bennett for best supporting performance in a musical, the Press Association reported.


Singapore Maintains Guilt of Executed Woman
To the Editor:
"A Hanging in Singapore" (editorial, March 21), on the execution of Flor Contemplacion, a Filipino woman working in Singapore as a maid, for two murders, refers to "new evidence that seems to cast reasonable doubt on her guilt," while your March 27 news article mentions "new testimony suggesting that Mrs. Contemplacion had been framed for the 1991 deaths."
Both articles ignore the Singapore Government's rebuttal of these claims.


The Loss of a Star Who Put a Face On a People's Hopes
The streams of mourners traveling from across the United States and Mexico to view the coffin of Selena, the 23-year-old Mexican-American singer who was shot to death on Friday in Corpus Christi, Tex., her hometown, suggest what kind of grip popular music can have on an audience.
In this case, the music itself is superseded by identification, for in Selena, the biggest star in Tejano music, a music from the Texas-Mexico border area, a whole culture between the poles of mainstream Mexico and America had found a public face.
Her full name was Selena Quintanilla Perez, and she was about to release her first record in English.
She was also working on a soundtrack song with the Talking Heads' former lead singer, David Byrne, and will soon be seen in the film "Don Juan DeMarco," starring Marlon Brando and Johnny Depp.
Selena was set to cross a cultural line, about to become a major figure in American entertainment, period.


More Dire Warnings About Social Security
The Clinton Administration said today that the Medicare trust fund that pays hospital bills for the elderly would run out of money in 2002, and two independent trustees said the Medicare program faced a financial crisis in the near future.
By contrast, the trustees said the Social Security trust funds, which pay retirement and disability benefits, would run out of cash in 2030.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
9.00
9.00
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
5.25
5.25
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
6.19
6.30
3.62
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.76
5.69
3.71
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.90
5.83
4.02
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.12
7.19
7.13
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.38
7.43
7.41
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.25
8.32
8.20
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.36
6.37
6.65
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-14  RUSSIA ADAMANT ON SALE TO IRAN
The Russian Government made it clear that it would go ahead with the sale of light-water nuclear reactors to Iran despite the American protests repeated in Moscow by Defense Secretary Perry.
A1


Clinton Edges Congress in Amount of Television Coverage, Study Says
Contrary to conventional wisdom, the Clinton Administration has received more coverage on the three major television networks during the first three months of 1995 than the new Republican-controlled Congress has received, according to a new survey.
The study, conducted by the Center for Media and Public Affairs, a nonpartisan research group based in Washington, found that the three networks' evening news programs spent a combined 11.9 minutes on the Administration every night from January through March, while they spent a combined 10.5 minutes on the 104th Congress.


Budget Talks Deadlocked as Blame Flies
Negotiations over a new state budget remained deadlocked today as Gov.
George E. Pataki and legislative leaders spent the afternoon blaming each other for the impasse.
The budget is now three days late, and Mr.
Pataki along with his Republican colleague, the Senate majority leader, Joseph L. Bruno, charged that their Democratic opponent, Assembly Speaker Sheldon Silver, was secretly trying to increase spending on welfare and health-care programs by $1 billion or more.
Mr.
Silver, they added, has yet to explain where the state will find the money, even as New York faces a $5 billion shortfall.


Mark's Work reports earnings for Year to Jan 28


BUSINESS DIGEST
Federal Reserve Intervenes, But Dollar Falls Again The United States poured an estimated $1 billion into currency markets in an effort to defend the battered dollar, but the move had little effect on the markets.


Strike One for 'Three Strikes'
California's habitual-offender law is off to a shaky start.
The law, dubbed "Three Strikes and You're Out," requires anyone convicted of three felonies, including one violent crime, to serve 25 years to life in prison.
The perverse result is that defendants up for their third felony in Los Angeles are refusing to plea-bargain for sentences, thus clogging the courts with expensive, time-consuming trials.
Prosecutors in Los Angeles fear they may have to drop misdemeanor prosecutions, the kind of low-level street crime that, while usually nonviolent, harms the quality of city life.
Civil suits are already in holding patterns so that the strikeout criminal docket can be served.


Senate Extends Deduction for Self-Employed
The Senate agreed today to extend a tax deduction for self-employed workers, clearing one of the political hurdles that had unexpectedly stalled debate on $15 billion in midyear budget cuts and a vote on an emergency $3.2 billion appropriation to the military.
Anxious to bring the budget cuts to a vote before the start of next week's spring recess, Bob Dole of Kansas, the majority leader, said the Senate would vote on Tuesday on another contentious issue -- a Republican amendment to the budget-cut bill that would scuttle the Clinton Administration's $20-billion bailout of the Mexican peso.


Julius Hemphill, Saxophonist And Composer, Is Dead at 57
Julius Hemphill, the saxophonist and composer who helped to found the World Saxophone Quartet and who was among the most important musicians of his generation, died on Sunday at Mount Sinai Medical Center in Manhattan.
He was 57 and lived in Manhattan.
The cause was complications from diabetes, said his companion, Ursula Oppens.


A New Chairman At Lintas Worldwide
Martin F. Puris, vice chairman of the Lintas Worldwide unit of the Interpublic Group of Companies and president and chief executive of its New York office, Ammirati &amp; Puris/ Lintas, was named chairman and chief executive of Lintas yesterday as part of a series of expected management changes.
At Lintas, Mr.
Puris, who is 56, will succeed Kenneth L. Robbins, 59, when Mr.
Robbins retires on July 1, and will also take the new position of chief creative officer.
Spencer Plavoukos, 58, who as president has been the No. 2 executive behind Mr.
Robbins, retains that title and takes the additional new position of chief operating officer.


Bomb at Rutgers Library
All libraries on Rutgers University's three campuses were closed and searched yesterday after a small bomb was detonated in the basement of the Douglass Library here.
Several books and ceiling tiles were damaged, but there were no injuries, said Leslie Fehrenbach, assistant vice president of public safety.
The area near the explosion was closed at the time, but students working inside the building reported hearing a loud pop.
A bomb threat was telephoned to a library on the Camden campus, but no explosives were found.


Yanks Talk to McDowell, Wait for Everyone Else
The telephone operator's voice penetrated the discussion today in the Yankee manager's office: "Jack McDowell for Buck Showalter." A surprised Showalter politely asked reporters to leave so he could chat with the pitcher who might be a Yankee.
At least McDowell returned Showalter's call.
Although he is not expected to arrive until Friday's mandatory workout, McDowell will remain a focus while the Yankees attempt to sign him to a contract.
Another focus today was poor attendance; only three major league players have sauntered into camp since the work stoppage ended Sunday.


Final Four Logo Is Unveiled
Farewell, Puget Sound, Mount Rainier and Seattle.
Hello, Meadowlands.
In 1996, the Byrne Meadowlands Arena will serve as host for the Final Four of the N.C.A.A. men's basketball tournament.
The official logo, featuring the Statue of Liberty and the words "Meadowlands 1996," was unveiled yesterday in newspaper advertisements.


Winds Drive Fire Across Pinelands
A fire fanned by strong winds burned out of control in the crub pinelands of Ocean County, N.J., engulfing more than 15,000 acres and forcing a temporary evacuation of hundreds of houses in its path.


Devils Manage To Escape With Tie
Looking mortal again, the Devils fooled their coach and their fans tonight.
After three consecutive victories, they escaped with a 1-1 tie despite a totally uninspired performance against the Tampa Bay Lightning at Byrne Meadowlands Arena.
Stephane Richer earned the point in the standing for the Devils when he scored with 12.9 seconds left in regulation time, using his glove to help deflect Neal Broten's shot through the legs of goaltender J. C. Bergeron.
It was the 19th goal of the season for Richer and the 600th assist of Broten's career.


Is the Wine Kosher Or Not?
CRAIG WINCHELL wears a baseball cap over his yarmulke when he makes wine.
This raises a question.
Should his Sonoma County reds and whites be perceived as kosher, or as Californian?
Californian, Mr.
Winchell says.
Aside from his brand name, Gan Eden -- Hebrew for Garden of Eden -- almost nothing strikingly Jewish appears on the label.
To most non-Jews, the name is unfamiliar; one customer thought it was Celtic.


The Bias Against Women's Sports
The come-from-behind victory of the University of Connecticut women's team in the National Collegiate Athletic Association basketball finals Sunday was more than an exciting finish to an unbeaten season.
The sellout crowds and solid television ratings were measures of how far the women's game has advanced in both quality and popularity.
But a recent Federal court decision involving Brown University is a reminder that many institutions of higher learning are still failing to provide what the spirit and letter of the law demand -- equity in supporting varsity sports teams for men and women.


Bond Prices Increase as Fed Buys Some Treasury Issues
ond prices were bolstered and interest rates slid to levels of a week ago yesterday as a result of the dollar's stronger performance in currency markets and an announcement by the Federal Reserve that it was buying various Treasury securities in the open market.
A few times a year, the central bank comes to market and buys certain maturities to add cash to the banking system.
It is a way to address seasonal shortages of reserves that if left unattended may cause short-term rates to move higher than the current Fed policy warrants.


Bridge Pulls In the Young: Making Bids and Friends
THE four people at the table stared into their hands, huge vats of cappuccino steaming at their elbows.
The songs of James Taylor played in the background.
Nearby, a woman sat with her head buried in an anthology of tragedies.
Abby Mintz looked up.
"That was a very dangerous bid," she said, to no one in particular.
On a Tuesday night five years ago, Ms.
Mintz and her friends would most likely have found themselves in a bar, listening to loud music and surveying the offerings for small-talk possibilities.


CHRONICLE
LARRY KING is used to putting guests in the hot seat on his interview show on CNN, but tonight he will assume a different role: that of master of ceremonies at a roast of his boss, Ted Turner, the chairman of the Turner Broadcasting System.
The roast is part of the fourth annual Rainforest Alliance Champion Award Dinner at the Plaza Hotel, and honors Mr.
Turner's programs on the environment.
"The difference is that in roasting, it's all your ball game," Mr.
King said.
"You're not getting answers from your subject."


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
9.00
9.00
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
5.25
5.25
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
6.06
6.28
3.60
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.72
5.76
3.65
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.85
5.90
3.98
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.11
7.12
6.91
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.37
7.38
7.24
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.25
8.25
8.09
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.33
6.36
6.63
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills 8


Tarkanian Wants to Coach at Fresno State
JERRY TARKANIAN arrived yesterday to interview for the coaching job at Fresno State, his alma mater.
Of the 40 candidates for the job, Tarkanian is the only one to interview on campus, said DAVE HAGLUND, the sports information director.


C.I.A.'s Workaday Cloak
The Central Intelligence Agency's "liaison" relationships with foreign intelligence services, like the one with Guatemala suspended Monday by the Clinton Administration, have always been among the least known aspects of the C.I.A.'s work, little understood even within the United States Government.
That lack of understanding became clear on Monday night.
President Clinton and Secretary of State Warren Christopher did not know that the liaison program was continuing, Administration officials said, and Mr.
Christopher erred when he said on Sunday that no more money was flowing from the C.I.A. to the Guatemalan military.


Unorthodox Expert With a Nobel Prize Prepares for the Simpson Spotlight
His words sounded like those of a prizefighter psyching himself up for an especially loathsome rival.
"O.K., Rockne, come on out, put them up, boy," he said, his voice low and edgy and ominous.
"I'm ready right now."
Sitting at the table in a modest apartment in the city's La Jolla section overlooking the Pacific Ocean was not Mike Tyson or George Foreman, but Kary B. Mullis, the Nobel Prize-winning scientist who is expected to be a vital defense witness in the murder trial of O. J. Simpson.
Dr.
Mullis won the 1993 Nobel Prize for chemistry for inventing one of molecular biology's most powerful tools, the polymerase chain-reaction technique, or P.C.R., which allows scientists to identify even a fragment of the DNA genetic code and then reproduce it virtually an infinite number of times.
The movie "Jurassic Park," based on Michael Crichton's fictional account of re-creating dinosaurs from ancient DNA, drew upon this technique.


4 Acquitted In Conspiracy Over Sludge
A former New York City port official and two members of her family, who ran a network of marine-transport and ship-cleaning companies, were acquitted yesterday of conspiring to hide 250,000 gallons of contaminated sludge on a dilapidated barge at their oil storage site.
One of their workers, Noble Darrow, the manager of the site, was found guilty of failing to maintain Coast Guard certification for the barge.
He could receive a prison term of up to five years.


Sex Harassment Persists
A Congressional study found that women at military academies say they are sexually harassed at the same rate as in the past or even more.
Page B8.


The History and Mystery of Augusta's Front Nine
Things happen in secret there every year, away from the glare of the Masters spotlight, when CBS's Big Eye is closed.
Out on the best nine-hole stretch you've never seen, Augusta National's lost corner of 3,465 yards on the front nine, some real Masters moments are buried.
It is the Forgotten Front.
Think about it.
Mention No. 12, and a vivid picture snaps into focus.
Rae's Creek.
Thin sliver of green.
The slope with Fred Couples's ball somehow stuck to it.


14 Killed in 2 Copters to Get Purple Hearts
The Army and Air Force said today that they would posthumously award the Purple Heart to 14 American service members who were killed a year ago when two American fighter jets shot down two United States helicopters over northern Iraq.
The decision came after pressure from Congress, relatives of the dead and Defense Secretary William J. Perry on the Army Chief of Staff, Gen.
Gordon Sullivan, who had resisted awarding the medal to the troops.
He had argued that their deaths, while tragic, did not meet the requirement of suffering injury or death from hostile force, Pentagon officials said today.


Spectrum Of Veterans Look Back In Vietnam
An American veteran stood in the city square of Da Nang the other day and said he was curious about all the fuss.
Red-and-yellow banners hanging across the streets proclaimed: "Remember the Soldiers Who Devoted Their Lives to the Struggle." Some participants wearing olive drab fatigues and leaves and branches as camouflage re-enacted a march down the Ho Chi Minh Trail.


2 Knicks and Net Fined by N.B.A.
The trash-talking and shoving during Sunday's Knicks-Nets game was costly for three players.
Rick Mahorn was fined $7,000 by the National Basketball Association for instigating the second-quarter shoving match between Mahorn and Patrick Ewing, which led to both players being ejected.
Ewing was fined $3,500 for retaliating.
And Derek Harper was fined $5,000 for talking abusively to the referees.
Harper was ejected with 28.2 seconds to play after receiving his second technical foul.


ABC Adds Saturday Games to 1996 Lineup
College basketball will get greater exposure next season from ABC Sports with the addition of six Saturday afternoons of games from late January to early March.
To make room, ABC will shift seven bowling telecasts from their traditional winter time periods to May and June.
ABC currently airs about 10 weeks of regional college basketball games on Sundays.


Mother Charged With Tossing Out Newborn
Kara Bradley managed to conceal her full-term pregnancy from her parents by wearing loose-fitting clothes.
But last week, the woman, who weighs a little more than 100 pounds, gave birth to a boy inside her bedroom, and she could not hide the baby, the police said.
So after the birth, Ms.
Bradley, 20, wrapped the baby in a towel, put it in a brown paper bag and tossed the newborn two stories from her apartment window in East New York, Brooklyn, the police said.
The baby fell on the roof of a community center that adjoins her apartment building.


Rupite Journal; For a Revered Mystic, a Shrine Now of Her Own
This remote hamlet has become a shrine for the sick and troubled from throughout the Balkans and beyond.
Every day they come by the hundreds, hoping for a word from an extraordinary woman who they believe is blessed with great mystic power.
The visionary, known only as Vanga, is widely believed to be able to see and feel things that are beyond the senses of ordinary people.
There are countless stories of her ability to explain the past, predict the future and prescribe cures for physical and spiritual pain.


Rangers Have a Lot of Excuses, Very Little Time
When Quebec beats the Rangers, it is because the Nordiques are faster.
When Philadelphia beats the Rangers, it is because the Flyers are bigger.
When Pittsburgh beats the Rangers, it is because the Penguins have more depth and skill.
And tonight, if Florida beats the Rangers in Miami, it will be because the Panthers are a tight-checking, boring bunch of castoffs, a second-year expansion team that uses clutch-and-grab tactics to slow the pace and stifle the creative flow of the star-studded cast of the Stanley Cup champions.


Judge Upsets Murder Conviction Focused on 'Repressed Memory'
A Federal judge in San Francisco yesterday overturned the conviction of a California man on murder charges that were based on his daughter's testimony that she had seen him kill her best friend in 1969 but had repressed the memory for two decades.
Judge Lowell Jensen of Federal District Court said the judge in the trial of the man, George Thomas Franklin, in 1990 in San Mateo County Superior Court had made two serious constitutional errors that "had a substantial and injurious effect on the jury's verdict."


Series of Blunders Led to Crash Of USAir Jet in July, Panel Says
The National Transportation Safety Board concluded today that USAir Flight 1016 crashed in Charlotte, N.C., last July 2 because air traffic controllers failed to pass along crucial weather information, the crew failed to recognize signs of wind shear and at the crucial moment the captain, apparently disoriented, told his first officer to push the nose of the plane down when the aircraft should have been climbing.
The findings were approved at a seven-hour meeting to establish the cause of the crash, which killed 37 people and injured 20 others aboard the USAir DC-9.


Tyson Behind the Mike for Title Fights
MIKE TYSON will be an analyst on the pay-per-view telecast of the five world championship fights on Saturday night at Caesars Palace in Las Vegas, Nev.
The former heavyweight champion will tape his comments before the show. (AP)


Disney Names Casino Expert to a Top Post
The Walt Disney Company named a longtime casino company finance expert, Stephen F. Bollenbach, as its chief financial officer yesterday, but insisted that it had no plans to enter the gambling business except, perhaps, on cruise ships.
Despite the Disney denial, casino executives and gaming analysts across the country said yesterday that there were growing indications that Disney was trying to find a way into the gambling business without tarnishing its family entertainment image and without linking Mickey Mouse to the glitzy world of one-armed bandits and dice flying over green felt.
Indeed, casino executives in Las Vegas, Nev., say agents working for Disney have been looking for property there.


Clinton and Britain's Prime Minister Say They've Patched Up Relations


Make Your Own Butter
To The Living Section:
The article on butter  [ "Butter Bites Back," March 22 ]  reminded me of a favorite activity when I was a kindergarten teacher.
After pouring a pint of heavy cream into a jar, we would pass the jar around, each child shaking it.


Gingrich Seems to Back Off On Step Against Gay Policy
House Speaker Newt Gingrich today appeared to back off his comments of two days running that he wanted to overturn President Clinton's policy on homosexuals in the military, saying instead that Congress would probably leave that policy in place.
He said that if the President's policy withstood court scrutiny, homosexuals in the military would not "be an issue that you'll see necessarily very much legislative action on."


AT WORK WITH: Ivana Trump; Thinner, Blonder, Wiser
MAKE it Ivana, she says, simply Ivana, and she chops the air with her hand as if to say, "Enough of that Mrs. Trump stuff."
She leans across her desk in the Park Avenue showroom of the House of Ivana, a fashion and fragrance company she likens to the House of Chanel.
"You don't have to put down the second name," she says, pointing to the open notebook.
"Ivana is what the people call me."


'Translations' Closing
"Translations," a revival of the 1981 drama by Brian Friel, is to close after the matinee on Sunday at the Plymouth Theater, 236 West 45th Street, Manhattan.
The matinee of the play, directed by Howard Davies and starring Brian Dennehy, Donal Donnelly and Dana Delany, will be its 25th regular performance.
It had 15 previews.


Corrections
A listing in the Benefits column in the Styles pages last Sunday misstated the ticket price of a party to be given on Saturday at the Players Club to aid the Drama League's Directors Project.
Tickets are $50.


Daulton Resigns as Player Representative
Frustrated by the players strike and the large role lawyers played in it for both sides, Philadelphia Phillies catcher DARREN DAULTON said he has resigned as the team's player representative.
"I don't want to be a part of it," Daulton said yesterday. (AP)


A Legal High-Wire Artist Takes On Silicon Valley Giants
It is probably safe to say that Jim Manzi and Bill Gates, who seem to have little to agree on as the chief executives of Lotus Development and Microsoft, both wish they had never heard of Gary Reback.
A lawyer with the Silicon Valley firm of Wilson, Sonsini, Goodrich &amp; Rosati, Mr.
Reback wrote a brief that was influential in the decision by Federal District Judge Stanley Sporkin in February to reject the Justice Department's settlement of its antitrust case against Microsoft.
Last month, Mr.
Reback helped Borland International Inc. win a ruling in a copyright infringement case brought by Lotus, when a Federal appeals court panel overturned a lower court's ruling that could have required Borland to pay crippling damages.


Metropolitan Diary
DEAR DIARY:
It's hard to be a good Samaritan in New York.
Recently, a friend of mine came upon a man in need of assistance in the Times Square subway station.
The man, a suited Wall-Street type, was staggering about, coat unbuttoned, briefcase dangling from his hand, obviously having had one too many.
My friend asked if he was all right.
The man gave a slurred but affirmative response and staggered away.
My friend, a recent transplant from the Midwest, simply could not let someone brave the rough maw of a New York subway without trying to help.
He followed the chap and began to walk alongside him, asking: "Are you all right? What subway are you looking for? Would you like me to escort you home?"


Corrections
A chart at the bottom of the Business Digest yesterday, about the nation's spending on construction, mislabeled the month-to-month percent changes in some editions.
The months depicted were August to January, not July to December.


Reviews/Fashion; Mod Look Returns, a la Jacobs
MARIANNE FAITHFULL removed a marabou bolero to show off the Wonderbra beneath and shared a cigarette with the photographer Steven Meisel, whose arm was draped over her bare shoulders.
Thus the stage was set for Marc Jacobs's collection, drawn from the era when Ms.
Faithfull rose to fame as a singer and shown in front of this era's financially famous, Donald and Marla Trump, and the famous-for-being-famous Donovan Leitch and Ingrid Casares.
It was a strange scene on Monday night, watching the reinvention of the fashion of Ms.
Faithfull's past while she was doing her best to plant herself in the fashion of the 90's -- although her embrace of the present displayed more gusto than Mr.
Jacobs's embrace of the past.


COMPANY BRIEFS
CBL &amp; ASSOCIATES PROPERTIES INC., Chattanooga, Tenn., a real estate investment trust that owns and operates regional malls and community shopping centers, bought two shopping malls, Westgate Mall, Spartanburg, S.C., and Suburban Plaza, Knoxville, Tenn., for about $32.3 million.
FIFTH THIRD BANCORP, Cincinnati, a bank holding company, agreed to buy Bank of Naples, a Florida bank with $57 million in assets, for an undisclosed amount.


A Show Biz Effort To Make a Molehill Out of a Mountain
It was nearly silent on "Sunset Boulevard" yesterday.
The day after her enraged threat to leave the hit musical was splashed all over the tabloids, Glenn Close, the show's star, and Sir Andrew Lloyd Webber, its creator, were still smoothing things over by press release.


History on the March; New Standards, Attacked on the Right, Stress the Neglected
Jaime Kleinman, 16, took another look at the American Revolution and surprised herself by arguing that the British were right.
"They did everything for the colonists," she said.
"They didn't deserve to be turned on." Many of her classmates at a Long Island high school, however, argued just as strongly that the British were wrong.


G.M. Agrees To Sell Car Rental Unit
The General Motors Corporation said yesterday that it had agreed to sell its National Car Rental System operation to an investor group led by William E. Lobeck, the former president of the Chrysler Corporation's group of car rental companies and a former owner of Thrifty Car Rental.
Industry analysts estimated the sale price of National, the fifth-largest car rental company in the United States, at about $1 billion.
G.M. did not disclose the terms of the deal.


Sports of The Times; The Dollars And Sense of Early Exits
I wonder how much time will pass before an agent or the flunky of an agent tells U.C.L.A.'s Toby Bailey that he should consider turning pro.
Can't you hear it: "Toby, baby, you're a natural. They love you!"


Time and Money Producing Racial Harmony in Military
As a young Army officer in Korea in 1970, Frank L. Miller found himself in a racial climate so volatile among American troops that his post averaged more than 100 racial assaults a week.
These days, the experiences of Mr.
Miller, now a major general and the deputy commander of the Army III Corps, are far different.
Outside his office on this sprawling base, black, Hispanic and white soldiers maintain their M1A1 tanks and Bradley fighting vehicles, train in Apache helicopters, attend classes, eat, work and laugh together -- all with a lack of rancor that makes those tempestuous days in Korea seem a distant memory.


Foreign Affairs; Mischief Makers
There is a dictum in the Babylonian Talmud about the virtues of compromise that goes like this: "Where there is complete truth, there is no peace. And where there is peace, there is no complete truth." What the ancient sages were trying to say was that seeking perfect justice for your community or cause might be ideologically satisfying, but it's not compatible with peace -- because peace is built of compromises, painted in shades of gray.
There are a few American Jewish organizations and lawmakers meddling in the Arab-Israel negotiations today who would do well to reflect on that lesson.


Seagram Is Seen in Deal This Week to Sell Du Pont Stake
The Seagram Company plans to announce by Friday an agreement to sell back its 25 percent stake in Du Pont for $10.1 billion, clearing the way for Seagram's plan to buy a majority interest in MCA Inc., people close to the companies said yesterday.
E.
I. du Pont Nemours &amp; Company is expected to buy Seagram's 164 million shares at current market prices, with the payment primarily in cash, these people said.
Both companies' boards are expected to approve the transaction by Friday.


ABC Adds Saturday Games to 1996 Lineup
College basketball will get greater exposure next season from ABC Sports with the addition of six Saturday afternoons of games from late January to early March.
To make room, ABC will shift seven bowling telecasts from their traditional winter time periods to May and June.
ABC currently airs about 10 weeks of regional college basketball games on Sundays.


Tarkanian Wants to Coach at Fresno State
JERRY TARKANIAN arrived yesterday to interview for the coaching job at Fresno State, his alma mater.
Of the 40 candidates for the job, Tarkanian is the only one to interview on campus, said DAVE HAGLUND, the sports information director.


G.O.P. Sets House Vote On Tax Cuts For Today
The House Republican leadership decided today that it had enough support to bring its package of tax breaks to the floor without further change or compromise, and it scheduled a final vote on the measure for Wednesday.
The action, taken by the Rules Committee, means that those Republicans who dislike parts of the five-year, $189 billion collection of tax breaks will have no chance to offer amendments to the bill on the House floor.
The Rules Committee gave Democrats one chance to offer an amendment, but purely as a courtesy; their changes stand no chance of being accepted.


U.S. Petroleum Data
In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
Mar. 31
Mar. 24
Apr. 1
1995
1995
1994
Gasoline production, daily
7.4
7.3
7.1
Distillate production, daily
3.2
3.3
3.1
Gasoline stocks
213.8
217.7
214.4
Distillate stocks
120.7
119.8
101.7
Crude imports, daily
8.4
6.2
6.8
Product imports, daily
1.0
1.5
2.0
Crude stocks
337.3
328.3
337.0
Crude production, daily
6.6
6.6
6.6
Refinery utilization (%)
89.8
89.6
87.7
Source: American Petroleum Institute


Wine Talk
WHAT ever happened to cabernet sauvignon?
Merlot has been discovered and it's a trendy favorite.
Pinot noir is not far behind.
Syrah and sangiovese are hot, and nebbiolo is coming up fast.
Zinfandel?
It's being discovered for the second time.
Or is it the third?


He Cheated a Charity, Unchallenged
William Aramony was president of the United Way of America for 22 years, until an embarrassed board of directors forced him out in 1992.
He now stands convicted of siphoning off more than $600,000 of United Way funds for himself.
The Aramony scandal hurt local United Ways all over the country, although they had no hand in it.
More important, it signaled the businessmen and women who sit on charity boards -- Mr.
Aramony's and others as well -- that they are guardians of the public's trust, and must not treat the responsibility casually.


Reviews/Fashion; Designed for Retailers and Real Women
IT'S easy to tell what retailers think of a collection just by looking at the faces all lined up in a row on one side of the runway.
If they're frowning, with their brows furrowed, they're no doubt thinking, "How will we ever sell these clothes?" If their expressions are placid, they're pleased.
There were a lot of happy faces as the Ellen Tracy show ended yesterday with eight models in cropped sweaters and bouffant ball-gown skirts.


CHRONICLE
LANCE LIEBMAN, the dean of the Columbia University School of Law, and Justice DAVID H. SOUTER of the Supreme Court will meet tomorrow at the Harlan Fiske Stone Moot Court Honor Competition at the school.
Justice Souter will serve as a judge.
The two met in a moot court as students, in 1964 when Mr.
Souter was a judge at a moot court at Harvard Law School.
"I got up filled with fear and did my thing, and he asked questions," Dean Liebman recalled.


Giuliani and Council Clash on Domestic Violence Effort
A year ago, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani and the Police Department announced a broad initiative to fight domestic violence by stepping up arrests and greatly expanding training.
Yesterday, the issue became tangled in the continuing rancor between the Mayor and the City Council after the Council released a report charging that virtually none of those promises have been kept.
The report forced the Mayor to defend his program, and he insisted that it had produced a significant change.
Council members, he said, "don't understand law enforcement as well as they should."


IN PERFORMANCE: DANCE
The Shared Experience Of American History  Lula Washington Los Angeles Contemporary Dance Theater Picnic House in Prospect Park
The Lula Washington Los Angeles Contemporary Dance Theater, one of that city's leading troupes, is rarely seen in New York.
On Sunday night, this 15-year-old company proved to be a vibrant, beautifully trained ensemble with an important message.
The message, that American history is a shared experience, was offered by Ms.
Washington in an elegant and smoothly blended mix of styles that ranged from ballet and modern dance to jazz and street dance, all animated by her performers' passion and devotion to the work.


The Secrecy Infection
As President Clinton tries to determine how the Central Intelligence Agency entangled itself in a disgraceful covert relationship with Guatemalan military thugs, he must reckon with the abuse of secrecy that rests at the core of this case, and so many other past C.I.A. train wrecks.
Washington has a long, dishonorable history of mistaking secrecy for patriotism and misusing the cover of national security to shield abuses of power and amoral policies.
The C.I.A. is the most skilled practitioner of these undemocratic arts, but far from the only one.


Don't Blame Brokers For Ticket Prices
To the Editor:
"Broadway Robbery" (editorial, March 25) laments the price of tickets for Broadway shows and calls on New York's Attorney General to act against "ticket wholesalers" who "buy up huge blocks of tickets and resell them at illegally high prices."


Stolen Sign Mailed to Stern
Howard Stern told his radio listeners yesterday that the men who took the "Howard Stern Rest Stop" plaque on I-295 in Burlington County had mailed it to him.
A spokesman for Governor Whitman, Carl Golden, said he believed that Mr.
Stern intended to affix the sign to the wall of the men's room at his studio rather than ship it back to the state.
"It's a fitting final chapter in this tired saga of Howard Stern," Mr.
Golden said.
Mrs.
Whitman began the saga in 1993 by pledging to name a rest stop for the so-called shock jock in return for his endorsement.
LAWRENCE VAN GELDER


Bailey Expecting Giants' Cut
It was about two weeks ago when Carlton Bailey knew his life was going to drastically change -- again.
Giants Coach Dan Reeves, Bailey said, told him the team was going to sign linebacker Mike Croel and that Bailey was most likely going to be released.
The Giants have since signed Croel, the former Denver linebacker, and Bailey was expected to be released this week.


Privatization Plan Under Gun
Timing, as they say, is everything.
Yesterday, state legislators were wondering if contracts could be drawn up in time for Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman's privatization plan to deliver its savings of $33 million for next year's budget.
Concerned lawmakers asked for the status of each privatization project.
Mrs.
Whitman hopes to realize the savings from competitive contracts to run motor vehicles offices, day-care centers, a veterans home and adult activity centers and from the sale of the Garden State Health Plan, a health maintenance organization for welfare recipients.


Dole Takes Step to End Debate on Budget Cutting
Under the pressure of a Friday deadline, Republican leaders in the Senate tried today to persuade Democrats and the White House to agree to a quick vote on a budget-cutting bill, but they failed.
After using threats and overtures alike, Senator Bob Dole, the majority leader, filed a motion this evening to bring an end to the weeklong debate.


Food Notes
More Farmers' Fare
A new farmers' market is operating in an empty lot on Lexington Avenue between 97th and 98th streets.
The market, which is not a part of the Greenmarket farmers' market group, was organized by Pam Wolf and Stacy Goldberg, who set up an antiques market in SoHo several years ago.
Ms.
Wolf said the farmers who participate in the market can sell only foods they grow or produce.
The market, open Thursday, Saturday and Sunday from 11 A.M. to 7 P.M., has 20 farmers selling produce, dairy products, chickens, fish, baked goods and preserves.
They share the space with a flea market.


Katherine Squire, 92, Actress In Theater, Film and Television
Katherine Squire, an actress who had a long career on Broadway and in regional theater, movies and television, died on March 29 in Lake Hill, N.Y.
She was 92.
Born in Defiance, Ohio, she graduated from Ohio Wesleyan and began her career at the Cleveland Play House.
After studying at the American Laboratory Theater, she made her Broadway debut in 1932 in the comedy "Goodbye Again," starring Osgood Perkins.


Corrections
An obituary on March 23 about Paul Bancroft Jr., a San Francisco developer, incorrectly described his relationship to Hubert Howe Bancroft, the California pioneer who was a chronicler of Western history.
Paul Bancroft was not the sole surviving grandson of Hubert Bancroft.
Another grandson, Griffing Bancroft Jr., lives in Naples, Fla.


Book Notes
Baseball Books
An old publishing proverb goes that for every five sports books that sell, five are about baseball.
These days, however, booksellers are glad for even one.


Corrections
A headline in Business Day yesterday about an investor who was penalized for using insider information to make a profit in trading the shares of the Knogo Corporation misstated the position of the investor, Lawrence Ronald Freeman.
As the article stated, he was an auditor doing business with the Sensormatic Electronics Corporation; he had no connection with the Knogo Corporation.


Bo Jackson Retires to Pursue Acting
BO JACKSON, once a star in two professional sports, has decided to retire from baseball and continue acting in movies and on television, his business manager said yesterday.
SUSANN McKEE, who directs Bo Jackson Enterprises in Mobile, Ala., said Jackson, 32, realized during the eight months of the baseball strike that he wanted to spend more time with his wife and three children. (AP)


A G.O.P. Dissent on Elephants on the Hill
The issue before the Senate on Monday was simple: whether to allow the Ringling Brothers and Barnum &amp; Bailey Circus to offer a free event on the Capitol grounds featuring "circus elephants and performers."
It is the type of measure that usually passes in a blink of the eye.
But Senator Robert C. Smith, Republican of New Hampshire, engaged in 45 minutes of soliloquy to try to block the observance of the circus's 125th anniversary at the Capitol on Wednesday.


Personal Health; How to survive allergy season.
LIKE the birds and the bees, many plants in spring have but one goal: to make new plants.
Hence the misery that has begun to sweep the country and that will ultimately plague the 35 million Americans who are allergic to tree and grass pollen.
But while pollen (the plant's male "seed") prefers to land on the sticky, moist stigma (female sex organ) of a plant of the same species, it unfortunately lacks self-direction.
At the mercy of wind and weather, pollen will settle on any sticky, moist surface, including the lining of the human nose and throat.
Once there it will make a tentative overture, sending out a protein signal that in effect asks, "Are you the one for me, and are you receptive?"


More Butter, Fewer Guns?
To The Living Section:
Reading the article about the great American butter phobia reminded me of the slogan in Britain when rationing was introduced: "Guns for Butter." Britain went back to butter soon after the war, while the United States has adopted the same principle for peacetime use.
Now that butter consumption is supposedly increasing, could one hope for a corresponding drop in gun consumption?
T.
P.
BRODY  Pittsburgh


The Speaker's Speaker


The Power of Opera In an Intimate Production
If you need to be reminded what a sheer visceral wallop opera can provide, try the Dicapo Opera's new production of Carlisle Floyd's "Susannah."
The work has suffered no particular neglect since it appeared in 1955, and it was recently given a fine musical turn in a Virgin Classics recording featuring Cheryl Studer and Samuel Ramey.
The little Dicapo Opera cannot, of course, muster any such star power.


The Public Appoints An Official
Laurie Beckelman, a former New York City landmarks official, has been named to a new administrative post at the Joseph Papp Public Theater, the producer and theater president, George C. Wolfe, said yesterday.
Ms.
Beckelman, 44, will be overseeing fund-raising and the theater's relations with the city, among other duties, Mr.
Wolfe said.
Her title remains to be decided but she is to share administrative authority with the theater's general manager, Joey Parnes.
She will assume her new duties in several weeks, Mr.
Wolfe said.
Ms.
Beckelman is a vice president of the LaSalle Partners real estate concern and was the chairwoman of the city's Landmarks Preservation Commission from 1990 to 1994.


Artful Reasons to Live in Hunts Point
IF Bryant Park can go from nickel bags to designer rags, how farfetched is the idea of a runway in Hunts Point?
Look at it this way: some of the trendiest downtown fashions and music have origins in the South Bronx and other hip-hop hothouses.
Somebody else usually gets rich and famous.
The real auteurs get called bridge and tunnel people.
Now a group of artists, organizers and entrepreneurs have come together to bring money and respect to Hunts Point, a peninsula long dominated by food distributors, auto parts stores and assorted hustlers.


Muslim Rebels Kill Scores In Philippines
Hundreds of heavily armed Muslim rebels attacked a city in the southern Philippines today, killing scores of people as they robbed banks, looted stores and set part of the town ablaze.
The Philippine Government ordered soldiers and police officers flown in by helicopter to Ipil, a city of 100,000 people about 480 miles south of Manila, with orders from President Fidel V. Ramos to "shoot to kill" any of the Muslim rebels who remained in the ransacked city.


Yesterday in Washington
VOTE SET ON TAX BILL -- The House Republican leadership decided that it had enough support to bring its package of tax breaks to the floor without change or compromise and scheduled a final vote for today.
Those Republicans who dislike parts of the five-year, $189 billion collection of tax breaks will have no chance to amend it on the House floor.
Republican leaders clearly concluded that disgruntled party members would not buck Speaker Newt Gingrich on the last -- and to Mr.
Gingrich, the most important -- plank of the Contract With America.
GINGRICH ON GAY BAN -- Mr.
Gingrich appeared to back off his comments that he wanted to overturn President Clinton's policy on homosexuals in the military, now saying Congress would probably leave that policy in place.


IN PERFORMANCE: CLASSICAL MUSIC
Handel Survey Starts Out Semi-Serious, Semi-Satirical  'Deidamia' Manhattan School of Music
Will Crutchfield, the director of the Handel Project, began a projected complete survey of Handel's operas with a performance of "Deidamia" on Monday night at Borden Auditorium.
This half-serious opera seria was Handel's last attempt at establishing Italian opera in London; the success of "Messiah" the following year persuaded him to channel his dramatic energies into oratorio form.


Bridge Team Is Upset
The second-seeded team in the Vanderbilt Team Championship at the American Contract Bridge League's Spring Nationals was upset on Monday.
The team, headed by James Cayne of Manhattan, lost by 6 imps to a team led by John Adams of Gaithersburg, Md., seeded 63d in a field of 87.


Study Says Sexual Harassment Persists at Military Academies
Since the Tailhook sexual harassment scandal erupted in 1991, the military has issued dozens of decrees, ordered hours of sensitivity training and even ended several careers in an effort to stop such behavior and attitudes.
But a new Congressional study suggests that the efforts have had little impact at the three elite military service academies.
In the survey, conducted from last May to January by the General Accounting Office, women at West Point, the Naval Academy and Air Force Academy said they were being sexually harassed at the same or, in some cases, higher rates than four years ago.


The Garden Agrees to Curb Cigarette Ads
Even though the Federal Government banned cigarette advertising on television in the 1970's, the Marlboro man continued to show up: sometimes, ads could be seen during sporting events, prominently displayed in arenas and stadiums.
But now it looks as if that loophole is disappearing, at least at Madison Square Garden.
Under an unusual accord with the Justice Department, the Garden has agreed to ban cigarette advertisements in places where they can be seen on television.


Walters Won't Bow to Jordan
Rex Walters said he will neither bow nor salute the man considered the world's toughest defensive assignment.
"I'll try and guard him," Walters said at the Nets' practice today.
"It'll probably give me the framework of how far I have to go on defense."
The Nets, fighting Boston and Miami for the playoff berth in the Eastern Conference, will host Michael Jordan and the Chicago Bulls on Wednesday night at Byrne Meadowlands Arena.
Jordan is returning to the New York area for the first time since he scored 55 points against the Knicks last Tuesday at Madison Square Garden.


Franco to Decide Between Mets and Orioles
In what has apparently been reduced to a two-team battle, John Franco was expected to decide as early as tonight -- and not later than Wednesday -- where he will pitch in 1995.
The Mets are still in the hunt, with Baltimore also in contention.
Dennis Gilbert, Franco's agent, spoke again today with Mets General Manager Joe McIlvaine, who is believed to have sweetened the Mets' offer.
It's believed that the Mets have increased the money guaranteed Franco, while shrinking the incentive bonuses, leaving the package's total potential value unchanged.


Corrections
An article yesterday about a United Nations conference in China misattributed remarks by a critic of the Chinese Government's preparations for the event.
The speaker, who objected to a plan to move a gathering of nongovernmental organizations 30 miles from the main conference site, was Rachel Kyte, a policy adviser for the International Women's Health Coalition, not Rochelle Lefkowitz, a consultant to the group.


A Morality Tale About Everybody's Fall Guy
The Atlantic Theater Company's "Luck, Pluck and Virtue," written and directed by James Lapine, is a gelatinous satire that plays as if it had been conceived by someone locked too long in the stacks of the New York Public Library.
The comedy opened last night.
In fact, Mr.
Lapine is an active man of the theater.
Among his other credits, he wrote the books for and directed Stephen Sondheim's "Passion," "Into the Woods" and "Sunday in the Park With George." He lives in the real world, though you wouldn't know it from his new work, a generalized, witless, upside-down morality tale set in a timeless void.


Gill Granted Leave Because of Depression
Seattle Supersonics guard KENDALL GILL, who quarreled with Coach GEORGE KARL for much of the season over playing time, was granted an indefinite leave from the team yesterday because of clinical depression.
In 67 games this season, he has averaged 14.1 points, 3.9 rebounds and 2.6 assists in 29.4 minutes a game. (AP)


German Economists Fear a Slowdown From Strong Mark
Economists around Germany this week have issued the darkest warnings to date that the excessively strong mark is setting the German economy on a path toward radically lower growth, with exports dropping and employment stagnating this year and next.
With the dire predictions, growth projections have been reduced by one-third, in the aftermath of last week's unsuccessful attempt by the nation's central bank to bolster the dollar by cutting German interest rates.


On the San Andreas Fault, an Ideal Spot for Vines
AS Pat DeRose guided visitors around the winery at his family-owned Cienega Valley Vineyards, he pointed out the tanks, barrels and other equipment of a typical wine-making operation.
But his guests were drawn to the cracked floors and warped walls, and to a small box in the corner.
Inside were seismic monitors from the United States Geological Survey, instruments whose needles wavered frequently because the powerful San Andreas fault runs smack under the winery, slowly splitting it in half.
The vineyard is set in a quiet valley dotted with walnut groves and other wineries, 10 miles south of the town of Hollister and 100 miles south of San Francisco.
"The west side of the building has moved 24 inches in about 30 years," Mr.
DeRose said, pointing out a gap between two walls that once were one.
The west side is moving north and the east side is inching south.


Conflict of Interest Is Cited In Regulatory Bill Lobbying
Just a few weeks ago, the law firm of Hunton &amp; Williams seemed to have all the bases covered in the fiercely competitive lobbying over how to reshape the Government's power to write regulations.
Its partners were helping Senate Republicans draft the bill in closed-door sessions, putting the firm in a prime position to protect the interests of its corporate clients, which include the nation's leading utilities.


Far From Politics In the Holiday Kitchen
FEMALE politicians are seldom asked for family recipes.
Maybe it isn't considered seemly.
"People don't consider us one of them," said Geraldine A. Ferraro, former Congresswoman, now the United States representative to the United Nations Human Rights Commission and the only woman ever to be a major party's candidate for Vice President, as she rolled out the dough for her mother's Easter pie recipe one day last week.
"When people see me in a grocery store they say, 'I didn't know you shopped.


At the Nation's Table: Washington
Where Beer Is to Be Savored
Victoria Deitcher has a ritual when she selects from the eight-page beer menu at the Brickskeller Dining House and Down-Home Saloon in Washington.


A Portrait of Peru by Taxi
The streets of Lima, Peru, are clogged with weather-beaten vehicles, many bearing windshield stickers saying "taxi," in Heddy Honigmann's revealing documentary film, "Metal and Melancholy." Being a part-time cabdriver, the film says, is now the easiest way for many of the city's financially strapped middle-class professionals to make ends meet.
In recent years, Government corruption and ineptitude have nearly bankrupted Peru, and salaries have not kept pace with inflation.
The movie, which opens today at Film Forum, is a series of bumpy cab rides during which the Dutch film maker interviews well over a dozen drivers.
The view that emerges is of a city of seven million in deep trouble, gritting its teeth and refusing to despair.
The drivers include a teacher, an economist, an actor and a policeman.
What is remarkable is their attitude of almost cheerful resignation to a situation that doesn't seem likely to improve any time soon.


G.A.O. Says White House Is Expanding Medicaid Coverage
The General Accounting Office said today that the Clinton Administration was opening the door to large future increases in Federal Medicaid spending by allowing states to expand their Medicaid programs to cover hundreds of thousands of people not normally eligible for benefits under Federal law.
The head of the accounting office, Comptroller General Charles A. Bowsher, said the Administration was misusing its authority to approve such statewide experiments by granting waivers from the Medicaid law.


Fire Burns Down School And Wakes Quiet Town
There is no place quite like little Winfield.
At the onset of World War II, the Federal Government built this tiny town of 700 barracks-style homes to house workers at the Kearny shipyard.
Then, in 1950, the families banded together and did something novel -- they bought their town from the Federal Government for $1.3 million.
To this day, anyone who leaves gets paid $2,500 by the town association, the original purchase price of each home.
Anyone who comes pays $2,500.


New Pollen Index Could Tell How You'll Feel, Not How You Felt
THE sneezing season, already in full swing in many of the warmer states, is poised to pounce on allergic New Yorkers and their fellow Americans north of the Mason-Dixon line.
This year's warm, sunny and breezy days of March have already pushed some trees into an early bloom, resulting in a rush of miserable patients to the offices of allergists in New York and other northern states, clinicians and pollen counters report.


Man Convicted of Trying To Assassinate President
A Federal jury convicted Francisco Martin Duran today of trying to assassinate President Clinton when he shot at the White House with an assault rifle on Oct. 29.
After deliberating about five hours, the jury found Mr.
Duran, a 26-year-old upholsterer from Colorado Springs, guilty on all 10 counts against him, rejecting his defense that he was insane at the time of the shooting.


Court Allows Plan to Merge Housing Force
Two days after consolidating the transit police into the Police Department, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani yesterday overcame the final hurdle to merging the housing police as well.
In a unanimous decision, the Court of Appeals, the state's highest court, ruled that the Mayor had the power to move ahead with the merger, a ruling that cleared the way for a single superforce of more than 38,000 officers within a month.


Ralph A. Weller, 73, Executive Who Led Otis in Growth Period
Ralph A. Weller, a retired executive who led the Otis Elevator Company through a period of robust growth, died on Friday at Manor Care in Walnut Creek, Calif.
He was a resident of Manhattan and was 73.
He had been in failing health since late last year, his family said.


IN PERFORMANCE: CLASSICAL MUSIC
Chopin in the Afternoon With Attention to Nocturnes  Garrick Ohlsson Alice Tully Hall
Garrick Ohlsson continued his admirable Chopin series on Sunday afternoon with a collection of nocturnes, mazurkas and polonaises and a sprinkling of isolated favorites as well.
In truth, just about everything here was somebody's favorite, excepting perhaps the early E-flat Rondo, which comes as close to frivolous virtuosity as any Chopin piece I know.


Executive Changes
GTE CORP., Stamford, Conn., named Robert C. Calafell senior vice president for corporate planning and development.
HASBRO INC., Pawtucket, R.I., appointed Harold P. Gordon vice chairman.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Dow Rolls Past 4,200 As Bull Market Continues
An ebullient stock market hit record levels, with the Dow rising 33.20 points to close above 4,200 for the first time, at 4,201.61.
Bonds and the dollar also rose, with traders anticipating stable interest rates, low inflation and higher corporate earnings.


Salomon Will Begin Search For Assistant to Chairman
Salomon Brothers Inc., in an effort to strengthen its senior management, will start a search soon for an executive to assist Deryck C. Maughan, the firm's chairman and chief executive.
Mr.
Maughan's proposed new deputy would hold the title of chief administrative officer.
Separately, Salomon's chief financial officer, Jerome Bailey, is searching to find a comptroller, or chief accountant, for the troubled investment bank.


Jurors Acquit 3 Officers Of Robbing Drug Dealers
A day after acquitting two police officers on charges that they systematically robbed Brooklyn residents and drug dealers, a Federal court jury cleared a third officer from the same troubled precinct of the same charges yesterday morning.
The acquittals in Federal District Court in Brooklyn marked the second time in as many months that police officers charged with corruption have been cleared in separate jury trials.
Last month, a Federal jury in Manhattan acquitted Officer John Orena of the 30th Precinct in Harlem of taking payoffs from drug dealers.


KETCHUM SELLS SOME ASSETS TO RESOURCE SERVICES
Ketchum Inc., which announced on Feb. 8 that it was going out of business after decades as the nation's leading fund-raising company, has sold its research files and remaining business to Resource Services Inc., a privately held Christian fund-raising company.
Resource Services, owned by the Dallas businessmen Ben Gill and William Wilson, said it expected to raise $400 million for clients this year.
Mr.
Gill and Mr.
Wilson will operate Ketchum, based in Pittsburgh, and Resource Services in tandem.
But the companies' combined activities make them the nation's largest fund-raising concern, Carl Hefton, executive vice president of Resource Services, said.
Mr.
Hefton said the acquisition would allow Resource Services to develop secular markets and expertise in large gifts usually connected with estate planning.


G.O.P. to Delay a Vote on Communications Bill
Senate Republicans said today that they would delay voting on a bill to rewrite the nation's communications laws for at least several weeks, partly in response to sharp criticism of the measure from Vice President Al Gore.
The delay marks a new snag for the legislation, which had been on a fast track in recent weeks.
It would allow local and long-distance telephone companies and cable television companies to attack one other's markets.


Get Your Free Agents, While They Last
It could be called encampment, or maybe estrangement.
Some might view it as a form of quarantine.
But later this week, a first-ever spring training camp for free agents -- baseball's most bizarre free-agent bazaar to date -- will open in Homestead, Fla.
Now that the 234-day players strike is over, there are approximately 200 players who are adrift, that is, with no teams to report to.
So the players association is organizing a camp at a vacant facility in Homestead and inviting these players to work out, get in shape and showcase their skills for scouts.


Severe Infection Cited in Queens Boy's Death
An 8-year-old Queens boy who died on Sunday suffered from a severe bacterial infection that in its most virulent form causes the so-called flesh-eating disease, city officials said yesterday.
But city health officials sought yesterday to calm the fears of anxious neighbors, as well as those of parents of students who went to school with the boy.


Clinton and Major Patch Up Quarrel on Northern Ireland
With British-American relations at their lowest point in years, President Clinton and Prime Minister John Major emerged from nearly three hours of meetings today and declared that the two countries had largely patched up their differences.
Seeking to put the best face on their recent quarrel over Northern Ireland, the two acknowledged that some disputes were inevitable.


Embarrassment for Yankees
George Steinbrenner said today that he was embarrassed by Gene Michael's arrest on drunken driving charges last week and declined to guarantee that the incident would not affect Michael's job security as Yankee general manager.
Steinbrenner has met with the 56-year-old Michael and has received his version of the events that led to the arrest last Wednesday.
It is at least his second arrest on charges of driving under the influence of alcohol since 1991.
The Broward County police said that Michael crashed into a utility pole in nearby Oakland Park and drove away from the accident.
He was later stopped when an officer noticed smoke coming from a flat tire.
"He's embarrassed about it and he should be," Steinbrenner said.
"I'm embarrassed about it. I'm not going to say anything else at this time. I don't believe in judging a man until he has had due process."


PATAKI WILL LIFT SOME REGULATIONS FOR HEALTH CARE
Gov.
George E. Pataki announced today that he would lift a series of what he called "oppressive" health care regulations imposed by previous governors who had said close oversight was needed to protect patients.
The Governor said the regulations had gone too far.
He described his proposal as an important step in his drive to make government less burdensome for business, a theme sounded by Republicans across the country.


Rival Claims to Island Chain Bring Edginess to Asia's Rim
China and its Southeast Asian neighbors say they are eager to avoid a military clash over a chain of potentially oil-rich islands in the South China Sea, but their recent actions suggest that they may be girding for a fight.
The dispute over the Spratly Islands grew more serious last week when the Philippines announced that it had torn down or blown up Chinese territorial markers on several of the islands and seized four Chinese trawlers.
Vietnam accused Taiwan of firing on Vietnamese transport ships that came near the largest of the Spratlys.


COLLEGE LACROSSE REPORT
Johns Hopkins
This team, well laced with talented Long Island athletes, is king of the hill once more.
The Blue Jays, longtime titans of the sport, are ranked No. 1 in the nation after six straight victories, four of them against top teams.


Career Horizons Says Chief Left in Sex-Harassment Dispute
Career Horizons, a temporary-personnel business based in Woodbury, L.I., said yesterday that its president and chief executive, Joel B. Miller, had resigned because of sexual-harassment allegations made by some employees.
Mr.
Miller denied the allegations.
"I'm angry, I'm hurt and I'm upset," he said in an interview from his home in Westport, Conn.
"I had a lot to do with building the company, and I want to see it thrive."


A Park in Megan's Honor


Minorities' Presence in Newsrooms Rises Slightly
The number of minority journalists at American daily newspapers rose slightly last year, according to a report today.
But some journalists said the latest data showed that news organizations had turned away from commitments many had made for years to diversify their newsrooms.
The survey of minority employment, made public on the first day of the annual convention of the American Society of Newspaper Editors here, showed a slight increase in minority employment at the nation's daily newspapers last year, to 10.91 percent of the total newsroom work force.
In 1993 the figure was 10.49 percent.


Cuba Blockade Supporters Cling to the Past
To the Editor:
Senator Connie Mack insists (letter, March 24) on considering the United States policy of blockade against Cuba as the most effective means to achieve his aspiration, and that of an ultra-right-wing sector of Cuban migrants in Florida: to change the Cuban political system in line with his interests.


Kool-Aid, Not Soda: Living on Food Stamps
The children love Doritos, but at $2.89 a bag at the Save-a-Lot discount store, where Linda Snider buys most of her groceries, they are too expensive.
Instead, she buys two bags of generic potato chips for 89 cents, Kool-Aid instead of soda, pork chops instead of steak.
Once a month she splurges on a half-gallon of ice cream.
"I buy a lot of macaroni and cheese for 19 cents a box," said Mrs.
Snider, a 36-year-old emergency room aide who lives in a small garden apartment with her two daughters and a grandson on income of $222.89 a week and $160 a month in food stamps.
"A 10-pack of hamburger meat, I can get six or seven meals out of. A pack of chicken gives me four. That's the only way I can shop."


No Headline
"Every year in some part of the country allergists will say 'this is the worst year we've had,' but there is not a strong correlation between allergists' perceptions of a bad pollen season and what actually is a bad season." DR.
HARRIET BURGE, an aerobiologist at the Harvard School of Public Health.  [ C17:2. ]


The Art of Women's Animation
Faith Hubley, an Oscar-winning animator, says she sees it this way: There's the world of art animation, and then there's the world of "rotten Saturday morning cartoons" controlled by advertisers.
The problem is that art animation is something of a closely guarded secret, restricted to museum showings and film festivals.
The Independent Television Service moves to rectify that situation with a series of four half-hour profiles called "Animated Women," a celebration of four dissimilar women working in the labor-intensive art of independent animation.
Although financed by the Corporation for Public Broadcasting, the series is getting scattershot scheduling on PBS.
It has already been broadcast in prime time on WNYC.
The first program, a close-up of Ms.
Hubley, can be seen on WNET at midnight this evening.
The second will be on WNET at 12:30 A.M. on Tuesday.
In short, check your local listings.


The Knicks Fail a Playoff Test Against the Pacers
It was not a good sign for the Knicks, with the playoffs less than a month away.
Last night's game was important, with homecourt implications for the playoffs.
The Knicks were facing the Indiana Pacers, a rival they could meet in the second round.
And the game was on New York's home floor, a place where the Knicks used to intimidate opponents.


Minority Dorms Serve Real Needs of Students
To the Editor:
Re "Separate Is Never Equal" (Op-Ed, April 1):


Chicken With Juice And Relish
MAGNOLIA'S restaurant in Cambridge, Mass., was the inspiration for this chicken marinated in orange juice, served with banana curry and a corn-and-orange relish.
When corn is in season, use it scraped from the cob for an even better flavor.
Grilled Maple Chicken With Corn Relish
1. Turn on broiler, if using, and cover broiler pan with aluminum foil.
2.
Wash and dry chicken, and cut into 1/2-inch-wide strips.
Combine orange juice and maple syrup, add tarragon and marinate chicken in mixture while preparing the rest of the meal.
3.
Over low heat, cook corn in water with cumin for just a few minutes, until corn is tender.
4.
Trim, seed and mince jalapeno.
Finely chop onion.
Wash, trim, seed and chop red pepper.
Wash and chop cilantro.
5.
Prepare stove-top grill, if using.
Grill or broil chicken strips for a couple of minutes.
Baste with marinade, and then turn and grill a minute or two longer, until done.
6.
To make relish, combine corn with jalapeno, onion, red pepper, cilantro, orange juice concentrate, salt and pepper.
Serve the chicken strips with the corn relish and the banana curry. (See recipe below.)
Yield: 2 servings.
Approximate nutritional analysis per serving: 355 calories, 2 grams fat, 65 milligrams cholesterol, 460 milligrams sodium, 35 grams protein, 55 grams carbohydrate.
Banana Curry
1 teaspoon olive oil  1 small red onion to yield 1/4 cup finely chopped  1 teaspoon curry powder  2 large, slightly underripe bananas  1/4 cup no-salt-added chicken stock  2 tablespoons currants.
1.
Heat oil in nonstick pan until it is medium hot.
Saute onion until it begins to brown; stir in curry, and cook 30 seconds more.
2. Slice the bananas about 1/4 inch thick.
3.
Add the bananas, stock and currants to onion.
Cook a couple of minutes longer, until bananas begin to soften.
Yield: 2 servings.
Approximate nutritional analysis per serving: 220 calories, 4 grams fat, 1 milligram cholesterol, 15 milligrams sodium, 3 grams protein, 50 grams carbohydrate.
Game Plan
Prepare chicken dish through Step 4.
Prepare banana curry through Step 2.
Finish chicken dish.
Finish banana dish.


Senate Votes to Require Telling Mothers of H.I.V. Results
The State Senate today overwhelmingly approved a bill that would require the state to inform mothers of the results of mandatory H.I.V. tests that are currently performed anonymously on newborns, setting up an emotional confrontation with Assembly leaders who oppose the legislation.
The debate over notifying mothers of H.I.V. test results has been one of the most contentious in Albany for nearly three years.


State to Reimburse Heirs
A state agency has agreed to reimburse three siblings for money allegedly stolen by a lawyer from the estate of their father, a former state senator from Queens.
The lawyer, Thomas Cullen, who has since been disbarred, has been indicted in the theft of $64,500 from the $1 million estate of Martin J. Knorr, Republican-Conservative who died in 1989.


Market Place; Some people know a secret early, and -- surprise -- a stock moves.
IF you tell a secret -- one that is sure to send a stock price plummeting -- to a bunch of Wall Street analysts, can you expect it to be kept?
And why would anyone ever think the answer to that question was yes?
That is, however, exactly what the John Alden Financial Corporation, a fast-growing insurance company, did last week.
On Thursday afternoon, while the stock and option markets were open, it told its bad news in a confidential telephone conference call to three analysts.
The public was told in a news release after the markets closed.


Employers Buying Into Plan
A plan aimed at encouraging small businesses to provide medical coverage for their workers attracted more than 16,000 companies last year.
Leaders of the Small Employer Health Benefits Program said that at least 2,150 of these businesses did not offer such insurance to workers before they signed up for the standardized plans devised uner the state's 1992 health reforms.
Now these 2,150 companies provide coverage for 16,256 people.


Daylight Saving Waste
To the Editor:
A box accompanying an April 2 news article mentions that fire officials recommend changing the batteries in smoke detectors when daylight saving time begins and ends.
This advice should be changed to advise merely checking the batteries at these times.


8 Arrested in Numbers Game
The numbers paid off yesterday for Middlesex County authorities.
After a six-month investigation, they said they had broken up an illegal numbers game in New Brunswick with the arrests of seven men and one woman and the seizure of more than $40,000 in cash, as well as gambling records and gambling equipment.
Six suspects were arrested in New Brunswick, two in North Bergen.


Way Ahead in the Space Race; Europe's Arianespace Builds on Decade-Old Lead
It seemed a secure American domain: launching satellites to feed a growing world hunger for space-age telecommunications.
But the Challenger disaster in 1986 effectively shut down the American space program for more than a year, leaving customers little choice but to look elsewhere.
Where many of them looked was to Arianespace, the European consortium that had set up shop in the early 70's and was starting to expand rapidly by 1986.
After the Challenger, its business surged, aided by sharp business tactics and generous government financing, and it now dominates the worldwide business of launching commercial satellites.


At the Nation's Table: Ventura, Calif.
Bananas? Please, Be More Specific
"Seaside Banana Gardens," says the cheery voice on the phone.


Mayor Daley Is Easily Re-elected in Chicago
Voters in Chicago overwhelmingly gave Mayor Richard M. Daley a second term today in an election that had the lowest turnout on record.
With 95 percent of the votes counted, Mr.
Daley had 61 percent to 36 percent for Roland Burris, a former state Attorney General who ran as an independent.
The Republican candidate, Ray Wardingley, had 3 percent.


U.S. Yacht Racers Make Deal
Less than two hours before the start of the critical tie-breaking yacht race to determine the other entrant in the 1995 America's Cup defense trials, syndicate heads made an unprecedented deal today that turned a sailoff into a sailover.
All three United States teams, including the PACT 95 group whose Young America was already in the finals, agreed that neither Bill Koch's boat, Mighty Mary, nor Dennis Conner's yacht, Stars &amp; Stripes, should be eliminated.
So the sailoff held today, the final race of the semifinals, held little significance as Mighty Mary beat Stars &amp; Stripes by 5 minutes 59 seconds.


Isles' Loss a Showcase For Tradable Players
Islander Coach Lorne Henning had promised some changes.
But for the Islanders, tonight was little different from most other nights this season.
The core of players Henning had accused of quitting during an embarrassing loss at home to Buffalo last Saturday was not benched as he had promised.
Although nobody went "into the tank" tonight as Henning felt much of his team had done against the Sabres, the Islanders came up short against Washington, 5-4.


Court Backs Injunction And Pushes for Talks
The President, the Secretary of State and the mediator appointed by the President have tried to get the baseball owners and the players to bargain successfully.
Yesterday, the chief judge of a Federal appellate court tried his hand.
Judge Jon Newman of the United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit was not trying to broker an agreement, but in making his judicial point, he elicited answers from lawyers that added weight to the contention of union officials that they are eager to resume negotiations and the owners are not.


In Reversal, Court Backs City College In Jeffries Lawsuit
Reversing its decision of a year ago, a Federal appeals court ruled yesterday that City College acted within its rights in removing Prof.
Leonard Jeffries as chairman of the Black Studies Department for making incendiary remarks about Jews.
The ruling handed Dr.
Jeffries his first clear defeat in a three-year legal struggle that has at times polarized the college and has made him one of the most prominent and controversial figures in the nation's discussions of race and academic freedom.


METRO DIGEST
PATAKI TO LIFT SOME HEALTH CARE RULES
Governor Pataki announced that he would lift a series of what he called "oppressive" health care regulations imposed by previous governors who had said close oversight was needed to protect patients.
A1.
COURT BACKS CITY COLLEGE ON DISMISSAL
Reversing an earlier decision, a Federal appeals court ruled that City College acted within its rights in removing Prof.
Leonard Jeffries as chairman of the Black Studies Department for making incendiary remarks about Jews.
A1.


Hannes Alfven, 86, Founder Of Field in Physics, Is Dead
Hannes Alfven, a Nobel laureate who was largely responsible for founding a field of study that figures in many aspects of physics, died Sunday night at his home in Djursholm, Sweden.
He was 86.
His death occurred after a bout of influenza, according to the University of California at San Diego, where he was a part-time professor.


National Nightmare Returns To Argentine Consciousness
The mood seemed relaxed Friday night as perfumed Argentines, chatting and smiling, lined up in suits and flowery dresses for a movie.
Suddenly, a loud argument could be heard.
"Shame on you, shame on you for thinking that way!" Patricia Cata rella, 72, rebuked her friend Ruben Quesada, 76.
"I lost a brother in the war, and you lost no one!"


Thousands of Acres Ablaze In New Jersey Pinelands Fire
A fire fanned by strong winds burned out of control tonight in the scrub pinelands of Ocean County, engulfing more than 15,000 acres and forcing the temporary evacuation of hundreds of homes in its path.
More than 400 state and local firefighters were unable to contain the blaze as it burned south of this retirement center and moved toward lightly populated areas in Lacey Township several miles away, emergency officials reported.


O'Bannon Has the Look of a Leader
A championship plaque was in his dressing room, and a nylon necklace rested on his chest, and Ed O'Bannon's eyes appeared to be different at last.
For weeks they had been pointed straight ahead, the only direction O'Bannon could look for the U.C.L.A.
Bruins to win their first national championship in 20 years and his once-tortured career to end on a victory stand.
From the moment the brackets were filled and we all looked for hints of where the 1995 tournament would lead, the best possible clue -- everything you needed to know about O'Bannon's team -- could be found by looking into his eyes.
They pushed the Bruins and kept them whole through each crisis, the way Keith Hernandez once challenged teammates who became World Series champions in St.
Louis and New York.
O'Bannon played a different game on another level, but the impact of his command was so similar -- part mentor, part intimidator, someone capable of comforting, threatening and supporting a group all at once.


IN PERFORMANCE: CLASSICAL MUSIC
Tribute to Hindemith Shows Links to Bach and Brahms  Yale Music Spectrum Merkin Concert Hall
The Yale Music Spectrum, an ensemble in which students and faculty mingle, offered a centenary tribute to Paul Hindemith on Saturday evening.
Hindemith, who was born on Nov. 16, 1895, was on the Yale faculty from 1940 to 1953, but it was not to that period that the musicians looked.
Instead they played two works from his early years in Germany: the Viola Sonata (1919) and the Harp Sonata (1939).


Lobo Leading the Way in Her Hometown
Southwick, Mass., selectmen voted unanimously to rename the entrance road to the Southwick-Tolland Regional High School in honor of REBECCA LOBO, the 1991 graduate and honor student, who led Connecticut to the women's national basketball championship.
"It's not Rebecca Lobo Street," said PAUL SALZER, chairman of the selectmen.
"It is indicative of a way to get ahead in education, in athletics. It's Rebecca Lobo Way." Lobo also appeared on "Late Show With David Letterman" last night.


Avant-Garde Women Reinterpret Traditions
The Kitchen concluded its Feminine Instincts series of avant-garde musical performances by women with two very different interpretations of Eastern traditions by the Israeli-born cellist Maya Beiser and the Chinese-born singer and composer Liu Sola.
Although the four compositions Ms.
Beiser performed on Saturday night ranged from a piece in which she used the cello to imitate the instruments of Azerbaijani kemanche music ("HabilSajahi," composed by Franguiz Ali-Zade) to a more impressionistic piece ("Khse Buon") by the Cambodian composer Chinary Ung, she never changed the tone of her playing.
The sounds Ms.
Beiser eased and forced from her cello remained somber and elegiac throughout the long program, even when she was experimenting with extended playing techniques.


Protest March On Budget Cuts
Between 4,500 and 5,000 people turned out at City Hall Park yesterday afternoon for a demonstration against Gov.
George E. Pataki's proposed budget cuts, the police said.
The demonstrators marched to Wall Street, and no injuries or arrests were reported.
"Everything went smoothly," the Chief of Department, Louis R. Anemone, said.
A section of Broadway was closed for about half an hour as demonstrators marched, carrying signs that read, "Stop CUNY Cuts," "Stop Pataki's Cuts" and "Ghouliani Spells Death to Education."


Americans and Exercise
To The Living Section:
My findings on sports and fitness activities were not fully presented in "Time for a Fitness Pyramid?" (March 29).
Although growth in exercise participation lagged in the early 1990's, as the article said, my company, American Sports Data Inc., has found that the number of Americans who exercised at least 100 times in any one fitness activity during 1994 soared to 48.9 million -- an unprecedented leap of 11 percent over the 43.9 million projected in 1993 and an increase of 29 percent from the 37.9 million recorded in 1987.


Who Saved Civilization? The Irish, That's Who!
HOW THE IRISH SAVED CIVILIZATION  The Untold Story of Ireland's Heroic Role From the Fall of Rome to the Rise of Medieval Europe
By Thomas Cahill
Illustrated. Nan A. Talese/Doubleday. 246 pages. $22.50.
"Patrick slept soundly and soberly," says Thomas Cahill in this charming and poetic disquisition, which describes what he calls Ireland's "one moment of unblemished glory" when, according to our author, the Irish saved classical civilization after the fall of the Roman Empire.
The phrase, wry and pithy at the same time, is as good a way as any of suggesting Mr.
Cahill's thesis.


Apple Sales Chief Out in Cloning Struggle
Ian Diery, the man who led Apple Computer's United States sales organization and hardware business, has resigned after losing an internal struggle in which he opposed the decision to encourage the cloning of its computers, Apple announced today.
Apple said that Mr.
Diery was stepping down as part of a reorganization of the company along more functional lines, combining its hardware and software development organizations into a single unit along with three other divisions.


The Poetry of Theatrical Gay Works
Choreographers and poets joined forces to create theatrical works about gay blacks in "Toenails of Steel and Ruby Red Text," the program presented on Sunday afternoon by the Thelma Hill Dance Project at the Triangle Theater of Long Island University in Downtown Brooklyn.
Texts were sometimes spoken by the writers, and sometimes by the dancers.
But throughout the afternoon, words and movements were skillfully united.
G.
Winston James's poetry for the opening section of "As the Fairy's Magic Lives" affirmed not only the dignity of gay men and lesbians but also the wondrous variety of all creation.
Other episodes of this suite, choreographed by L. A. E. Beckles, included a lyrical duet for Curtis Glover and Leo J. Singleton, in which each man was tender as well as strong, and solos by Penelope Kalloo and Felicia Kennerly, which conveyed a sense of pride and courage.


Accounts
*
Healthpartners, Minneapolis, to Periscope, Minneapolis, to handle its account, previously at the BBDO Minneapolis unit of the Omnicom Group.
The billings were estimated at $5 million. *
Lai, Venuti &amp; Lai, Santa Clara, Calif., was awarded two software accounts with combined billings estimated at more than $2 million to $3 million: Caere Corp., Los Gatos, Calif., previously handled by CKS Partners, Campbell, Calif., and Egghead Software, Seattle, for undisclosed projects; Egghead will continue to handle some advertising in-house.


Back to the 1960's, in a version by Marc Jacobs: C16


Award Ceremonies On Two Coasts
Organizations in New York and Los Angeles have bestowed their annual advertising awards.
At the 1995 Best of New York Addy Awards, for New York agencies, Cliff Freeman &amp; Partners, a unit of Cordiant P.L.C., took top honors at the presentation, sponsored by the Advertising Women of New York.
The agency won six Addys for campaigns for Little Caesars and Staples.
Wells Rich Greene BDDP, a unit of BDDP Worldwide, and Lord, Dentsu &amp; Partners, a joint venture of Young &amp; Rubicam and Dentsu, each won four Addys.
Wells Rich also received the Best of Show award for broadcast advertising for an Advertising Council campaign against drunken driving.
Deutsch Inc. in New York won the Best of Show for print advertising for a Tanqueray gin ad featuring the fictitious Mr.
Jenkins.


A Young Opera Heavy With the Past
We like to imagine that a force called History separates artworks from dross.
But as the return of John Corigliano's "Ghosts of Versailles" showed at the Metropolitan Opera on Monday night, history just helps strip away the accidents of a work's origins.
In this case, the Met was unveiling its first new work in 24 years at the much-anticipated 1991 premiere.
"Ghosts" was an American opera that was energetically determined to entertain.
John Conklin's astonishing sets had an immediate impact.
And this novel work somehow managed to encompass campy parody and sentimental nostalgia while provoking analysis and reflection.
Now, three and a half seasons later, the work is a repertory piece, released on video and scheduled by the Chicago Lyric Opera for next season.
The opening-night audience may not have cheered as it did at the premiere, but listeners were certainly entertained and, according to the Met, the five remaining performances boast very good, if not spectacular, ticket sales.
The performance was up to initial standards as well.
James Levine was again in the pit and Colin Graham's production was still brilliantly imaginative.
Teresa Stratas reprised her role as the ghostly Marie Antoinette, and Gino Quilico his as a Figaro who becomes mixed up with the French Revolution's Reign of Terror.


Surgery Ends Season for Celtics' Fox
RICK FOX of the Boston Celtics had arthroscopic surgery to remove bone spurs from both ankles yesterday and will miss the rest of the season.
The forward/guard, who last played on March 12, averaged 8.8 points in 53 games this season.


The Strep Danger: A Need for Vigilance, Not Panic
The infections are rare but deadly.
People have no reason to panic, but they cannot afford to be complacent.
Doctors walk a verbal tightrope whenever there are cases of invasive streptococcus infections, which in their most virulent form are linked to "flesh-eating bacteria."


Clean Water Bill Stays True to '72 Act
To the Editor:
Re "Bud Shuster's Dirty Water Act" (editorial, April 2): Contrary to your unsupported assertions that polluters wrote the bill, that water quality standards would become voluntary, that this is a Republican ploy and that comments were not solicited from the Environmental Protection Agency, consider the following, easily verifiable facts:


Casino Revenues Still Rising
For the seventh consecutive month, revenues in the city's dozen casinos rose by 5 percent or more over the same period a year ago.
The highest increase came in March; revenues were 12.7 percent higher than in March 1994.
Nicholas Amato, executive director of the Casino Association of New Jersey, said revenues were up at every casino.
Casino revenue is the amount of money taken in from gamblers.
It is not profit.


Downtown Downpour


Colombian Press Feels Heat for Linking President to Drug Lords
An increasing number of press reports in Colombia linking President Ernesto Samper and former campaign aides with major drug traffickers has put the Government at odds with some members of the local press.
On Monday, Mr.
Samper's Cabinet issued a statement criticizing the opposition newspaper La Prensa for reports suggesting that Mr.
Samper's campaign received donations from members of the Cali drug trafficking ring.
The letter was made public after La Prensa published a composite picture of Mr.
Samper and the police mug shot of the former Panamanian leader, Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega.


Business Travel; Fourteen Latin airlines (along with USAir ) team up for a new frequent flier program.
AIRLINES from the United States have been flying more passengers to Latin America but 14 Latin carriers recently teamed up to try to slow the Yankee blitz by offering customers a frequent flier program called Latinpass.
USAir, the only American carrier in the Latinpass program, has a sprawling domestic route system that positions it to fly passengers to and from a dozen gateway cities in the United States.
The most important of these is Miami, where USAir is eager to increase its business.
Diners Club, a subsidiary of Citicorp, also recently joined Latinpass; American Express signed a preliminary agreement to join, while hotel and rental car partners are expected to sign on soon.


Clinton Nominee Approved
The nomination of Shirley Jackson of Bridgewater to the Federal Nuclear Regulatory Commission was unanimously approved by the United States Senate's Environment and Public Works Committee yesterday.
If confirmed by the full Senate, Ms.
Jackson would become the first black woman to serve on the five-member commission.
President Clinton has said he intends to make Ms.
Jackson, a professor at Rutgers, the chairwoman.


G.O.P. Plan to Cut $189 Billion in Taxes
The Republican tax bill the House of Representatives plans to take up on Wednesday would reduce the Federal income taxes of people and companies by $189 billion over the next five years and, according to Treasury Department estimates, $630 billion over the next decade.
The bill would give most families with children a $500 tax cut for each child.
It would also lower the capital gains tax and provide a variety of other tax breaks for individuals and businesses.


4,500 State Workers to Be Paid, Pataki Finance Chief Declares
The State Taxation and Finance Commissioner determined today that the state has to pay 4,500 legislative employees this week, undercutting Gov.
George E. Pataki's vow to withhold their pay until lawmakers pass a budget.
The Republican Governor had hoped to pressure Assembly Democratic leaders to reach a quick settlement on the budget, now four days late, by withholding pay for himself, the legislators and all their staffs.


CHRONICLE
ELIE WIESEL, the Nobel laureate and chronicler of the Holocaust, has moved into the age of video -- albeit a bit reluctantly.
Mr.
Wiesel is making his video debut in "A Passover Seder: A Video for the Family," produced and distributed by Warner Vision, a division of Time Warner.
He offers recollections and commentary on the holiday.


Orchestra Goes From Warm to Bright and Brassy
Listening to the Royal Concertgebouw Orchestra of Amsterdam at Carnegie Hall on Sunday afternoon and Monday evening was something like encountering a favorite old car that had been customized by new owners.
The customizer here was Riccardo Chailly, who succeeded Bernard Haitink as chief conductor in 1988, and who has traded the luxurious warmth that Mr.
Haitink and his predecessors had cultivated for the kind of brightness and brass-driven power of the Chicago Symphony during Georg Solti's tenure.
Mr.
Chailly has, in effect, turned a luxury car into a hot rod.
No doubt many concertgoers find this metamorphosis all to the good.
Times and tastes change, after all, and these days gleaming precision and sheer sonic force are high on the list of orchestral virtues.
Besides, whether one regards the Concertgebouw's flashy new sound as thrilling or coarse, it cannot be denied that section for section it remains one of the world's most polished ensembles.
But not long ago it was also an orchestra with a distinctive sound.
Now that distinctiveness has given way to the school of homogenous international virtuosity.


RESULTS PLUS
N.B.A.
Celtics' Rally Tops Cavs  Sherman Douglas scored 20 of his 24 points in the second half last night as the Boston Celtics overcame an early 15-point deficit and beat the Cavaliers, 97-92, in Cleveland.


Minority Dorms Serve Real Needs of Students; Pressure to Segregate
To the Editor:
Re "Separate Is Never Equal" (Op-Ed, April 1):


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; New campaigns invite consumers to surrender to the surreal.
ADVERTISERS and agencies are embracing a creative trend that might be characterized, were Marvin Gaye and Tammi Terrell to sing about it, as "Ain't nothing like the surreal thing."
Surrealistic imagery, whether for humorous effect or shock value, is appearing more frequently in campaigns for marketers as diverse as TAG Heuer watches, TGI Friday's restaurants, Johnnie Walker Black Label Scotch whisky and the Nynex Corporation.
The eye-catching abstractions, in bright primary colors or moody film-noirish black and white, present the unexpected juxtapositions of objects, people behaving as if they dwelled within cartoons and elaborate special effects.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-13  MOVES AGAINST MIDEAST FOES  President Clinton said that Iraq could be regaining the ability to develop weapons of mass destruction while national security advisers considered a near-total trade ban against Iran.
A1  The Purple Heart will be awarded to 14 killed over Iraq.
A12


Would Executive Superstars Stay at MCA?
If Seagram does acquire MCA Inc., it will inherit a venerable Hollywood studio -- but one whose fortunes depend, to a remarkable degree, on its charismatic top executives.
Lew R. Wasserman, the chairman of MCA, and Sidney J. Sheinberg, his longtime deputy, have close ties to MCA's most successful artists and performers.
If these executives leave the film, music and theme-park conglomerate, MCA stands to lose the potential of future blockbuster films -- not to mention its relationship with Dreamworks SKG, the new entertainment company started by Steven Spielberg, Jeffrey Katzenberg and David Geffen.


INSIDE
Budget Impasse Continues
The Senate majority leader, Bob Dole, filed a motion to force a vote on a budget-cutting bill after failing to persuade Democrats to drop their amendments.
Page A23.
Seagram May Be Near Deal
Seagram is said to be on the verge of a deal to sell its 25 percent stake in Du Pont for $10.1 billion, clearing the way for it to pursue MCA.
Page D1.
Sneezes by the Numbers
As allergy season opens early, experts are trying to standardize pollen counts so the allergic will know why they suffer.
Page C17.
White House Gunman Guilty
Francisco Duran, who fired an assault rifle at the White House, was convicted of attempting to assassinate President Clinton.
Page A16.


Heroin Scourges Million Pakistanis
In lucid moments, Mohammed Ilyas has happy memories of life as a fisherman on one of Karachi's deep-sea shark boats.
But that was 10 years ago, before Mr.
Ilyas began smoking the low-grade heroin he knows as "brown sugar," and before home became a threadbare blanket tacked to a grimy Karachi wall as a windbreak.
Now, Mr.
Ilyas's addiction brings him to the same lonely spot each night, with a sliver of silver paper to hold the heroin bought with a day's panhandling in the docks, and a lighted taper to heat the powder into the vapors he inhales.
On either side, fellow addicts crouch in their own pitiful isolation, ignored by the police and passers-by.


U.S. PRESSES DRIVE ON IRAN AND IRAQ
The Clinton Administration moved against two of its Middle Eastern adversaries today, as President Clinton charged that Iraq could be regaining the ability to develop weapons of mass destruction and his national security advisers met to consider whether to impose a near-total trade ban against Iran.
The stepped-up campaign against the two countries has a dual purpose: to keep together the anti-Iraq coalition at the United Nations and to throttle Iran's economy as it tries to rebuild its military capability.


The Dow Rolls Past 4,200 as Stocks, Bonds and Dollar Rally
As the financial markets head into the corporate earnings season, stocks, bonds and the dollar rallied yesterday, with traders expecting stable interest rates, low inflation and higher corporate earnings.
But the weak dollar, which rose slightly yesterday on expectations that the Federal Reserve and other central banks would again defend it, could be the financial markets' undoing over the next few weeks.


In America; The Wrong Target
One of the many important issues to emerge battered and distorted from the insidious cavern of political demagoguery is affirmative action.
If you listen to the latest crop of compulsively deceitful politicians, or tune into the howling degradation of talk radio, you might become convinced that the biggest problem of discrimination in the United States today is bias against white men.
The complaint is that legions of African-Americans, women and assorted others are taking jobs, promotions, classroom slots, theater tickets and the best seats on the bus from the folks who really deserve them -- white guys.


Handling of Simpson Evidence Attacked
Lawyers for O. J. Simpson today began what is likely to be an intensive and protracted effort to pick apart the manner in which the Los Angeles Police Department gathered, handled and preserved the evidence that prosecutors believe will show Mr.
Simpson to be a murderer twice over.
They focused initially on what they depicted as the crucial role played by a novice, noting that a trainee who had worked at fewer than a handful of crime scenes had collected on swatches the five blood drops leading from the bodies of the two victims as well as the drop on the door of Mr.
Simpson's Ford Bronco, and most of those leading into Mr.
Simpson's house.


New York Still Assists Furniture for Homeless
To the Editor:
While Yvonne R. Freund (letter, March 31) correctly states that the Partnership for the Homeless is no longer able to pick up furniture from individual households, and now relies entirely on bulk donations from offices and hotels, that is not due to a lack of support from Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani or New York City's Department of Homeless Services.


Carl H. Mau, World Lutheran Leader, Dies at 72
The Rev.
Carl H. Mau Jr., an American minister who led the international Lutheran movement during a critical period of realignment and initiative in the 1970's and 80's, died last Friday at a convalescent home in Des Moines, Wash., near his home in Seattle.
He was 72.
Colleagues said the cause was cancer.


William Hayter, 88, Ex-British Diplomat
Sir William Hayter, who as Britain's Ambassador to the Soviet Union played a role in Nikita S. Khrushchev's groundbreaking visit to Britain in 1956, died on March 28 in Stanton St.
John, England, where he lived.
He was 88.
The Times of London reported last Thursday that it was Sir William who suggested that the British Government invite Mr.
Khrushchev, the head of the Soviet Communist Party, and Nikolai A. Bulganin, the Soviet Prime Minister, to make the visit.


Sports of The Times; Montreal Sounds The Alarm
THE owners of major league baseball teams would have us supposed saps believe that they view their ownerships as a "public trust" or a "quasi-public trust," depending on what sanctimonious mood one finds them in.
From three National Labor Relations Board rulings in recent weeks that the owners have bargained unfairly with the players union and an arbitrator's $280 million penalty against them three years ago for having colluded to prevent the signing of free agents, among other items, it turns out that we can hardly trust these pillars of the community at all.


Baby's Death Not the First Case
When Sergio Sciancalepore learned that a dead baby had been found in an old washing machine in the basement of his apartment building here, he said, "Here we go again." Eight years ago another baby was found dead in the backyard of the building at 12th and Washington Streets.
Prosecutors said they would reopen the earlier case in light of yesterday's discovery, made by workers hired to clean out the building's basement.
Officials can't tell yet how the baby died or even whether it was a boy or girl; they say they believe the child has been dead at least six months.


Tough Fight on Health Benefits
Labor negotiations should take place at the bargaining table and not in front of media microphones, the Governor's office insists.
The leaders of the state's largest public employees union disagree.
The Communications Workers of America called a news conference here yesterday to say this: Leave our health benefits alone.
Talks are set to begin April 25 on a new contract for 60,000 state workers.
Nobody expects an easy settlement.


Washington Talk; Is the Race to the Swift? Maybe, and Maybe Not
Popular political wisdom has it that by next April Fool's Day, Republicans will have picked their nominee for President.
The idea is that with so many primaries bunched together and scheduled earlier than ever before, the contest might be like a drive through Podunk Center, Iowa: don't blink or you'll miss the whole thing.
But as the experts gear up for the quickest primary race in history, they ought to be prepared for one thing: it might not happen that way.


Bigotry on Display; Hate Speech and the University
Teachers may speak out on public issues without risking their jobs or tenure, but a university need not honor them with chairmanships when their racist statements betray the mission of the school.
That is the reasonable conclusion of the United States Court of Appeals in rejecting the claim of Prof.
Leonard Jeffries to keep his chairmanship of black studies at the City University of New York.
The decision respects academic freedom of speech among tenured faculty while recognizing the reasonable management prerogatives of a university.


International Briefs; Bols Wessanen Strategy To Focus on Food
Bowing to pressure from its shareholders, the Dutch food and liquor company Bols Wessanen N.V. said yesterday that it would shift its growth strategy toward the food sector and away from drinks.
The new strategy was announced at the annual shareholders meeting at which a pressure group, upset by a 1.4 percent profit gain last year and a company forecast of 10 percent to 15 percent lower profits this year, urged management to make far-reaching changes, including selling the Bols line of alcoholic beverages.


2 Justice Officials Back Idea of Federal Standard for Civil Suits
Senior Justice Department officials said today that they strongly believed that Congress should establish national standards in civil suits for harm caused by defective products.
The comments were the first explicit suggestion that the Clinton Administration might support elements of the Republican effort to overhaul the nation's civil litigation system.


Happy Yanks Get Down to Business
Wade Boggs walked across the parking lot, pumped his arms in the air like Rocky when fans shouted his name and then signed every item thrust at him.
Mike Stanley was not as animated, but he followed Boggs minutes later.
Jimmy Key went looking for fans so he could sign baseballs after he worked out.
The real Yankees arrived in earnest today as 25 of the 39 players who have been invited to camp said hello to Manager Buck Showalter.
After they hugged and high-fived each other, all spoke of being relieved over the back-to-work agreement and about returning something to the fans.


International Briefs; Renault's Truck Unit Returns to Profitability
Renault Vehicules Industriels, the truck division of Renault S.A., returned to profitability last year because of a tax credit, buoyant sales of Mack trucks in the United States and an improved second-half performance in Europe.
Renault V.I., which contributed 16.2 percent of Renault's total sales, posted a profit of 343 million francs, compared with a restated net loss of 1.39 billion francs in 1993.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Investment Company Takes Stake in Chase  Heine Securities has acquired a 6.1 percent stake in Chase Manhattan in a move that could set the stage for a big battle over the direction and ownership of Chase, the sixth-largest American banking company.
A1.
The head of Heine Securities, Michael F. Price, has compiled an impressive record as a manager with a keen eye for value and a willingness to take big gambles.
D6.


Cuomo to Be Host of New Radio Talk Show
Former Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo has signed a contract to be the host of a weekly syndicated radio talk show that will be broadcast live for three hours on Saturday morning.
Mr.
Cuomo, who was defeated for re-election in November by Gov.
George E. Pataki, said today that the show, which will begin in June, would be produced by SW Networks, a subsidiary of the Sony Corporation.
A company spokesman said that no stations had been signed up and he did not know how many stations across the country would eventually carry the show.
It will probably fill a 10 A.M. to 1 P.M. time slot.


Simpson Replaces Paddock in Winnipeg
JOHN PADDOCK, whose team is out of contention for a National Hockey League playoff spot, quit yesterday as coach of the Winnipeg Jets.
He was replaced on an interim basis by the associate coach TERRY SIMPSON.
Paddock will remain as general manager.
He said he was leaving his spot behind the bench to concentrate on other duties.
Simpson, a former coach of the Islanders and the Philadelphia Flyers, enjoyed success in his debut last night, as the Jets snapped an 11-game winless streak with a 4-1 victory over the visiting Chicago Blackhawks.
ALEKSEI ZHAMNOV scored two goals, including the game-winner, for Winnipeg (10-18).


U.S. and Allies Try to Prop Up the Dollar but Fail Again
Amid signs of increasing discord with its allies over the sharp fall of the dollar, the United States was joined today by Germany and Japan in largely symbolic moves to bolster the American currency.
But once again, the Clinton Administration failed to reverse the dollar's decline.
Treasury Secretary Robert E. Rubin later took the unusual step of calling a small group of reporters in Washington to announce that the three countries had been acting in concert and to argue that "in effect what you have is a shared commitment to a strong dollar because it is in our interest and in the interests of the other economies of the world."


'Harvey Milk,' a Gay Opera As a Grand Coming-Out Party
"Harvey Milk" comes as no surprise.
It or something like it has been inevitable, if not overdue.
Such is the powerful attraction of the gay sensibility to grand opera.
Gay men form a passionate audience for the medium, and the creative among them are key operatives in its design, production and performance.
While the gay movement still has no Martin Luther King Jr. or Gandhi, it does have local heroes like Harvey Milk of San Francisco, the martyred city politician whose exit from the closet and progress into public life brought empowerment to those accustomed to furtiveness and discretion.
Milk is remembered in "Harvey Milk," a docu-opera with music by Stewart Wallace and libretto by Michael Korie.
It had its local premiere at the New York City Opera on Tuesday.


INSIDE
Israeli Satellite
Israel launched what military specialists called the country's first intelligence-gathering satellite, in an orbit that could take it over hostile Islamic countries.
Page A12.
Defiance From Libya
Col.
Muammar el-Qadaffi said Libya is making preparations to violate the U.N. ban on flights to and from the country, and might leave the United Nations.
Page A3 F.A.A.
Resists Safety Seats
The Federal Aviation Administration says it will not make child safety seats mandatory for babies traveling on airliners.
Page A20.
Relief for Yanks and Mets
The Yankees gilded their bullpen by getting John Wetteland from Montreal, and the Mets kept John Franco in theirs.
Pages B13 and B16.


Food for Thought


Judge Sentences Ex-Fugitive In First of 4 Deaths of Women
Calling him "a brutal and cunning man," a judge today sentenced Ricardo S. Caputo to 8 1/2 to 25 years in prison for the first of four murders Mr.
Caputo has said he committed more than 20 years ago.
Since his escape from a New York psychiatric institution in 1974, Mr.
Caputo was a fugitive until he turned himself in last year, saying voices were urging him to kill again.


The Bancroft Prize Is Awarded to 2 Authors
Two authors have been named as the 1995 winners of the Bancroft Prize, awarded annually by Columbia University for books about American history, biography and diplomacy.
John L. Brooke, 41, was chosen for "The Refiner's Fire: The Making of Mormon Cosmology, 1644-1844" (Cambridge University Press).
He is an associate professor of history at Tufts University.


Study Finds Pattern in College Binge Drinking
More than one-third of the freshmen who enter colleges where student drinking is heavy indulge in binge drinking in their first week, according to a study released today by the Harvard School of Public Health.
By the end of their first semester, the study found, 68 percent will have abused alcohol.
Essentially that means some freshmen begin drinking "before many of them even finish buying their books," said Henry Wechsler, director of the Harvard School of Public Health's alcohol studies program.


Bizarre Blooms, Bold Blooms
WHETHER your taste in plants veers toward the weirdly beautiful, like an orchid called Dracula vampira, or the intoxicatingly fragrant, like the dumpy but lovable hyacinth, this is the week for flowers in the city.
The 1995 Greater New York Orchid Show opens today at the Winter Garden of the World Financial Center, on West Street between Vesey and Liberty Streets, and runs through Sunday.
Orchid lovers can ogle at more than 100,000 specimens from Hawaii and a few other parts of the United States, Brazil, England, France and New Zealand, and many are for sale.


Informer's Death Tests Will of Gaza Authority
In a case that has quickly become a test of its treatment of suspected informers, the Palestinian Authority in the Gaza Strip has arrested five members of its intelligence service in the killing of a prisoner accused of informing for Israel, the top justice official in the authority said today.
The prisoner, Muhammad al-Jundi, was shot to death four days ago on a street in the Jabaliya refugee camp, Palestinian witnesses said.





South Korea Strives for a Market in Latin America
To supply his new Daewoo dealership here, Moon Hyun Kim has drivers ferry South Korean cars over the Andes and then down jungle rivers to this bustling metropolis in the heart of the Amazon.
"In the last two years, Daewoo has opened 24 car distributors around Peru," said Mr.
Kim in Lima, his command post for the South Korean conglomerate's export assault on this small market.
One year after arriving from a Daewoo post in Carlstadt, N.J., the manager has peppered Peru's capital with 14 billboards, helping his company win 22 percent of the national car market.


Head of Army Forces in the U.S. Is Selected as New Chief of Staff
President Clinton has selected the head of Army forces in the United States to be the next Army Chief of Staff, senior officials in the Administration said today.
The officials said the White House intended to nominate Gen.
Dennis J. Reimer, 55, the commander of the Army's Forces Command in Atlanta, to replace Gen.
Gordon R. Sullivan, who will retire in June.
An official announcement could come later this week.


Pondering a Cease-Fire in the Drug War
In an uncomfortably apt comparison, one of the officials featured on "America's War on Drugs: Searching for Solutions" likens the drug war to the Vietnam war: After many expensive years the battle continues with no prospect of victory, and the strain on society keeps worsening.
Catherine Crier's plain-talking report finds a mayor, a police chief and a judge making the case for "harm reduction": the decriminalizing or legalizing of at least some drugs and an emphasis on treatment instead of jails.


Leave it to Lauren to redefine glamour


Living on Tinderbox's Edge, Families Hope to Be Spared
At 7 this morning, the fear started all over again for Lisa and Bill Applegate.
The couple had gone to sleep just a few hours earlier, believing their house in the Ocean County woods had been spared from New Jersey's worst forest fire in over two decades.
But when the wind came up again after dawn, so did the fire.


In a problem-solving move, Cordiant will sell Campbell Mithun Esty and related units.
CORDIANT P.L.C. said yesterday that it had agreed to sell Campbell Mithun Esty in Minneapolis, and related promotion and marketing units, to their top management and the Interpublic Group of Companies for $40 million in cash.
The equity ownership is to be divided equally between the management group and Interpublic.


Index of Leading Indicators Falls to Soft 0.2% Landing
The Government's main gauge for predicting the economy fell two-tenths of 1 percent in February, the first decline since October and the biggest since mid-1993, the Commerce Department reported today.
The index of leading indicators now stands at 102.3, exactly where it was in August before settling into a pattern of small changes that offset each other.
This pattern seems to have presaged the slackening from the unsustainably rapid economic growth of more than 5 percent in the final quarter of 1994.


Children and the Dentist
To The Home Section:
Reading "It's Playtime at the Dentist" (March 16), I had to chuckle.
I worked for a wonderful general practitioner for 20 years.
He believed in never lying to kids and in showing them the drills, instruments, X-rays and so on, and telling them what was going to happen.
The ride up and down in the chair was a simple treat that turned hundreds of children into cooperative dental patients.


McCaw to Put AT&amp;T Money Into Nextel
Craig O. McCaw, the billionaire who has been looking for a new project since he sold his company to AT&amp;T, has found one: Nextel Communications, a onetime high flier in wireless communications that has been flirting with death in recent months.
Mr.
McCaw announced yesterday that he and his family would immediately invest $300 million in Nextel and as much as $1.1 billion in the next six years.
If he exercises all his options under an agreement with Nextel, he would own 23 percent of the company and become its largest shareholder.


To Keep Russia From Arming Iran
The Clinton Administration is rightly alarmed that a Russian contract to build nuclear reactors for Iran might help Teheran make nuclear arms.
There are two ways to reduce that risk.
One is to get Moscow to cancel the contract.
The other is to negotiate additional safeguards, like those with North Korea, to prevent Teheran from using the reactors for bomb-making.
Russia has so far rebuffed American requests to call off the deal.
In retaliation, some in Congress are threatening to cut aid, including help for Russia to disarm.
That is unlikely to have the desired result, and may end up damaging American interests.
A better way is to offer inducements for Russia to find other, safer nuclear work.


U.S. Is Right to Press for Libya Sanctions
To the Editor:
Re "The Wrong Pressure on Libya" (editorial, March 30): You speak of justice for the families of the victims of the terrorist bombing of Pan Am 103 over Lockerbie, Scotland, in 1988.
The bombing was, as President Clinton said, an "attack upon America." The nation, not just the families, requires justice.


CHRONICLE
When NINA BEILINA, the founder and artistic director of the Bachanalia Festival Orchestra in New York, asked VLADIMIR POZNER, the television commentator, to narrate a concert in Alice Tully Hall tonight, he was hesitant.
"I was more than surprised, more than afraid," he recalled.
"I can't even read notes, so how could I get up on a stage and talk about music?"
Ms.
Beilina prevailed when she informed Mr.
Pozner, who does a show on CNBC with Phil Donahue and two monthly shows in Russia, that the concert, "Lamentation and Liberation," was a commemoration of the Holocaust, with music by a variety of composers.


U.S. AGENTS RAID STORES IN 24 CITIES TO SEIZE SPY GEAR
Federal authorities said yesterday that eavesdropping equipment that is supposed to be restricted to law enforcement agents was increasingly being sold to others, including drug dealers and corporate spies.
They raided stores in 24 cities where, they charged, the equipment was sold openly but illegally.
For several years, the so-called spy shops have been popping up around the country, selling advanced surveillance equipment, like transmitters hidden in pens, calculators or telephone jacks.
The stores appear legitimate; they even advertise their wares in catalogues, on billboards and in newspapers.


Yesterday in Washington
THE TAX-CUT BILL -- Republicans in the House approved the heftiest collection of tax breaks in 14 years, overwhelming Democrats who denounced the whole package as a fiscally reckless gift to the nation's monied class.
The 246-to-188 vote, largely along party lines, put the House's stamp on a plan that would reduce tax revenues by $189 billion over five years, fully $105 billion of that in the form of a $500-a-child credit to taxpaying families.
Billions more would go to breaks aimed at retirees, investors and corporations.
The bill now goes to a Senate far less inclined toward major tax reduction this year, but whose leader, Senator Bob Dole, faces strong pressure from within his own party to follow the House's lead.
RATING CONGRESS -- The public gives a decidedly mixed review of the Republican Congress's first 100 days and is particularly skeptical about the leadership's ability to deliver both large tax cuts and a balanced budget, the latest New York Times/CBS News Poll shows.
The survey also showed considerable ambivalence about the tax cuts sought by Mr.
Gingrich.
And a majority of the public, when asked to choose, said they would prefer balancing the budget to cutting taxes.


Transactions
Baseball  American League
BALTIMORE ORIOLES -- Agreed to terms with Chris Hoiles, catcher, on a five-year contract.
CHICAGO WHITE SOX -- Agreed to terms with Jose DeLeon, pitcher, on a one-year contract.


Investor Takes Big Stake in Chase Manhattan
The Heine Securities Corporation has acquired a 6.1 percent stake in the Chase Manhattan Corporation in a move that could set the stage for a major battle over the direction and ownership of the sixth-largest American banking company.
Heine, a mutual fund company managed by Michael F. Price, is now Chase's largest shareholder.
In documents filed yesterday with the Securities and Exchange Commission, Heine said it would press Chase, whose stock has lagged other banks' for years, to increase shareholder value.
In Wall Street parlance, such phrasing implies that Heine will push Chase to sell assets or even put itself on the block to increase the value of its shares.


Green Is Beaming as Players Arrive
Bobby Bonilla came roaring up on a motorcycle, then donned metallic-green roller blades and toured the parking lot.
Jason Jacome moved into a locker down the row from Bret Saberhagen, the fellow Mets' pitcher he so admired last year.
And Ryan Thompson walked into the clubhouse as only Thompson could -- loud and brash, with a swagger in his step.
After nearly eight months apart, the majority of the Mets players converged on the club's practice facility here this morning in preparation for the first official workout of Spring Training II.
Manager Dallas Green, notably upbeat and enthusiastic, roamed the clubhouse calling out names and shaking hands, his demeanor a far cry from what it had been during replacement baseball.


Senate Compromises On Cuts in Spending
Republican and Democratic leaders in the Senate announced a tentative agreement to break a logjam of amendments that has delayed a vote on spending cuts for the current fiscal year for more than a week.


Mob's Man? No, Says Javits Hall Union Chief
Anthony D. Fiorino, dressed in jeans and a black shirt, described himself as a modest carpenter and a devoted union man who played paddle ball in his spare time and volunteered to help poor children and prison inmates.
At a hearing yesterday into charges that he is the Genovese crime family's main agent at the Jacob K. Javits Convention Center, Mr.
Fiorino asserted it was a coincidence that he received hundreds of beeper messages from the home of Liborio Bellomo, his brother-in-law, whom Federal authorities call a top leader in the Genovese family.
It was by chance, he said, that he had met Mr.
Bellomo on Manhattan street corners several times in recent months.


Ron Richardson Is Dead at 43; Won a Tony in 'Big River' Role
Ron Richardson, who won a Tony Award in 1985 for his performance as Jim in the Broadway musical "Big River: the Adventures of Huckleberry Finn," died yesterday at Lawrence Hospital in Bronxville, N.Y.
He was 43 and lived in Mount Vernon, N.Y.
The cause was AIDS, said his manager, Michael Bolanos.


School Board and State Clash On Running Newark Schools
The State Education Department and the Newark school board fired test rounds in state court today in the battle over which of them will control the city's troubled education system.
The state argued that it should take over the schools immediately because the deplorable condition of education in Newark warrants ending a 10-year review process as soon as possible.


Publisher Chooses New International Chief
In an effort to reward leadership and expand business, Bantam Doubleday Dell Publishing Group announced yesterday that Stephen Rubin, president and publisher of Doubleday, had been appointed chairman and chief executive of Bantam Doubleday Dell's international division.
Mr.
Rubin, 53, who will be based in London, is credited with turning the once-beleaguered Doubleday -- one of three main divisions of Bantam Doubleday Dell -- into a vigorous, profitable publishing house during his five-year tenure at its helm.


No Children. No Apologies.
Although one in six women in the United States will probably never have children, according to Census Bureau figures, the numbers do not translate into general acceptance of childlessness.
Many of the 75 men and women who attended the Childfree Network's first life-style conference here this weekend agreed with Janine Gudewicz, 41, a school bus driver from New Lenox, Ill.
"It's unspoken, but if you don't have children, you are kind of stigmatized," she said.
"I don't know of anything that gets the same reaction as when I say I don't have kids."
The network was organized in Sacramento, Calif., in 1991 by Leslie Lafayette, an English teacher and writer, to promote the idea that being childless was "a fulfilling and productive, acceptable alternative to rearing children." Ms.
Lafayette, 49, said she began the group because she had found that "you are not considered whole unless you have children."


METRO DIGEST
U.S.
RAIDS STORES SELLING SPY GEAR Federal authorities said that eavesdropping equipment that is supposed to be restricted to law enforcement agents was increasingly being sold to others, including drug dealers and corporate spies.
They raided stores in 24 cities where, they charged, the equipment was openly but illegally sold.
A1.
UNION LEADER DENIES LINKS TO THE MOB Anthony D. Fiorino, dressed in jeans and a black shirt, described himself as a modest carpenter and devoted union man.
At a hearing into charges that he is the Genovese crime family's main agent at the Jacob K. Javits Convention Center, he asserted it was a coincidence that he received hundreds of beeper messages from the home of a man whom the authorities call a Genovese family leader.
A1.


Garden Q.&amp;A.
Old-Fashioned Vines
Q.
I'm intrigued at the idea of using vines to give my 19th-century house some old-fashioned atmosphere.
Can you suggest quick growers that also flower? -- Simone Mason, Brooklyn


Funeral Home Is the Target Of a Pipe Bomb
A pipe bomb exploded in front of a Queens funeral home on Tuesday night, just after the business's owner kicked the flaming device away, the police said.
The owner sustained minor injuries.
Police officials said that the business had been the site of other small fires last month and that they were trying to determine whther those incidents were connected.


ABC Morning Show Switches Departments
"Good Morning America," which for 20 years has reported to the ABC network's entertainment division, will now be assigned to ABC News.
The change should not make any big difference in content, but news division resources and reporters will now be more available, said Alan Wurtzel, the senior vice president of ABC News, who is to be in charge of "Good Morning America."


Clinton Backs Drive Against Nuclear Arms in Mideast
President Clinton said today that he would support efforts to rid the Middle East of nuclear weapons after peace is achieved there, a promise that appeared to have eased tensions between the United States and Egypt over Israel's reported nuclear arsenal.
Mr.
Clinton made the commitment at a meeting with President Hosni Mubarak of Egypt, who until recently had threatened to block the American-led quest to extend indefinitely the treaty banning the spread of nuclear weapons.
Mr.
Mubarak had pointed to Israel's refusal to sign the document as reason for his concerns about it, but he signaled after his talks with Mr.
Clinton that he was now prepared to accept it.


Indictments Against Police Are Expected
A grand jury investigating allegations of corruption and brutality in a Bronx police precinct is likely to indict more than a dozen officers soon, possibly by next week, law enforcement officials said yesterday.
The investigation of the 48th Precinct in the central Bronx has been going on since 1993, and involves allegations of shakedowns of drug dealers for money, guns and drugs, as well as the beating of suspects.


Falcons Catch Pro Bowl Prize in Metcalf
The Atlanta Falcons signed the two-time Pro Bowl selection, ERIC METCALF, a star all-purpose back expected to fill the team's slot receiver position.
The Falcons swapped first-round draft picks with the Cleveland Browns to obtain Metcalf, who passed his physical in Suwanee, Ga., yesterday. (AP)


Israel Finally Orbits Its Own Spy Satellite
Israel launched today what military specialists called the country's first spy satellite, in an orbit that an official said would take it over Islamic states still technically at war with Israel.
Formally, the Government said only that the Ofek-3 satellite was "an experimental satellite intended for scientific and technological purposes," but officials did nothing to refute assessments by defense experts that the purpose is intelligence-gathering.


A Blue Empire State Wouldn't Faze Wray
To the Editor:
In response to your March 30 editorial question "What Would Fay Wray Say?" to the Empire State Building's turning blue for something as crass as the introduction of a new color for M &amp; M candy, I have a hunch that Fay Wray would say "A-O.K."


International Briefs; Credit Lyonnais Loss For 1994 at $2.5 Billion
Citing lower revenue from lending and trading, Credit Lyonnais S.A., Europe's biggest bank, said its 1994 net loss was 12.1 billion francs, about $2.5 billion.
The loss is the largest ever for a French bank.
Net banking income fell 9 percent, to 48.7 billion francs from 50.6 billion francs.
The state-controlled bank said it had to set aside 17 billion francs for bad loans.
Income from continuing operations fell 2.3 percent last year, the bank said.


International Briefs; Alitalia Loss Shrinks
Alitalia, Italy's national airline, said yesterday that its loss narrowed by more than 16 percent last year, though the company again incurred hefty charges related to its restructuring.
Alitalia lost 288 billion lire last year , or roughly $168.4 million, compared with a loss of 344 billion lire in 1993.
Revenue rose 7 percent, to 7.2 trillion lire, or about $4.21 billion, from 6.7 trillion lire in 1993.
Alitalia said last month that it would cut more than 2,500 jobs by the end of 1996 as a cost-cutting move.
The carrier, which laid off 1,600 people in 1994, hopes to cut labor and operating costs significantly by the end of 1997. (Dow Jones)


Cheating the Reformers: Ins and Outs of Welfare
SHON-DU has a little bulletin for the Mayor.
He can crack down on welfare, impose all the rules he wants, fingerprint both of Shon-du's hands and put him through workfare hoops from here to his home in Brownsville and back.
The Mayor can do that and more, but Shon-du will still manage to beat the system because he knows it inside out.
"They can't win," said the 27-year-old Brooklynite, who will only allow himself to be identified by his street name.
"I'm ahead of them."


In Bergen, a Tax-Break Plan
Bergen County's freeholders say they plan to spend more over the next year but tax county residents less.
They could do that by taking $10 million from the county's surplus from last year.
Overall spending would increase by 4 percent, to $446 million from $427 million, with much of the increase coming from the cost of insurance and operating Bergen Pines Hospital.


Official at F.B.I. Is Censured but Is Still Likely to Be Promoted
The Justice Department announced today that it would accept the F.B.I.
Director's recommendation to censure the acting deputy of the bureau for managerial lapses during a bloody 1992 standoff with a white separatist in Idaho.
After the decision by Deputy Attorney General Jamie S. Gorelick was announced, the Director, Louis J. Freeh, issued a statement that he still had the "utmost confidence" in the acting deputy, Larry A. Potts, his close associate and choice to take over permanently as the second-highest official at the Federal Bureau of Investigation.


Bigotry on Display; Senator D'Amato's Slur
Once again, Senator Alfonse D'Amato has embarrassed himself and New York State with crude and insulting behavior.
The latest episode is his display of anti-Japanese bigotry this week on Don Imus's nationally syndicated radio show.
Mr.
Imus suggested that Senator D'Amato would not get the public's attention if his Senate Banking Committee held hearings on Whitewater during the O. J. Simpson trial.
That led New York's junior Senator to begin a disjointed monologue using a fake Japanese accent to mock the trial's judge, Lance Ito, a Japanese-American.
Apparently emboldened by the laughter in the studio, Mr.
D'Amato could not seem to stop himself until Mr.
Imus appealed to him to shut up as a matter of political self-preservation.


School Bus Drivers Protest Possible Change
Several dozen school bus drivers demonstrated outside the Board of Education headquarters in Brooklyn yesterday morning over contract changes the school system is considering.
Contracts with bus companies that provide service on about 700 of the school system's 3,800 bus routes will expire in June, and school officials are considering opening the contracts up for competitive bidding, a practice they stopped 16 years ago.


Stop Giving Tax Cheats White Glove Treatment
To the Editor:
Re "What Goes On Under the Table" (Op-Ed, April 1): Hans W. Morsbach is correct and quite restrained in sounding the alarm about the "rape" of the country's revenue by dishonest taxpayers.


NJ Transit Is Riding High
New Jersey Transit bus service wins high marks from its riders for safety and convenience.
People say they would be even happier if shelters were in better condition and weekend service more frequent.
NJ Transit officials say that improvements are in the works, and that its first-ever bus report card will give the agency a way to measure progress.


Let's Make A Deal Is First Order Of Business
The Montreal Expos began dismantling the major leagues' best team in the strike-shortened 1994 season, trading their No. 1 starting pitcher, Ken Hill, and their No. 1 relief pitcher, John Wetteland yesterday.
But their general manager said the moves were not reminiscent of the San Diego Padres' self-destruction a few years ago.
The Expos, faced with paying huge salaries through the injunction-restored salary arbitration procedure, traded Wetteland to the Yankees and Hill back to the St.
Louis Cardinals.
They received primarily minor league players in return.


Ruth Silva, 74, Political Scientist Who Advised on the Presidency
Ruth Caridad Silva, a political scientist and authority on Presidential succession and legislative apportionment, died on Saturday at Centre Community Hospital in State College, Pa.
She was 74 and lived in State College.
She suffered a brief illness, said the Koch Funeral Home in State College.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  *
Norwest Financial Inc., Des Moines, a unit of Norwest Corp., Minneapolis, is selling $150 million of notes due in 2005 through Merrill Lynch &amp; Co.
The notes are priced at 99.583 to yield 7.56 percent.
The noncallable issue is rated Aa3 by Moody's Investors Service Inc., AA- by the Standard &amp; Poor's Corp. and AA by Duff &amp; Phelps.


Chase Investor Shows Impressive Record
Michael F. Price, the 43-year-old money manager who stunned the banking world last night by announcing that he had acquired a 6.1 percent stake in the Chase Manhattan Corporation, has compiled an impressive record as a manager with a keen eye for value and a willingness to take big gambles.
Mr.
Price, who runs Heine Securities and trained with the late Max Heine, a Wall Street legend for his investments in distressed companies, has made his name both by buying companies in financial trouble and by having an eye for stocks that are undervalued.
His flagship fund, Mutual Shares, has compiled an excellent record.


Yanks Get Wetteland as a Stopper and a Clincher
The Yankees just might have won the American League East today, and they haven't even played a game yet.
They acquired possibly the best closer in baseball in John Wetteland from the Montreal Expos and improved a team that was already considered talented.
On paper, they are impenetrable.
On paper, make your reservations for the post-season.
While Wade Boggs, Mike Stanley, Jimmy Key and other Yankees filtered into the clubhouse for the first voluntary workout, the newest Yankee was initially driving to West Palm Beach, where the Expos train, from Cedar Crest, N.M., because he didn't know he had been traded.
The Expos called Wetteland on his car phone, and the Yankees did not mind waiting for a reliever who should make their bullpen one of the strongest in the majors, while heightening expectations that they will end a 13-year drought and reach the World Series.


C.I.A. Director Admits to Failure In Disclosing Links to Guatemala
The acting Director of Central Intelligence said today that the C.I.A. should have told Congress three years ago that it had information implicating a Guatemalan colonel on its payroll in the killing of an American citizen, but that the facts had "slipped under the carpet."
Testifying at a rare public hearing of the Senate intelligence committee, the acting director, Adm.
William O. Studeman, offered a detailed defense of the agency's conduct in the case.
He said the C.I.A. had worked long and hard to provide facts on the case to United States officials -- even though, he said, the agency failed from October 1991 to February 1995 to tell the committee about its suspicions that the Guatemalan colonel, Julio Roberto Alpirez, might be involved in the killing.


No Music This Summer In Washington Sq. Park?
To the Editor:
While much is written about future budget cuts, Washington Square Music Festival has experienced freezing of funds allocated last year for services performed in 1993-94.


A Son's Quest Indicts His Mother
Somewhere in the bleak span of his childhood, Leonard Hare began to wonder how his brothers had died.
He was too young to remember, but relatives told him that the two had succumbed to illness when they were babies, in the 1960's.
Growing up, Mr.
Hare also heard family whisperings that his mother had a cruel streak.
He looked at the scars on his own body and wondered whether she had inflicted them -- and whether she had also harmed his brothers born before him.


Lost, and Found, New York
New York City, like all the world's great cities, is forever creating itself.
But in the process it is forever at risk of destroying itself.
If New York, which is terminally addicted to running ahead of the century, has not wholly succeeded in erasing its physical past it is mostly because of a law signed 30 years ago this month.
The law established the Landmarks Preservation Commission, and to realize what New York lost before the commission came to be is to realize what it has gained since.
Take Penn Station.
All that remains of the old Penn Station are the memories of those lucky enough to have known its steel-ribbed spaces.
"Until the first blow fell," this newspaper wrote when the terminal was demolished in 1963, "no one was convinced that . . . New York would permit this monumental act of vandalism."


Republicans Challenged on Their Own Rules
When Republicans took control of the House in January, one of the first things they did was to change the chamber's rules to make tax-rate increases subject to approval by three-fifths of its members instead of a simple majority.
Tonight, it was very nearly their ruination.
Democrats seeking to block the majority's five-year, $189 billion package of tax cuts pored over the bill in search of technical challenges.
Lo and behold, they found two clauses that appeared, at least to some eyes, to increase tax rates rather than lower them.
They argued that the bill required a supermajority of 261, which was out of reach, instead of the simple majority of 218 votes.


G.O.P. Gets Mixed Reviews From Public Wary on Taxes
The public gives decidedly mixed reviews to the Republican Congress's first 100 days and is particularly skeptical about the leaders' ability to deliver both huge tax cuts and a balanced budget, according to the latest New York Times/CBS News Poll.
Despite the best efforts of the Republicans to publicize and promote what they call their legislative revolution, the survey suggested that much of the public remained largely disengaged.
Only 38 percent said they had read or heard anything about the Contract With America, the Republican policy agenda that has driven the House in these first three months.
Forty-seven percent said they were "mostly disappointed" with the first 100 days, compared with 39 percent who said they were pleased.
And Mr.
Gingrich's personal ratings remain remarkably negative.


HOUSE VOTES TO CUT TAXES BY $189 BILLION OVER 5 YEARS AS PART OF G.O.P.'CONTRACT'
The House tonight approved a Republican plan containing the heftiest collection of tax breaks in 14 years, overwhelming Democrats who denounced the package as a fiscally reckless gift to the nation's moneyed class.
The 246-to-188vote, largely along party lines, put the House's stamp on a plan that would reduce tax revenue by $189 billion over five years, with fully $105 billion of that in the form of a $500-a-child credit to taxpaying families.
Billions of dollars more would go to breaks aimed at retirees, investors and corporations.


The Met: Power Meets Imagination
DO we build museums to honor the muse or to murder her?
That question haunts the Met's new show, "The Architecture of the Metropolitan Museum of Art, 1870-1995." The Met's building gets bigger, its architectural style becomes grander and, as the gleaming walls of white limestone rise higher and higher, you begin to wonder whether the poor muse, that most mercurial of beings, has not been crushed beneath the massive weight of it all.
But what a way to go.
Organized by Morrison H. Heckscher, the Met's curator of American decorative arts, the show traces the evolution of the museum's architecture, from the temporary quarters it once occupied on Fifth Avenue and 54th Street (Fortunoff's occupies the site today) to the sprawling labyrinth in Central Park.
Presented to mark the 125th anniversary of the Met's founding, this is primarily a study in changing architectural taste.


So Where Is That Lava Lamp Now?
THE counterculture collecting?
The idea seems slightly absurd; after all, the Age of Aquarius was hardly the Age of Acquisition.
Nevertheless, some members of this generation still cling to the objects of the 1960's -- lava lamps, Fillmore posters, campy clothes -- if not the spirit.
Following are observations on quintessential 1960's design from men and women whose names are still associated with the period.
Here are the keepsakes and touchstones they've hung on to -- and the parts of flower-power style they hope will never bloom again.


G.O.P. Group Seeks to Lift 1994 Ban on Assault Guns
A group of House Republicans plans to introduce legislation on Thursday to repeal last year's ban on assault weapons, even as national polls continue to show that a majority of Americans favor it.
The legislation for the repeal will also include tougher penalties for criminals using a gun while committing certain crimes, a packaging technique intended to attract proponents of the ban on 19 types of assault weapons into voting for the repeal.


K-III Seeking Chicago Magazine
The K-III Communications Corporation has signed a letter of intent to acquire Chicago magazine from Landmark Communications Inc.
Since K-III already owns New York magazine, it will now have two of the nation's largest city magazines.
Normally there is not much synergy among city magazines because they carry mostly local advertising and few national ads.
But Harry McQuillan, president of the K-III Magazine Group, said that since New York had about 40 percent national ads and Chicago 20 percent, these ads could be sold as a package to run in both magazines.


Judges Rule Gay Partner Can't Adopt
In the first such case to reach a New York appellate court, a panel of judges has ruled that lesbians and gay men cannot adopt their partners' children because they are not legally married.
The ruling came in the case of a lesbian couple who have lived together for 19 years.
One of the women had a child after artificial insemination from an anonymous donor, and her partner wanted to become a legal parent of the child as well.


In Honda Case, Tales of Dealers' Culture of Bribes
A helicopter tour of Hawaii, $25,000 shopping sprees in Hong Kong and a swimming pool for his California home.
Such were the bribes -- "gratuities," he calls them -- that a former marketing executive at the American Honda Motor Company received from dozens of Honda dealers, according to his testimony during the last several days in Federal court here.


April Cruelty


On Transracial Adoption
To The Home Section:
Generals, it is said, in planning a new campaign, are actually fighting the last war.
Authorities on parenting fall into the same trap.
In "Beyond 'Losing Isaiah': Truth in Shades of Gray" (March 23) everyone describes the world of trans racial adoption as it was in the late 1960's and early 1970's, not today.


Seagram Is Seen in Discussions to Acquire MCA From Matsushita
Representatives of the Seagram Company have been negotiating around the clock to strike a deal to buy MCA Inc. from the Matsushita Electric Industrial Company, according to an executive familiar with the negotiations.
The president of Seagram, Edgar Bronfman Jr., is believed to have an exclusive agreement with Matsushita to negotiate for an MCA deal for a limited period, several people with knowledge of the talks said yesterday.


New Catalytic Process Would Let Cars Eat Ozone
You're in the heart of Los Angeles on a miserably smoggy day and decide to do your bit to clean up the air.
So you take a drive on the freeway.
Outlandish as it may seem, the latest idea in the battle to chip away at air pollution is to turn cars into roving air purifiers, devouring any smog that crosses their path.


Movement on All Sides Of the Labor Dispute
In a continuing climate of cooperation that had not existed the previous eight months, the baseball players union and the owners' labor committee agreed yesterday to move up opening day by one day to April 25.
The Los Angeles Dodgers will play the Marlins in Florida that night.
In another development that served as a reminder of the differences between the sides, a Congressional bill to strip baseball of its antitrust exemption on labor matters took its first step forward when it was approved by the antitrust subcommittee of the Senate Judiciary Committee.


Corrections
Because of a transcription error, an article yesterday about the growing number of minority journalists at American daily newspapers misstated the given name of the executive director of the National Association of Hispanic Journalists.
She is Zita Arocha, not Vita.


McCall Is a Titleholder Obscured by Ex-Champions
Oliver McCall has a burden.
He's the man who isn't George Foreman or Mike Tyson -- or even Riddick Bowe -- but he is a heavyweight champion of the world.
In the confusion of so many title-holders changing belts or hands in recent months, Oliver McCall became the World Boxing Council champion and faces the first defense of his title against 45-year-old Larry Holmes here on Saturday night.


Tax-Cutters Finish First; Gingrich Alters the Context of U.S. Politics, But the Power Lies With Clinton and Dole
With the passage tonight of a $189 billion tax-cut measure by the House of Representatives, Speaker Newt Gingrich has all but completed his self-decreed 100 days in the center ring of American politics.
He calls the tax bill the crowning jewel of his Contract With America.
But for all his considerable achievements in the last three months, he lacks the power to assure that Americans will keep more of their paychecks.
In a nice piece of political congruence, that power lies to a large degree with the two men considered most likely to compete for the White House next fall: President Clinton and Senator Bob Dole of Kansas, the majority leader.


A Shutout for Devils as Broten Puts Talents to Good Use
When the Devils acquired Neal Broten from Dallas five weeks ago, the idea was to have the 35-year-old center take up some of the defensive slack at the position left by the departure of Bernie Nicholls, who went to Chicago after last season.
After all, Broten, who averaged 30 to 35 goals in his early seasons in the National Hockey League, had polished his defensive skills in recent years.


Questions on Lockerbie
To the Editor:
The effort to impose even tougher sanctions on Libya (news article, March 28) comes when the rest of the world, though not the American public, is learning there are contradictions in the United States version of what happened at Lockerbie.


Young Characters Trying to Fill a Gap
MYSTERIOUS SKIN  By Scott Heim  292 pages. HarperCollins. $20.
"Memory," wrote Oscar Wilde, "is the diary that chronicles things that never happened and couldn't possibly have happened." Whatever horrific thing happened to Brian Lackey in Scott Heim's wrenching first novel, "Mysterious Skin," is completely gone from his memory as the story begins.


Rangers Finally Respond to That Playoff Wake-Up Call
In case there was any doubt, Brian Leetch summed up the Rangers' suddenly tenuous playoff state heading into tonight's game against the Florida Panthers: "There's a sense of urgency, even a sense of desperation right now."
Three hours later, the Rangers were thinking that maybe desperation is just the kind of emotion they needed.
They produced their widest victory margin of the season, 5-0, before 14,703 at Miami Arena.


CHRONICLE
The radio personality HOWARD STERN has created a stir by making fun of the slain Tejano music star Selena, playing her music accompanied by gunfire noise on the day of her funeral.
Callers jammed the switchboards at a Dallas radio station, KEGL, which carries Mr.
Stern's show, after the broadcast on Monday in which Mr.
Stern also parodied weeping mourners and made disparaging remarks about Mexico and Mexican-Americans, The Fort Worth Star-Telegram reported.


Hillary Clinton Discovers A New Role
A year ago, Hillary Rodham Clinton was visiting the biggest, most advanced hospitals in the Western world, proposing to change radically the way they did business.
Last Friday, she sat in a tiny clinic in the shadows of the Himalayas and learned about its latest innovation: the "Safe Home Delivery Kit."
Inside a small cardboard box were the tools intended to reduce infant mortality in a country where more than 10 percent of the 700,000 babies born each year die within 12 months: A plastic sheet to provide a sanitary surface, a bar of soap, a plastic disk to rest the umbilical cord on, a shiny razor blade to cut it and a clean cord to tie it.


Libyan Chief Threatens to Defy Flight Ban and Quit U.N.
Col.
Muammar el-Qaddafi said today that Libyan planes were preparing to defy the United Nations ban on flights to and from Libya and said that his country might soon drop out of the United Nations.
In an interview in a Bedouin tent near the gutted remains of his former home, which was bombed in 1986 by American warplanes, Colonel Qaddafi said he had notified Egypt, the Sudan and Saudi Arabia that Libyan planes carrying Muslim pilgrims to Mecca would soon enter their airspace.


RESULTS PLUS
N.B.A.
O'Neal Leads Rally  Shaquille O'Neal scored 40 points and Dennis Scott had 30 last night as the Magic overcame poor foul shooting and the loss of Nick Anderson to rally for a 128-125 victory over the Detroit Pistons at Orlando, Fla.
The Atlantic Division leaders trailed by 18 when Anderson, who suffered a concussion when he bumped heads with Detroit's Rafael Addison, was removed from the court on a stretcher early in the second quarter.
But O'Neal, who also had 19 rebounds, refused to let his team lose.
Although the Magic was only 32 for 49 from the foul line, Orlando made six of seven free throws in the last 1 minute 1 second for a 126-125 lead with 32 seconds left. (AP)
HORNETS 84, 76ERS 66: Alonzo Mourning had 16 points as host Charlotte held Philadelphia to the lowest scoring total in 76ers history.
The 76ers shot only 32 percent and scored only 8 points in the second quarter.
It was the fewest points they have scored in a game since scoring 67 at Cleveland on Jan. 15, 1994.
The teams combined for 19 points in the second quarter, the second-lowest-scoring quarter in N.B.A. history and the lowest total ever for a second quarter.
Fort Wayne and Syracuse combined for 18 points in a quarter on Nov. 29, 1956. (AP)


Nigeria's Sinking Fortune Is Reflected in Soccer Group's Snub
Less than a decade ago when Nigeria, Africa's most populous nation, boasted of ambitions as large as its numbers, few blinked.
Nigeria, after all, stood for giant steel mills and vast oil fields, automobile factories and Los Angeles-style freeways to match.
Its diplomats went from one international forum to another confidently pitching their candidacy for a permanent seat on the United Nations Security Council, a natural vocation, they would say, for a country of 100 million inhabitants.


Some News Coverage by the Networks Exceeds That of Newspapers
Network television news, long dismissed by critics as superficial, now reports on certain national and international events more thoroughly than do some respected metropolitan newspapers, according to a comprehensive study presented here at the annual meeting of the American Society of Newspaper Editors.
The study, by the Freedom Forum Media Studies Center, reached that conclusion, described by the authors as unexpected, after an unusually detailed comparison in January between network news telecasts and three leading newspapers.


Not Half Bad: Jordan Closes With a Rush
This is what happens when your evil twin plays the first half for you: He misses 11 shots, commits a couple of turnovers and tarnishes your reputation as the game's greatest player.
This is what happens when you lock him in a Byrne Meadowlands Arena broom closet for the second half: You score more than half your team's points, have your way with whoever guards you and quickly reaffirm your deity status, high above the rim.


The Bizarre Kicks In And Shows No Mercy
Never underestimate the appeal of a good yarn.
What makes Jeffrey Hatcher's play "Three Viewings" diverting is his knack for telling stories that at the very moment when they seem to be settling into predictable paths, throw in a zinger.
Blatantly manipulative, this playwright isn't averse to withholding crucial facts about his characters until the last minute.
If his stacking of his narrative decks seems like cheating, the payoffs are usually worth the chicanery.
"Three Viewings," at Manhattan Theater Club, consists of three monologues, each delivered by a different character in the same funeral parlor in a small town outside Pittsburgh.
In the sharpest one, "The Thief of Tears," Margaret Whitton plays a tough cookie named Mac who flies from Los Angeles to Pittsburgh for the funeral of her rich, tyrannical grandmother.
"Thirteen Things About Ed Carpolotti" finds Virginia (Penny Fuller), the middle-aged widow of a wheeler-dealer with ties to organized crime, in dire straits.
After his funeral, she learns that he owed several hundred thousand dollars in loans she had innocently cosigned.


Ralph Lauren Does What He Does Best
THAT old saw about shoemakers sticking to their lasts applies equally well to designers.
Ralph Lauren stuck to what he does best in his fall collection yesterday, producing the best show of the season so far and one of the strongest of his career.
He didn't stretch for an exotic theme or look to see what other designers were doing.
He just sent out an array of sleekly tailored suits, easy sweater knits and sparkly evening dresses that defined glamour in a totally contemporary way.
There was nothing retro or costumey, just deceptively simple clothes for the kind of woman who longs to dwell in a Ralph Lauren advertisement.


The 60's: Worth The Trip
IF there was a moment of deja vu at the "Psychedelic 60's Pop, Op and Peace Show" at the 69th Regiment Armory last weekend -- New York's first "antiques" show devoted to the ugly-beautiful 1960's and early 70's -- it wasn't the spectacle of $500 Peter Max lunch boxes or so many orange objects that one yearned for a bad-taste conspiracy trial.
Rather, it came when a uniformed National Guardsman approached a dumbfounded Gary Moise, who was arrested at the 1971 May Day exercises in Washington, and asked him to take down the American flag decorated with a huge marijuana leaf that Mr.
Moise had hoisted in his booth "for history's sake." Nearly 30 years later, the emotions engendered by such a symbol are still powerful and real.


Secaucus Fire In Marshlands Halts Trains
A brush fire in the marshlands of Secaucus, N.J., forced officials to shut down New Jersey Transit rail services for three hours yesterday afternoon and early evening, complicating life for thousands of commuters.
Ken Miller, a spokesman for New Jersey Transit, said the tracks were closed between 2:45 and 4:45 P.M. and again from 6 to 7 P.M. between Penn Station in Newark and Penn Station in New York.
Two of the railroad's 12 lines were affected: the Northeast Corridor, which runs between Trenton and New York, and the North Jersey Coast Line, which runs between Bayhead in Ocean County and New York.


London Lawyer Charged in B.C.C.I. Case
A partner in a prominent London law firm, Simmons &amp; Simmons, was charged yesterday with suppressing evidence crucial to an investigation by the Manhattan District Attorney of the criminal conduct of the Bank of Credit and Commerce International.
The indictment, handed up by a New York State grand jury in Manhattan, says that the law partner, David Sandy, in 1992 illegally concealed the business diary of the former chief executive of BCCI Holdings (Luxembourg) S.A., the holding company for the rogue bank.
That executive, Zafar Iqbal, headed BCCI Holdings for 15 months before the international bank was forced to close by regulators in Britain, the United States and several other countries on July 5, 1991.


Subtle Home Motif From Calvin Klein
IT'S exactly what you'd expect from Calvin Klein -- the master of the understated, the subtle and the many shades of beige.
And the designer is the first to agree.
With Calvin Klein Home, his new home furnishings collection, "I'm bringing the same philosophy, the same esthetic, colors, textures and patterns, but mixing all these things in a very modern way," Mr.
Klein said last week, as fluffy towels ($20 to $45 each), soft blankets ($50 to $350 in twin sizes), and cool and smooth sheets in 100 percent cotton percale, sateen and Italian linen with a signature handkerchief stitching ($25 to $300 in twin size) were unfurled in his Manhattan office.
The new collection, which also includes all manner of duvets and blankets along with glassware, china and flatware, will be introduced to buyers on April 9 and will be in the new Calvin Klein store that is to open in September at 654 Madison Avenue, at 60th Street.
Stores across the country and Bloomingdale's in New York will also carry the line.


Giuliani's Next Subject: School Spending
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani said yesterday that gaining City Hall control over the Board of Education's spending would be his next political goal now that City Hall has accomplished a long-sought merger of the police and transit police departments.
"What we are going to do is try to build support for school reform the same way we did for the police merger," the Mayor said yesterday in an interview.
"This one will probably be an even bigger effort but a more important one ultimately. We're talking about the most important function of a city -- the education of our children. There is nothing the city spends more money on than education."


The Pop Life
Cheaper Tickets
Last summer, Pearl Jam canceled its summer tour after it could neither negotiate a deal with Ticketmaster to keep ticket prices below $20 nor find a way to tour without selling tickets through Ticketmaster, which has exclusive contracts with most major venues.
This week, however, Pearl Jam announced that it would begin a national tour in June, perform in amphitheaters, fairgrounds and outdoor fields not handled by Ticketmaster, and sell tickets through a telephone-order system developed by a new California ticketing company called ETM Entertainment Network, which might turn out to be Ticketmaster's first national competitor.


U.N. Council Seeks Support for Nuclear Pact
Hoping to broaden support for the indefinite extension of a treaty to prevent the spread of nuclear weapons, the Security Council is expected to adopt a resolution early next week pledging help to countries threatened or attacked by a nuclear power.
The five permanent Security Council members want to approve the resolution before the opening on April 17 of a critical conference on the future of the pact, the Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty.
But the resolution may fall short of security demands made by leading countries of the developing world.


Woods Has Injury Scare on Eve of Masters
It's Masters time down South, and as the first ceremonial tee shot draws near, questions float on the breezes, plentiful as pollen.
There is always a little uncertainty, a little apprehension, as the first major golf championship of the year begins.
But this 59th Masters, which gets under way on Thursday with a field of 87 players, will go down as the one that had more themes than Augusta has pine needles.
First, there is the Tiger factor.
Get used to it.
Tiger Woods, the reigning United States Amateur champion and 19-year-old freshman phenom from Stanford University, has the biggest galleries, the largest press following and the most-scrutinized swing since Jack Nicklaus started prowling the grounds 36 years ago.


Walter Welch, 94; Recordings Expert Founded Audio Lab
Walter L. Welch, an authority on early recordings and phonographs and founding director of the Belfer Audio Laboratory and Archive at Syracuse University, died on Friday at the Hallmark Nursing Home in Minoa, N.Y.
He was 94.
A lifelong resident of Syracuse, he had been admitted to the nursing home with Alzheimer's disease four years ago, the university said.


2 Studies Equate Treatments Of Early Breast Cancer Cases
Two new long-term studies underscore the effectiveness of what have become widely used treatments for breast cancer.
In the case of women with small, early cancers, breast-conserving surgery, commonly referred to as lumpectomy, and radiation were found as effective as mastectomy over 10 years.
For women with more advanced disease, postoperative chemotherapy was found significantly more effective than surgery alone.


Art and a Porch Market
THE waiting room at Grand Central Terminal is not for the idle these days.
It's for the active consumer.
"Freewheeling," an exhibition of 42 sculptures by Bruno Pasquier-Desvignes, including "The Painter as a Musician and Magician," 1992, at right, is on view.
In addition, a Spring Market has opened with 39 vendors.
Both events run through April 22.
Damask pillows wrapped with cords and tassels, kilim rugs transformed into travel bags and boxes topped with silk fruit and flowers are among the offerings at the market.
The vendors are in small shops that look like outdoor porches, screened in apple green.
From the porches hang baskets of fresh flowers.


Bridge
It was youth day Tuesday in the Vanderbilt Knockout Team Championship at the American Contract Bridge League's Spring Nationals.
First, a foursome with an average age of 32 toppled the defending champion team headed by Seymon Deutsch of Laredo, Tex.
Brian Platnick and John Diamond of Philadelphia, Gerald Seixas of Ashland, Mass., and Barry Rigal of Manhattan won by 23 imps against the Deutsch team, with Zia Mahmood and Michael Rosenberg, both of Manhattan; Tony Forrester of Winter Park, Fla.; Chip Martel of Davis, Calif., and Lew Stansby of Castro Valley, Calif.


Harald Raudsepp; Editor of Newspaper On Estonia Was 91
Harald Raudsepp, the longtime editor of the newspaper Free Estonian Word, died on Monday at Columbia-Presbyterian Medical Center in Manhattan.
He was 91 and lived in the Inwood section of Manhattan.
The cause was a stroke, a family friend, Juhan Jaakson, said.


Event's President Announces Resignation
JOHN P. (JACK) KELLY announced his resignation yesterday as president of the Goodwill Games, the quadrennial sporting event begun eight years ago by TED TURNER to improve relations between the United States and the former Soviet Union.


Federations Given Bigger Share of the Pie
The International Olympic Committee agreed yesterday to PRIMO NEBIOLO's demand that individual sports federations receive a greater share of commercial revenues from next year's $3 billion Centennial Games in Atlanta.
It was the first major concession by the I.O.C. to long-running pressure by the Association of Summer Olympic International Federations for more money.
While Nebiolo's demand for more television money was rejected, the I.O.C. president, JUAN ANTONIO SAMARANCH, agreed to compensate the federations in connection with the Olympics' lucrative international sponsorship program.
Nebiolo is president of the association, which represents the 26 sports on the Atlanta program.
The Italian also heads the International Amateur Athletic Federation, the governing body for track and field.


It's the 'City of Tenors,' But It Offers a Lot More
With its recent production of "La Boheme," the Theatre du Capitole could hardly go wrong.
Toulouse has long boasted of its addiction to opera, and in this case, the heralded French tenor Roberto Alagna was a special draw.
All eight performances were sold out.
More telling, perhaps, was that 5,000 people crowded the city's cavernous Palais de Sports recently to hear Michel Plasson lead the National Orchestra of the Capitole of Toulouse in something far less obviously popular: Britten's "War Requiem."


Thompson to Handle Boston Market Job
Boston Market Inc., the restaurant company formerly known as Boston Chicken, said yesterday that it had selected the J. Walter Thompson New York unit of the WPP Group to handle its account, which had been at Bayer Bess Vanderwarker in Chicago since November 1992.
The billings were estimated at $30 million to $35 million.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article in Business Day yesterday about the proposed acquisition of USA Mobile Communications Holdings Inc. by Arch Communications Group Inc. described USA Mobile incorrectly.
It is an independent, publicly traded company; it is not a subsidiary of the Bellsouth Corporation.


International Briefs; Charge for German Unit Halves Alcatel's Profits
The French industrial giant Alcatel Alsthom said yesterday that its profits for 1994 were cut in half because of a big charge in its telecommunications operations.
Alcatel, which makes high-speed trains, power stations and telecommunications equipment, posted net income of 3.62 billion francs, about $754.5 million, compared with 7.06 billion francs, about $1.47 billion, in 1993.
Sales were up 7 percent, to 167.6 billion francs, about $34.93 billion.


On Transracial Adoption
To The Home Section:
Generals, it is said, in planning a new campaign, are actually fighting the last war.
Authorities on parenting fall into the same trap.
In "Beyond 'Losing Isaiah': Truth in Shades of Gray" (March 23) everyone describes the world of trans racial adoption as it was in the late 1960's and early 1970's, not today.


Minister's Death Suggests Car Crash as Suicide
To the Editor:
A variety of instruments of self-destruction are available to individuals bent on committing suicide, one of which is the automobile.
The death of the Rev.
James S. Castria (news article, March 30) shows that not all automobile crashes are accidents, but some are suicides.
We are reminded of Willy Loman in Arthur Miller's "Death of a Salesman," who also committed vehicular suicide.
The extent of vehicular suicide in the United States is unknown; however, it is estimated that suicides represent 5 percent to 15 percent of all vehicular fatalities.
In a study of compulsive gamblers with suicidal tendencies, automobile crash was the most preferred method because death in an automobile is thought to occur swiftly and has the added incentive of being insurable.


Airline Plans Boston Flights
Competition from Newark and Philadelphia undid the last commercial air service at Mercer County Airport here.
But a new company thinks it can survive by offering "air travel that takes people where they want to go." Eastwind Airlines, a new carrier, thinks people want to go to Boston and it hopes to begin flying Boeing 737's to Logan Airport in May, with fares starting at $49 each way.
Eastwind's dreams for the future include flights to Washington, Pittsburgh, Chicago and Florida.


In Defense of Megan's Law
The Federal Justice Department wants to help defend Megan's Law before the state Supreme Court next month.
In filing a brief seeking permission to join oral arguments, the Justice Department said that New Jersey's law, which requires convicted sex offenders to register with local authorities, is written "in the spirit" of the Federal crime bill.
What happens in New Jersey, one of 40 states with laws seeking to control sex offenders, has national consequences, the department said.


Giants Welcome Pierce and Croel Aboard
The Giants yesterday re-signed AARON PIERCE, the H-back who played in all 16 games last season.
The team also made two other moves, signing the free-agent linebacker MIKE CROEL, who had agreed to terms last week, and releasing the veteran linebacker CARLTON BAILEY.


With a Boy's Death, Safety Is Questioned
An anxious and often agitated group of parents and teachers in Howard Beach, Queens, clamored for answers yesterday during an emotional meeting with city health officials about an 8-year-old boy who died Sunday after contracting a severe bacterial infection.
The meeting, held in the auditorium of Public School 146, where the boy was in second grade, turned raucous at times as some parents questioned whether school and Health Department officials were doing enough to protect their children from the rare strep infection.


Journal; Bait and Switch II
As they used to say in my family, what's not to like?
Clearly stung by embarrassing complaints by Jews, this Jew included, about intolerance at the Christian Coalition, the organization's executive director, Ralph Reed, did an about-face before the Anti-Defamation League Monday night.
In a speech sprinkled with quotes from Irving Howe and William O. Douglas, Mr.
Reed at last acknowledged that it was not kosher for his followers to talk of creating an exclusionary "Christian nation." He also said he was in favor of the separation of church and state, and he conceded that religious conservatives cannot be absolved of "all other insensitivity to Jewish concerns" simply by ritualistically repeating that they are pro-Israel.


AT HOME WITH: Horton Foote; Revisiting the Place He Never Left
IN the old days, when fortunes here were made on cotton, corn and sugar cane, the town square would burst with people on a Saturday afternoon.
"You couldn't hardly walk down the street," Horton Foote recalls.
The stores don't open on Saturdays now -- no customers.
There used to be five family-owned grocery stores.
Gone.
Three family-owned drugstores.
Gone.
On a recent weekend, both the main street and the town square were completely deserted.


Senate Leaders Reach Tentative Accord on Budget Cuts
The Senate's Republican and Democratic leaders announced a tentative compromise tonight on spending cuts for the current fiscal year, breaking a logjam of amendments that have stalled a vote on the legislation for more than a week.
Under the agreement, the cuts to welfare, social and educational programs would be narrowed by $800 million, while cuts to airport improvements and housing subsidies and other programs would be $1.6 billion deeper.


Market Place; The Battle of the Studies: Is there competition at Nasdaq?
IS Nasdaq a cartel, or does it just compete on some other basis than the narrowness of the spread at which stocks are quoted?
Yesterday, Nasdaq and a group of market-makers released studies that they say prove that suspicions of collusion on pricing are unwarranted.
Until last year, the idea that Nasdaq was uncompetitive would have seemed absurd.
There are about 400 market-makers -- brokers who stand ready to buy or sell Nasdaq stocks -- and it is common to see 10 or more of them listing prices on any given stock.


Judge Replaces a Sixth Simpson Juror
As yet another juror in the case was replaced, lawyers for O. J. Simpson argued today that the white cotton blanket the police placed over Nicole Brown Simpson to preserve her dignity in death sowed contamination over the crime scene and reasonable doubt over evidence linking Mr.
Simpson to the killings of his former wife and one of her friends, Ronald L. Goldman.
Judge Lance A. Ito gave no explanation for the latest switch in jurors, the sixth since the trial began.
Nor did he rebuke the conduct of the dismissed juror, as he did when he made his last substitution.
The change was made after he learned that the dismissed juror, a 38-year-old married woman, had not been candid when asked about her own experiences with domestic violence.


Daughters, Mothers and Breast Cancer
Two specials for young audiences -- one this afternoon, the other on Tuesday -- explore the same subject: breast cancer.
In "Notes for My Daughter," today's ABC Afterschool Special, Brenda Gardner (Kate Burton) learns she has breast cancer and tries to shield her 13-year-old daughter, Dany (Grace Johnston), from the seriousness of the situation.
Brenda was once a composer and enjoys playing violin duets with Dany.
When the troubled youngster withdraws from playing, Brenda tries to complete a composition she began when she was pregnant with Dany.
Its title is "Notes for My Daughter."


Ketchum Plans Sale Of Office to Bozell
Ketchum Communications said yesterday that it would sell the Chicago office of its Ketchum Advertising unit to Bozell Worldwide, part of Bozell, Jacobs, Kenyon &amp; Eckhardt.
The terms of the agreement, under which Ketchum Advertising Chicago will be merged into Bozell Chicago, were not disclosed.
The sale of the Chicago office comes 14 months after the Philadelphia office of Ketchum Advertising was sold to the Earle Palmer Brown Companies.
Victoria Horstmann, a Ketchum spokeswoman in New York, said the management wanted to concentrate on operations in Los Angeles, New York, Pittsburgh and San Francisco, adding that the sale also coincided with plans by Bozell to expand.
The sale does not include the Chicago offices of Ketchum Public Relations and Ketchum Directory Advertising, Ms.
Horstmann said.


Mixed Results From 2 Designers
THE only two designers still in business out of a heralded 1980's fashion brat pack presented collections this week with mixed results.
Cynthia Steffe successfully succumbed to the mod influence permeating the fall collections.
Jennifer George showed too little of her signature good thing -- simple, clean tailored sportswear -- and too much of something else.
Using a combination of live models and whimsical Pucci mannequins with hair painted to match the color of the clothes, Ms.
Steffe presented a tight, solid collection that was modern even while it distilled the look of women who were famous when the private self did not appear to be separate from the public persona: Faye Dunaway really was as edgy and anti-establishment as Bonnie, wasn't she?
Nancy Sinatra absolutely walked all over any man stupid enough to fool with her, right?


Jet Crash Revives Debate About Child Safety Seats
When the flight attendants told passengers to prepare for landing in Charlotte, N.C., the mother in seat 21C held her 9-month-old baby against her chest, and as she realized that something was wrong, she clutched her daughter tighter.
But when the DC-9 struck the ground at more than 160 miles an hour, she could not possibly hold tight enough.
"When the impact occurred, the mother said, she unable to hold onto her daughter and the daughter went flying out of her arms," Nora Marshall, an investigator for the National Transportation Safety Board, said at a meeting held on Tuesday to determine what caused USAir Flight 1016 to crash last July.
"From what we can determine, where she ended up was about row 17."


Turgeon Exits As Isles Make Their Move
Don Maloney finally did it.
He finally pulled the trigger on a trade, a five-player deal with Montreal that involved the Islanders' most recognizable name, Pierre Turgeon.
Now the question is: Is it too late -- if not to turn around this 10-20-4 season, then to save Maloney's job as general manager?


D'Amato Mocks Ito And Sets Off Furor
A day after he lampooned the Japanese-American judge in the O. J. Simpson case with Japanese-accented remarks, Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato apologized yesterday, but still found himself the target of criticism from organizations devoted to fighting discrimination.
"If I offended anyone, I'm sorry," Mr.
D'Amato said in a statement.
"I was making fun of the pomposity of the judge and the manner in which he's dragging the trial out."


Poland's Premier Is Seeking NATO Membership During 1996
Trying to erase doubts raised by his predecessor, Prime Minister Jozef Oleksy told NATO today that Poland expected the alliance to give it the go-ahead for membership by next year.
On his first visit to the Brussels headquarters since he took office last month, Mr.
Oleksy told NATO ambassadors that his country's membership "must not be delayed."


CHRONICLE
In the Hammerstein family of musical renown, it seems to be a tradition to name a son of every other generation Oscar.
OSCAR ANDREW HAMMERSTEIN, grandson of Oscar Hammerstein 2d, the lyricist, will be on a panel at the Museum of the City of New York on Saturday afternoon in conjunction with the centennial of his grandfather's birth on July 12.


Fighting TB's Spread
To the Editor:
Re "Tuberculosis Resurgent" (editorial, April 3): TB is the world's No. 1 infectious disease killer.
If it exists anywhere, there are no boundaries to stop its spread.


Reviews/Fashion; Oldham and Tyler Look Super
EVEN when absent, the supermodels are seemingly an irresistible story for the television and tabloid crews covering the shows.
As supermodels Amber Valetta and Ru Paul interviewed the press on either side of the runway before Todd Oldham's show for competing television fashion segments, the press was interviewing them right back about supermodels.
But it is not supermodels, or the lack thereof, that has spoiled the first few days of shows here; it is the lack of superdesigners.
Forget the supermodel.
It is the superdesigner who has been somewhat elusive this season, in a schedule that has the heavyweight talents packed at the end, like noble captains fighting to desert the sinking ship last.


Tarkanian Returns Home the Hero
The news conference was televised live, the auditorium was standing room only and the National Collegiate Athletic Association sent its blessing.
Jerry Tarkanian -- Fresno State class of 1955 -- was hired to coach his alma mater today, and the town granted him everything short of a police escort.
The "Hire Tark" bumper stickers were printed two weeks ago and, if nothing else, Tarkanian's hiring proved that peer pressure can still influence a college administrator.


Economic Scene; Were the Government's mileage standards for cars a mistake?
GOVERNMENT regulation is under harsh attack these days.
So why has there been so little criticism of what was once among the most controversial interventions by Big Brother: corporate average fuel economy standards for new cars and trucks?
If only it were because the mileage standards worked so well that skeptics were converted to their virtues, everything would be fine.
But I don't buy it.
Indeed, Pietro Nivola and Robert Crandall, senior fellows at the Brookings Institution, argue in a new book, "The Extra Mile" (20th Century Fund), that the regulations have proved to be an exceptionally wasteful means of conservation.
The story of how Americans learned to stop worrying and live with the mileage standards is a cautionary tale of our times.


Reporter's Notebook; April Is the Fashionable Month
The fashion world is no place for the uninitiated, though from time to time those in the know and out of it seem at least to be living in the same neighborhood.
This week, of course, that neighborhood is Bryant Park in midtown Manhattan, where the 49 designer shows that constitute New York's semiannual fashion week are being held, like the circus, in tents.
Inside, the frenetic backstage hair-styling, cosmetic-applying and zipping up gives way on stage to high-pressure performing and the excited scrutiny of critical mobs.
The theatrics, practiced in Paris and Milan, Italy, as well as here, are mesmerizing: a model stares down a bank of photographers as she sashays down the runway and, at the last moment, with an infinitesimal moue or the twitch of a cheek muscle tries to eke out a psychic victory.
It can be tense.


Knicks Rebound Quickly With a Victory
A solid performance against a weaker opponent resulted in a successful night for the Knicks.
Building a 22-point lead late in the third quarter, then holding off a Milwaukee rally, New York cruised to a 114-94 victory over the Bucks tonight at the Bradley Center.
The victory kept the Knicks (48-25) half a game ahead of the Indiana Pacers in the race for the second best record in the Eastern Conference.
The Pacers (48-26) won at home tonight against the Washington Bullets.


CHRONICLE
LAUREN BACALL and DUSTIN HOFFMAN are the latest American actors to be inducted into the French Order of Arts and Letters.
JACQUES TOUBON, the French Culture Minister, inducted the stars at a ceremony in Paris on Tuesday, The Associated Press reported.


The Day of the Elephants, in More Ways Than One
Shortly before the House prayed itself into session for the day's long and anguished debate over cutting taxes, a man wearing a grossly checked clown suit and a greasepaint smile stepped up to the steps of the Capitol and shouted for order in the morning chill.
"Brutus, cut it out!" Johnny Peers yelled at the most mischievous canine among his pack of yapping dogs, the Muttville Comics, which were penned outside the Capitol awaiting Speaker Newt Gingrich's arrival as the signal for the day's divertissement to begin.


Essay; Bashing the Spooks
The C.I.A. is defending the indefensible and failing to defend the defensible.
When the columnist Mary McGrory of The Washington Post criticized in passing "their most egregious and expensive blunder about the Soviet economy," the acting Director, Adm.
William O. Studeman, huffed: "The most objectionable piece of fiction is the canard that the intelligence community's analysis of the Soviet economy was wrong. . . . The facts have been on the public record for any journalist who cares to do her homework."


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-18  C.I.A.
RESPONDS TO CRITICS  Speaking before a Senate panel, the acting director of the Central Intelligence Agency defended the agency's conduct in the case of two killings in Guatemala.
A1


Deal Near on Waterfront Plan
Finally there may be a plan for developing the Hoboken waterfront that will please city officials, Hoboken residents and the Port Authority.
The proposal, which involves $75 million of Port Authority money, puts more emphasis on recreational and open space than earlier, more ambitious plans did.
The plan includes restaurants, a 300-room hotel, 380 apartment units, parking for 2,100 cars, a soccer field and two basketball courts.
If the City Council and the Port Authority go along, groundbreaking could take place in August, Mayor Anthony Russo said.


Rams Sign Defensive Touchdown Maker
The free-agent cornerback ANTHONY PARKER, who started 15 games for the Minnesota Vikings last season and set an N.F.L. record by scoring touchdowns on defense in three straight gmes, signed a multiyear contract with the Rams yesterday.
The Rams also announced the re-signing of the unrestricted free-agent running back JOHNNY BAILEY to a one-year contract and the signing of the free-agent quarterback CREE MORRIS. (AP)


Vita R. Ostrander, 72, Advocate for the Elderly
Vita R. Ostrander, a former president of the American Association of Retired Persons who helped make the health care system a major national issue a decade before last year's debate on overhauling it, died on Tuesday at Crawford Long Hospital in Atlanta.
She was 72 and lived in suburban Decatur.
Her family said she had a heart attack while recovering from back surgery.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
9.00
9.00
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
5.25
5.25
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
5.31
6.08
3.48
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.67
5.72
3.55
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.83
5.85
3.94
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.09
7.11
6.90
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.36
7.37
7.24
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.24
8.25
8.09
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.32
6.33
6.54
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills 8


Ex-Members Of Gang See Defeat at Polls In Chicago
After weeks of tense and sometimes ugly campaigning, two former street gang members running for the City Council were handily defeated at the polls on Tuesday.
But today, as the backers of Mayor Richard M. Daley were celebrating his easy re-election to a third term, the young supporters of the gang candidates were promising better organized campaigns.
We will keep trying, one vowed, "until we win and take us some power."


Grant Haitian Minors Their Refugee Status
To the Editor:
"Haiti, After Six Months" (editorial, March 31) states, "the refugee issue that drove two Administrations into legal contortions has been temporarily resolved." Not true.


It's Whoopi and Company
Was that Whoopi Goldberg?
Could be.
She is filming scenes for a movie, "Bogus, " in Newark, Jersey City, Teaneck and Atlantic City.
In the film, a 6-year-old Las Vegas boy goes to Newark to live with his godmother, Ms.
Goldberg, after his mother dies.
Haley Joel Osment, who appeared as Forrest Jr. in "Forrest Gump," plays the 6-year-old.
"Bogus" is to be released around Thanksgiving or Christmas.
SUSAN JO KELLER


Corrections
An article in Business Day on Monday about a proposed acquisition of Health Systems International by Wellpoint Health Networks misstated a provision of the deal in some editions.
Two foundations would be created under the deal: one would have 43 percent of the new company's stock, and the other would have $1 billion in cash; it would not have 23 percent of the stock.


COMPANY BRIEFS
ABT BUILDING PRODUCTS CORP., Troy, Mich., a maker of building products, has acquired Kentech Plastics Inc., Hopkinsville, Ky., a maker of plastic building and industrial products, for undisclosed terms.


Treasury Securities Gain Despite Weakness in Dollar
Prices of Treasury securities crept higher yesterday despite the continued weakness in the dollar.
Traders were taking on larger cash positions ahead of tomorrow's Government report on employment in March, traders and analysts said.


N.H.L. Suspends Whalers' Featherstone
Hartford Whalers defenseman GLEN FEATHERSTONE, who threw his helmet and accidentally hit an usher during Monday night's game at Buffalo, was suspended yesterday by the N.H.L.
The league said Featherstone would not dress for last night's game at Pittsburgh.
A hearing will be held later this week.


Resting on Laurels Isn't Davies's Style
British knighthood confers status, respect and, it might be thought, the peace of mind that comes with a sense of arrival.
But that last seems to have eluded the 60-year-old English composer and conductor Sir Peter Maxwell Davies.
"If it gets much worse," Sir Peter said with a slight laugh, "I'm sure I am going to be arrested and bumped off as a subversive." He spoke by telephone from Boston, a stop on a three-and-a-half-week tour with the BBC Philharmonic that is to bring him to New York for concerts at Lehman College in the Bronx tomorrow, Brooklyn College on Saturday and Avery Fisher Hall on Sunday.


A Brooklyn Driver Is Indicted For Murder in Car-Crash Deaths
In what the Brooklyn District Attorney called "a particularly gruesome example of vehicular violence," a Canarsie man has been charged with murder in the deaths of a father and son in a hit-and-run incident last November.
The suspect, Gaspar Gaudino, 21, of East 88th Street, was under the influence of alcohol at the time of the crash and was driving with a suspended license at about 50 miles per hour when he ran through a red light, the 12-count indictment said.
Two other men, one of them Mr.
Gaudino's brother-in-law, were injured and left at the scene, the indictment said.


Tarkwa Journal; Land Is Made of Gold, but Jobs Are Precious Few
Nine years ago, when Lucien Gerard began prospecting in the scrubby hill country on the edge of this old mining town, officials of Ghana's antiquated gold industry smirked at the thought of gullible Americans taking over what everyone here assumed to be a marginal property.
"It was sort of like a joke to them," Mr.
Gerard said on the veranda of his white villa, which sits on a hilltop overlooking outsize earth movers that eat away day and night at the mountainsides below.
"Look at the Americans pouring money into a low-grade area thinking they know what they are doing."


Mexican Aid Cutoff Pushed Into Defense Appropriations Bill
House and Senate conferees agreed today to a $3.1 billion supplemental defense appropriations bill requested by the White House but unexpectedly added a Republican-drafted provision that threatens to cut off all future loans and guarantees to Mexico.
The sponsor of the amendment, Representative Christopher Cox of California, said it was in retaliation for President Clinton's refusal to provide detailed information on his financial aid plan for Mexico that Congress demanded a month ago.


When 'Amazing' Is No Longer Enough
Two months ago, Patrick Erdman arrived at the University of Minnesota hospital here exhausted and anxious about his increasing difficulty in breathing.
He has cystic fibrosis, whose victims often die from infections when their lungs become clogged by mucus.
These days the 18-year-old high school student is playing basketball with friends, preparing to paint the family's home in Hudson, Wis., and feeling somewhat amazed at his rebound.
"I have so much energy I can barely stay in my seat at school," Mr.
Erdman said during a recent visit to the university's cystic fibrosis clinic.


Heart Before Wallet: Franco Remains a Met
As most of the Mets arrived at the club's spring training facility here, John Franco -- perhaps the soul of the clubhouse -- turned down more money from the Baltimore Orioles to rejoin his old teammates.
Citing his love for New York and his familiarity with both the team and the National League, Franco, 34, spurned a two-year, $5.8 million offer -- plus bonuses -- from Baltimore and accepted a two-year deal from the Mets.
The National League saves leader last season with 30, Franco will receive $2.5 million a year, with the possibility of an additional $525,000 a season in performance and award bonuses.


Philippine Town Struggles to Recover From Rebel Raid


Events: Shows, Auctions And a Panel Discussion
Quilts and an Auction  Museum of American Folk Art, Columbus Avenue at 65th Street; (212) 977-7298.
A show of 25 American quilts and other 19th-century furnishings like ceramics, glass and furniture starts on Saturday and runs through Sept. 10.
Open Tuesday through Sunday, 11:30 A.M. to 7:30 P.M.
No charge.


As Software Multiplies, So Do Problem
HEL-L-L-P-P-P!
You've gone software shopping and splurged on a half-dozen programs, including games and learning programs you hope will lure your children from the tube, and some tools for your correspondence and home finances.


Plays Obviously Touched By CNN
Right after the matinee performance of the play in which Elvis Presley showed up as a messenger of God in a toxic dump, Ingmar Bjorksten, the cultural counselor for the Swedish Embassy in Washington, was moved to describe American theater as "very provincial."
The observation was made during a Saturday panel discussion at the 19th annual Humana Festival of New American Plays.
Its members, who also included visitors from China, Croatia and Poland, were seated before the mountainous garbage heap that was the set for Jane Martin's "Middle-Aged White Guys," which had featured a homicidal soldier of fortune, a gun-wielding housewife on Prozac and a corrupt, small-town mayor dressed as Abraham Lincoln.


No Headline
"Let me state emphatically that the C.I.A. is not complicit in the murder of Mr. DeVine nor in the apparent killing of Mr. Bamaca. Nor has the C.I.A. deliberately withheld information." -- ADM.
WILLIAM O. STUDEMAN, head of the C.I.A.  [ A14:1. ]
"How do we know what they tell us is the truth? Aren't there other ways of finding out what's going on?" -- CAROL DEVINE  [ A14:2. ]


Battery Deal for Chrysler's Electric Mini-Van
The Chrysler Corporation and Electrosource Inc. are expected to announce today that Chrysler has agreed to buy up to $75 million of a new kind of lead-acid battery to power an electric mini-van.
Neither company would disclose details of the deal, but the chairman of Electrosource, Michael G. Semmens, said the batteries to be produced could provide power to 3,000 to 5,000 vehicles.
California, New York and Massachusetts have rules requiring Chrysler and other auto makers to make 2 percent of their cars electric in the 1998 model year; for Chrysler that would come to about 3,000 vehicles.
The auto maker may begin selling them early to get a jump on meeting the quota.


Ramada Is Revamping Hotels to Raise Profit Margins
In a restructuring aimed at raising profit margins, Ramada Franchise Systems announced yesterday that it would convert 150 of its 800 hotels and inns into Ramada Plaza Hotels designed for the corporate traveler.
The midpriced chain -- a division of Hospitality Franchise Systems Inc. of Parsippany, N.J. -- will also reduce its five hotel categories to three, to reflect more accurately prices, room size and amenities.
In addition, it will raise minimum quality standards, a move that could require as many as 100 properties to upgrade or leave the system.


Rutgers Tuition to Rise, but Less
Rutgers University officials said tuition must go up next year but added that the proposed increase would be the lowest in a decade.
The university's Board of Governors is to vote today on increasing tuition 4 percent -- an extra $145 a year for most in-state, full-time undergraduates.
Tuition is now $3,640.


Worker Dies When Building On West Side Suddenly Falls
A construction worker was killed yesterday when part of a building under demolition on the West Side of Manhattan collapsed, dragging down scaffolding he was on and flinging him 60 feet through the air onto a Lincoln Tunnel access road in front of horrified motorists.
Officials had not determined last night what caused the collapse of the building, an apartment building that had been vacant for years.
A spokeswoman for the owner said he had decided to tear it down after a recent inspection indicated that the structure was unsafe.


Rethinking Welfare: Time Limits -- A special report.; Iowa Plan Tries to Cut Off the Cash
For all the tough talk around the country about cutting the Gordian knot of welfare dependency, Iowa is the only state that has cut off cash benefits to families because a parent refused to go to work or take other steps to get off welfare.
Even here, the state started removing parents and their children from the rolls only six months ago.
Iowa has been unable to determine what became of most of the 881 families who have lost benefits so far.
Some recipients say the new rules have prodded them to work, while others seem to have been pushed off a precipice.


Arson Suspected in Pinelands
Investigators suspect arson caused the biggest forest fire here in almost 25 years, with almost 20,000 acres scorched in the Pinelands.
They are focusing their inquiry on the Greenwood Forest Fish and Wildlife Management Area, where the fire began on Tuesday.
Noting that there were no lightning strikes or other obvious causes, Lieut.
Bernard Snyder of the Lacey Township Police Department said, "The only other conclusion you can draw at this time is that it's manmade or man-started."


Times Company to Buy a Video Stake
The New York Times Company has agreed to acquire a majority interest in Video News International, a global video news-gathering service for television and cable networks, the two companies said yesterday.
The terms of the deal were not disclosed.


All-White Police Force Settles
There are 107 members of the Wayne Police Department.
Not one is black.
That may change after a settlement the township reached with the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People, over a local law giving local residents preference for police jobs.


An Upright, Ethical and Kind Lawyer. Really.
'My Antonia'  U.S.A. Tomorrow at 3 P.M.
When it comes to made-for-cable movies, U.S.A. is known primarily for its low-budget, Grade B or less, poorly lighted thrillers.
Now the company is producing what it calls "event" films.
The first, "Lily in Winter," with Natalie Cole, flopped ingloriously.
The second is "My Antonia," based on Willa Cather's turn-of-the-century celebration of Nebraska pioneers.
It may not be a major event, but it's a lovely film, well worth catching.


An Upright, Ethical and Kind Lawyer. Really.
The producer Dick Wolf has established a niche for himself in television's prime-time world of lawyers and police officers.
His current creations are ABC's "Law and Order" and Fox's "New York Undercover." Now he is testing CBS waters with a new series called "The Wright Verdicts."
Charles Wright, a shaggy Briton, is an upscale lawyer, the type who is invited to appear on "Lifestyles of the Rich and Famous." He has been practicing in New York for 15 years.
There's a trick lurking here.
Although Charles is officially a defense lawyer, he occasionally takes on assignments as a special prosecutor.
Viewers can never be sure whether he will be defending or prosecuting in a given week.
This is not an entirely successful ploy to keep the show from looking like a "Perry Mason" retread.


COMPANY BRIEFS
ARJO WIGGINS APPLETON, London, a pulp and paper maker, said its U.S.
Appleton Papers Inc. unit has a joint venture with Ponderosa Fibres of America Inc., Baltimore, a producer of de-inked pulp, to build a $190 million recycled fiber pulp mill in the United States.
MAGIC RESTAURANTS INC., Yonkers, which operates a chain of restaurants, and 17 of its subsidiaries filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection in Delaware, to restructure all its debt.


Frederick R. Esty, Securities Industry's 'Mr. Banknote,' 79
Frederick R. Esty, a former chairman and chief executive of the United States Banknote Corporation, died on Tuesday at his home in Summit, N.J., after a brief illness.
He was 79.
Mr.
Esty, a longtime leader in the securities printing and engraving field, was widely known as "Mr. Banknote" within the industry.
His company produces stock and bond certificates and does financial printing.


Before Park, Black Village; Students Look Into a Community's History
Near the West 85th Street entrance to Central Park, a spring trickles through rolling hills thick with white oak trees.
The occasional woodpecker hammers overhead.
It would seem that this spot was always this way.
But before the park was built, 250 people lived there.
Residents of Seneca Village, mostly working-class blacks, traveled to their jobs in laundries or inns in bustling lower Manhattan.
Like other communities in the northern reaches of Manhattan, they impatiently waited for proper streets of cobblestone.
There were multistory frame houses, gardens, three churches and at least one school.


A Marriage Not Made In Heaven
The expected sale of 80 percent of MCA Inc. by the Matsushita Electric Industrial Company, its Japanese parent, to the Seagram Company would amount to one of the more important transactions in the entertainment business in years.
But the most revealing comment today on how the news hit Universal City, where MCA is situated, came from Lew R. Wasserman, the company's chairman: "I have no idea because no one has called me. I've heard nothing."
After five years of a rocky marriage, it had come to this: MCA and Matsushita were not even talking.
Mr.
Wasserman said he had received a call Wednesday evening from Edgar M. Bronfman, Seagram's chairman and an old friend, and was told only that Mr.
Bronfman would call back later when he could discuss the issue.


Restaurants
One night four gorgeous women walked into Zut! wearing huge fluffy pink hats that looked exactly like cotton candy.
Every head in the restaurant turned to watch as they were seated at a front table.
Those pink clouds were so mesmerizing that everyone in the long, dark room waited to see if the women would remove them.
We waited all evening and when they finally got up and left, hats still firmly anchored to their heads, a collective sigh zipped around the room.
This display was particularly impressive, given the difficulty of making an entrance at Zut!
The fabulously silly room captures most of the attention.
The eye is first caught by the animals cavorting over the circular bar and then bounces to the chandeliers made of giant straw hats.
By the time it discovers the musical giraffes, dancing rabbits and bridge-playing penguins on the wallpaper, it is hooked.
There is so much to discover: sombrero mirrors, copper monkey panels, gold animals twinkling on the ceiling like urban constellations.
This is one of the most playful spaces in New York City.


Inside Art
Getting Caught in the Web
Thea Westreich is a newbie.
A what?


Art in Review
June Leaf  Edward Thorp Gallery 103 Prince Street SoHo Through April 22
Sometimes all an artist needs is touch, a distinctive yet ineffable way with materials, to get away with anything.
June Leaf, an underrated member of the rich tradition of figurative art that came out of Abstract Expressionism, is such an artist.
A feminist of the old school, she equates women's bodies with the frets of guitars, attaching them in both paintings and sculpture to swelling boatlike shapes that also cast them as figureheads.
Her paintings are infused with a vague primordial narrative in which these figures and others inhabit abstract landscapes whose wavering, shifting surfaces are as much scratched into existence as painted.


CD's in the Spirit of the Season
Here are comments by Times classical-music critics on CD's appropriate to the Easter and Passover season.
The price of a single CD ranges from $14.98 to $21. (An introduction appears on page C1.) Haydn's Seven Last Words
Inevitability is a prime conceit of classical-music commentators.
Certain works attain such a degree of perfection, the logic seems to go, that they cannot be altered in any material way, indeed could not have been conceived differently even by their creators.


Beyond December And May
Defying Hollywood convention, "The Last Good Time" is a romance with an unlikely hero: a cultured, fastidious, proud man in his 70's.
Armin Mueller-Stahl plays Joseph Kopple, a retired violinist who lives in a neat but shabby room in Brooklyn.
And though he has what is presumably his final fling, with a woman in her 20's, there is nothing lurid in the film's delicate depiction of their friendship.
"The Last Good Time" is saddled with two strained and obvious plots, but it is also filled with moments of sweetness and wit, and it has the great virtue of avoiding a sitcom-cute view of aging.
As he sits wearing a tie and a dressing gown, reading a book, Joseph is a picture of old-fashioned decorum and elegance.
He remembers, and the film recreates, a favorite image of his wife, now long dead, dancing languorously in front of a fire.
In Mr.
Mueller-Stahl's subtle performance, Joseph's perplexity is visible beneath his restraint.
Suddenly he is dealing with questions -- whether to have an affair, how to make some money -- he thought were in his past.


Last Chance
Here is a sampling of shows and exhibitions in New York City that are to close soon: Closing This Weekend  "TRANSLATIONS," Plymouth Theater, 236 West 45th Street, Manhattan.
A revival of the 1981 drama by Brian Friel set in Ireland in the 1800's about a young English army officer and an Irish woman; with Brian Dennehy, Donal Donnelly and Dana Delaney; directed by Howard Davies.
Through Sunday.
Performances: today at 8 P.M.; tomorrow at 2 and 8 P.M.; Sunday at 3 P.M.
Tickets: $45 and $55.
Information: (212) 239-6200.


RESULTS PLUS
N.B.A.  40 Points for Drexler  Clyde Drexler scored 40 points, including 17 in the fourth quarter, and the Houston Rockets rallied to beat the Golden State Warriors, 110-102, last night at Oakland, Calif.
Houston, playing without the ailing starters Hakeem Olajuwon and Vernon Maxwell, registered its 10th straight victory over the Warriors.
Olajuwon and Maxwell are both out with iron deficiency anemia.


CHRONICLE
Mayor RUDOLPH W. GIULIANI probably did not do much to endear himself to Senator ALFONSE M. D'AMATO yesterday, but he certainly had the audience at a luncheon of the New York Landmarks Preservation Foundation roaring with laughter.
"I think I'll start with four or five ethnic imitations," the Mayor said in a none-too-veiled reference to the Senator's mimicry of Judge Lance Ito.
"I'm afraid to even talk with an Italian accent these days, but Peter and I know how to do that," he said, referring to Peter Vallone, the City Council Speaker.
"You should hear my Mafia accent. If I did that, I'd really be in trouble."


The Spoken Word
"IN THE COMPANY OF ANIMALS," New School for Social Research, 65 Fifth Avenue, Greenwich Village.
A free conference on issues affecting the relationships between humans and animals, including how animals are portrayed in literature and art, continuing through tomorrow with professors, researchers and authors.
Hours: today and tomorrow, 9 A.M. to 4:30 P.M.
In conjunction with the conference, there will be a free reading of poetry about animals, tonight at 8.
Conference information: (212) 229-5755.


Reviews/Fashion; Cool Rises to Intimidating Heights
In one of the dozens of reference books Anna Sui consulted while researching her mod collection, the phenomenon is described simply: "The mod way of life consisted of total devotion to looking and being 'cool.' Spending practically all your money on clothes and all your after-work hours in clubs and dance halls. To be part time was really to miss the point."
Therein lie two concepts that Ms.
Sui understands, which is why her collection was such a triumph.
The first is cool.
The second is to disdain part-timers.
Ms.
Sui is a full-time, fully consumed, fully fascinated force.
Her dedication, ingenuity and dexterity in taking on any theme are admirable.
As for her cool, it is fiercely intimidating.


Deadline Extension Is Sought On Watershed Plan Approval
The Pataki administration, struggling to find a compromise between New York City and upstate communities on protecting the city's watershed, has asked Federal regulators for a six-month extension before the state must decide whether to approve the city's long-range plans.
Under an agreement between the city and the Federal Environmental Protection Agency in December 1993, state health and environmental officials must decide by April 15 whether to approve critical elements of the city's plans.
City officials have proposed more than 150 different actions to protect the watershed, including buying sensitive land near reservoirs and upgrading more than 100 sewage treatment plants.


Term Limits, Though Defeated, Will Not Die
To the Editor:
Both your March 31 front-page news analysis of the defeat of the term-limits amendment in the House and "Term Limits: A Victory of Good Sense," your editorial of the same date, distort the strength and merits of the term-limits movement.


Knicks Take a Breather Before Going All Out
The Knicks had a day off yesterday to regroup for the final stretch of the regular season.
With nine games remaining, the Knicks (48-25) are half a game ahead of the Indiana Pacers (48-26) in the race for the second-best record in the Eastern Conference.


Early at Augusta, There's a Bear in the Air
Dark clouds wrapped Augusta National in a wet shroud today, but the steady rain and dank chill could not dampen the fireworks that lit up the first round of the 59th Masters tournament.
Out of the mist stepped a diverse assortment of contenders, a group that included newcomers, old hands and one legend.
With the fire taken out of the greens, the defending champion Jose Maria Olazabal, Phil Mickelson and David Frost shot 66's for a one-stroke lead over -- and this is not a mistake -- Jack Nicklaus.


Rule Threatens Future of a Bank Annuity
In an action hailed by the life insurance industry, the Treasury Department moved today to severely restrict sales by 11 small banks of a new kind of tax-deferred annuity, which is financed with Government-insured certificates of deposit.
The Treasury Department's proposed rule -- which effectively begins Friday -- guts the new annuity, called the Retirement C.D., by treating it for tax purposes like a zero-coupon bond, for which income taxes must be paid on each year's accrued interest.


Start Time for the '96 Men's Marathon Is a Heated Issue
Against the wishes of many runners and against the advice of the International Olympic Committee's medical commission, the men's marathon at the 1996 Summer Olympics in Atlanta will be run in the wilting heat and humidity of early evening.
The 26.2-mile race will begin at 6:30 P.M. on Aug. 4, 1996, and will finish in the Olympic Stadium as a prelude to closing ceremonies, a tradition that began at the 1984 Los Angeles Games.
The starting time has come under criticism, however, because of possible health risks and likely slow times caused by sauna-like conditions in the Deep South.


Art in Review
John Baldessari  'Books and Ephemera, 1971-1995'
Printed Matter  77 Wooster Street  SoHo
Through April 28
John Baldessari's large-scale photographic works tend to look diffuse and thin, but the books, pamphlets and epigrammatic collages in this mini-retrospective organized by David Platzker catch the California Conceptualist in top form.


McDowell Seeking Stability, Big Money
Sporting a full beard and short one important piece of luggage, Jack McDowell sauntered into the spring training complex this afternoon and asked a reporter where Buck Showalter's office was.
The unsigned Yankee had arrived.
Jim McDowell, the pitcher's brother and agent, will also be arriving here over the weekend to possibly negotiate a contract with General Manager Gene Michael.
If the Yankees do not sign the 29-year-old pitcher, he will be eligible for salary arbitration.
But Jack McDowell, who could never agree on a long-term deal with the White Sox, sounded interested in one with New York.


Fearing a Major Strom, Insurers Are Denying Housing Coverage
Shoreline residents are finding it increasingly difficult to buy homeowners' insurance because insurance companies fear that the next major storm to hit Long Island could put them out of business, state and county officials said today.
The insurers, whose financial reserves were depleted by hurricanes that hit the South in the last two years and by the earthquake in California, are predicting a major loss should the Island be struck by a hurricane or a storm like the one that ravaged it in December 1992, insurance brokers said.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Seagram Agrees to Buy 80% of MCA for $7 Billion
Seagram has agreed to pay $7 billion to Matsushita for 80 percent of MCA.
Matsushita is agreeing to cede control after failing to master the vagaries of Hollywood and a disgruntled American management team.
A1.


Goofy in the Here and Now As a Constantly Tested Dad
If every father of a teen-ager were as plaintively self-effacing as the long-running Disney character Goofy, the world might be a far less angry place.
The 63-year-old cartoon yokel, who is starring in his first animated feature film, "A Goofy Movie," doesn't have a mean bone in his body.
When his teen-age son, Max, sneers at him as the epitome of squareness, Goofy isn't so much indignant as wounded in a droopy, hangdog way.
Goofy and Max have classic generation-gap issues to resolve.
Where Goofy's notion of hip is Xavier Cugat, Max worships a strutting hard-rock superstar called Powerline.
After Max rudely interrupts a high school assembly to do an impersonation of his idol, the school principal telephones Goofy to warn him that Max is heading for trouble.
Goofy's solution is to take his son to Idaho on a fishing trip, during which he hopes they can become buddies.


Tax Bill Benefit Is a Matter of Perspective
To hear the Democrats tell it Wednesday night, the Republicans' tax-cut bill would give a windfall to the wealthy and barely a pittance to ordinary Americans.
More than half of the money saved, the Democrats argued, would go to taxpayers with incomes over $100,000.
Those with incomes over $200,000 would get, on average, an annual tax reduction of $11,266, while taxpayers with incomes between $30,000 and $50,000 would have an average tax cut of only $569.


Yesterday in Washington
SENATE APPROVES CUTS -- A deal between the Republican and Democratic leaders in the Senate on reductions in current spending appeared to have fallen apart, but in a late-night vote of 99 to 0 the Senate approved cuts of $16 billion.
Its bill will now have to be reconciled with the version passed by the House, which voted last month for cuts totaling $17 billion.
WATER ACT CHANGES -- The House Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure approved legislation that would overhaul of the 1972 Clean Water Act by easing water-pollution controls on industry and local sewer agencies, while sharply reducing the protection of wetlands.
The bill, which would affect toxic releases from factories as well as pollution runoffs from city streets, now goes to the House floor.
The issue has yet to be considered by the Senate.


Johnny Depp With a Don Juan Complex
In "Don Juan DeMarco," Marlon Brando returns to the screen to play a psychotherapist treating a delusional young man who imagines he is Don Juan, the famous lover.
There may be at least as many delusional young men who imagine that they're Mr.
Brando, but not one of them could have pictured this: one of the screen's most volatile, dangerous performers wedged into a truly banal role.
Mr.
Brando has been cast as Jack Mickler, happily married suburbanite, a man on the verge of retirement from the hospital where he has been "the best damn clinician this place has ever seen."


Burundi Drifts Toward Disaster
Ethnic massacres punctuate Burundi's history.
Four horrific bursts of killing have erupted between the majority Hutu and the militarily dominant Tutsi since the country won independence from Belgium in 1962.
The most recent, in 1993, cost 150,000 lives.
Now, a year after Hutu fanatics slaughtered 500,000 Tutsi in neighboring Rwanda, Burundi seems to be slipping toward a fresh calamity.
For weeks, Tutsi-led army and militia units have been attacking Hutu civilians, killing scores, even hundreds at a time.
Hutu militia groups have been fighting back.
But most Hutu have simply taken flight, swelling the region's already huge refugee population.


Marlboro Man Moving Down in Shea Lineup
The Mets repositioned their outfield yesterday, dropping the Marlboro Man to a less visible spot in their Shea Stadium advertising lineup.
The idea behind the move was to reduce the amount of air time the cigarette billboard receives on television.


CHRONICLE
Speaking in Spanish, HOWARD STERN, the radio personality, tried to explain yesterday why he had joked about the murder of Selena Quintanilla Perez, the Tejano singer, who was killed last Friday.
"As you know, I am a satirist," he said on his radio program yesterday morning, The Associated Press reported.
"My comments about the tragic death of Selena were certainly not intended to cause any further pain to her family, friends and those who loved her.
"I am incensed that this young woman's life was taken in such a mindless way," Mr.
Stern continued, according to a written English translation he issued later.


Floral Arrangements


Informer in Terrorism Trial Admits Threatening F.B.I.
The Government's chief informer in the terrorism trial of Sheik Omar Abdel Rahman and 10 others admitted yesterday that he had threatened to falsely accuse the F.B.I. of knowing in advance that the World Trade Center would be bombed and of failing to stop it.
But the informer, Emad Salem, denied a defense lawyer's contention that he had made the threat to blackmail the F.B.I. into paying him handsomely to work undercover in the effort to catch the bombers.
Mr.
Salem had worked as an informer for the F.B.I. earlier, but the agency had dropped him seven months before the Trade Center bombing.


CD's in the Spirit of the Season
Here are comments by Times classical-music critics on CD's appropriate to the Easter and Passover season.
The price of a single CD ranges from $14.98 to $21. (An introduction appears on page C1.) Wagner's 'Parsifal'
The pagan roots of Easter have never been far away, but Wagner's "Parsifal" reinvents them in such vivid and overwhelming terms that we are not likely to forget the link ever again.
Indeed, "Parsifal," with its warlike conquest of evil through redemption, manages to wear the trappings of Christian worship and at the same time avoid the Christianity of tender forgiveness.
In Wagner's scheme of things, the pure will inherit the earth but not necessarily the meek.


Boy, 12, Is Killed In Brooklyn Hit-Run
A 12-year-old boy was struck by a van and killed yesterday in a hit-and-run incident in the Flatbush section of Brooklyn, and an 8-year-old girl was seriously injured in another Brooklyn neighborhood when a car struck her about two hours later, the police said.
The boy, Clayton Williams, of 529 East 22d Street, was crossing at the intersection of Newkirk and Ocean Avenues, said Officer Jacqueline Jacknow, a Police Department spokeswoman, when a dark gray van, possibly a Chevrolet Astro, hit him and sped off at about 6:30 P.M.


CD's in the Spirit of the Season
Here are comments by Times classical-music critics on CD's appropriate to the Easter and Passover season.
The price of a single CD ranges from $14.98 to $21. (An introduction appears on page C1.) A 20th-Century Miscellany
The 20th century is usually judged a century without faith, but religious music has unexpectedly prospered since Nietzsche and sundry others announced the death of God.
Many major Romantics of the 19th century steered clear of the ancient sacred genres, seeking new spiritual modes; in the 20th century, deepening nostalgia has brought the Passion and other forms back into circulation.


Where the Girls Are. (Not the Beach.)
Loretta (Nancy Allison Wolfe), the central character in "Bar Girls," an amusing, sharply observant new comedy about lesbian-mating rituals in Los Angeles, is the kind of woman who acts like a tough cookie when caught in the thrill of the romantic chase.
But beneath her smart remarks and calculating maneuvers, she is insecure and love-starved.
On spying Rachael (Liza D'Agostino), an attractive new face in a neighborhood watering hole called the Girl Bar, Loretta plays an elaborately coquettish game of having the bartender send Rachael a drink, then feigning a shyness when the object of her fancy responds.
Before the night is over, Loretta has Rachael in her bedroom on the verge of being seduced.
As they are about to kiss, Loretta draws back.
She can't have sex, she explains, unless she is in love.


Art in Review
Raoul De Keyser  Brooke Alexander Gallery 59 Wooster Street SoHo Through April 29
This exhibition of beautifully reticent abstractions introduces a Belgian artist who, despite a long list of European exhibitions, comes across as something of a painter's painter.
Judging from the seven recent paintings here, Raoul De Keyser, 61, might be said to occupy a mid-point between Gerhard Richter and his fellow Belgian Luc Tuymans, while being more sincere than either. (Reproductions of paintings from the mid-1980's suggest a kinship with the American painter John McLaughlin.)


Art in Review
'Still/Life'  'The Body as Object in Contemporary Photography'
Americas Society  680 Park Avenue (at 68th Street)  Through April 9
The body provides six artists with a varied metaphor in "Still/Life: The Body as Object in Contemporary Photography." Several of the artists refer to religious rituals, from those of Roman Catholicism to those of the Afro-Caribbean Santeria.
Others are more closely aligned with the formal and conceptual concerns of performance art of the 1960's and 70's.


Three More In Precinct Are Accused
The window on corruption in the troubled 30th Precinct in Harlem widened slightly yesterday with perjury accusations against a sergeant and two officers who were charged with lying about arrests that they made illegally and about evidence that they seized unconstitutionally to put suspected drug dealers behind bars.
The arrests, announced by District Attorney Robert M. Morgenthau of Manhattan and Police Commissioner William J. Bratton, raised to 33 the number of officers implicated in the past year in the most sweeping scandal in one precinct in city history.
It has touched more than one of every six of the 192 officers assigned to the precinct, which has come to be known as the "Dirty Thirty."


Tax-Cutters and the '96 Election
With the approval on Wednesday night of a $189 billion tax cut by the House of Representatives, Speaker Newt Gingrich has all but completed his self-decreed 100 days in the center ring of American politics.
He calls the tax bill the crowning jewel of his Contract With America.
But for all his considerable achievements in the last three months, he lacks the power to assure that Americans will keep more of their paychecks.
In a nice piece of political congruence, that power lies mostly with the two men considered most likely to compete for the White House next fall: President Clinton and Senator Bob Dole of Kansas, the majority leader.


No Headline
"We're attempting to change a culture, not only  of those who have received welfare, but of the people working with people on  welfare." CHARLES PALMER, director of Iowa's Department of Human Services.  [ B6:3. ]


Spanish Fishermen Protest Canada's Stance on North Atlantic Waters


A new national campaign by Fannie Mae seeks to widen the net for would-be homeowners.
WALL STREET knows about Fannie Mae, and so do many investors who have purchased its stock or its mortgage-backed securities.
But not enough of the low- and middle-income households that Fannie Mae is trying to reach are aware of its services -- and that's where a new campaign comes in.
Fannie Mae, officially the Federal National Mortgage Association, is a source of funds used by home buyers.
With more than $272 billion in assets, it buys and often holds mortgages acquired from more than 3,000 local banks, savings and loan associations, credit unions and other companies that provide money for mortgage loans.
The objective is to help these financial institutions issue more such loans so that more people will become homeowners and, not so incidentally, its own revenues will rise.


Detector Was Silent at A-Plant
Nobody was in danger when radiation escaped from the Hope Creek nuclear plant on Wednesday, Federal officials said.
But they are concerned that the small release went undetected by an alarm that should have been the first line of defense.
Instead, operators were alerted by monitors on the reactor's roof.


INSIDE
Support for Nuclear Treaty
The United States said most nations that signed the treaty to prevent the spread of nuclear weapons now want to extend it indefinitely.
Page A3.
New Virus in Australia
A mysterious disease that killed 14 Australian race horses and their trainer has been lined to a new virus in the measles family.
Page A20.
Time to Break Up Chase?
An investor in Chase Manhattan is shaking banking's belief that bigger is better, suggesting that Chase may be worth more in pieces.
Page D1.


Questions Raised In Babies' Deaths
Testifying in the trial of a woman charged with killing her five young children, the chief forensic pathologist of the New York State Police said that all five had been deliberately suffocated and were not, as was originally believed, victims of crib death.
One after another, Dr.
Michael Baden read aloud from the original death certificates of Waneta E. Hoyt's five children, who died between 1965 and 1971, then questioned the cause of death listed in each case.
Article, page B5.


Moves at Wieden And Mastercard
A media review involving Mastercard International and the hiring of a top media executive by Wieden &amp; Kennedy are making news.
Mastercard has placed in review the media portion of its account, which has been handled by DeWitt Media in New York since September 1992.
The billings were estimated at $80 million.


A Supermarket for Atlantic City
The first new supermarket in more than 25 years is coming to town.
The store, a 43,000-square-foot Thriftway, will be the heart of a $13 million downtown shopping center, Renaissance Plaza.
Ground was broken yesterday and stores are expected to open in time for year-end holiday shopping.


Ex-Fox Programmer Joins New Video Venture
Sandy Grushow, the former chief programmer for the Fox network, was named president yesterday of the media division at a recently formed telephone company consortium that plans to provide video services to phone customers.
The consortium, which consists of Bell Atlantic, Nynex and Pacific Telesis, plans to compete directly with cable and direct satellite companies in supplying programming to homes.
The phone company joint venture, which is still unnamed, is scheduled to start its video service by the end of next year.


Postal Branch Is Backed
People who live and work near the post office where four people were fatally shot last month are urging the Postal Service not to close it.
Helping them are New Jersey's two Senators, Bill Bradley and Frank Lautenberg, and Representative William Martini.


CD's in the Spirit of the Season
NOW THAT one of the great musical masterworks written for the Easter season, Handel's "Messiah," has been firmly appropriated for Christmas, what is left?
Well, plenty, as can be seen in the listings of seasonal musical events that are to take place in New York over the next 10 days, on page C32.
Handel was good enough to supply another timely masterpiece, "Israel in Egypt," on the subject of Passover.
Bach poured some of his most inspired music into his "St. Matthew Passion." Haydn's Seven Last Words of Christ on the Cross proved one of his most versatile creations.
Even opera composers got into the act, albeit at some remove from traditional piety: Richard Wagner, with "Parsifal," and Bohuslav Martinu, with "The Greek Passion."


Janet Fitchen, 58, Rural Sociologist And Anthropologist
Janet Mathews Fitchen, a cultural anthropologist who studied rural poverty in the United States, died on Saturday at her home in Ithaca, N.Y.
She was 58.
The cause was a brain tumor, her family said.


Elastic Device In Insect Wing Is Powerhouse
Flying insects have elastic mechanisms in their wings that store and release energy, allowing them to minimize the tremendous effort needed to sustain flight, scientists said today.
Scientists have long suspected that insects have springlike mechanisms in their wings to recapture energy that would otherwise be wasted as their wings feverishly move up and down.
Now, researchers who tethered fruit flies in a sophisticated flight simulator say they have confirmed that insects use such elastic devices to capture energy from one wing stroke to help propel the next.


D'Amato Gives A New Apology On Ito Remarks
In barely audible tones, a chastened and visibly nervous Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato delivered a rare apology on the Senate floor today, calling his heavily accented remarks about the Japanese-American judge in the O. J. Simpson case "totally wrong and inappropriate."
Following three days of criticism of Mr.
D'Amato's remarks about Judge Lance Ito on Don Imus's radio talk show -- the controversy picked up more momentum after a terse and perfunctory initial apology on Wednesday -- some Asian-American groups and others were still saying the damage done by his mocking rendition of a Japanese accent circa 1940's Hollywood could not easily be forgotten.


Du Pont Buys Back 23% of Its Shares, at a Steep Discount
The Du Pont Company, the nation's largest manufacturer of basic chemicals, bought almost 23 percent of its shares back from the Seagram Company yesterday for an estimated $8.8 billion of cash and short-term notes.
Seagram, which needed to raise money quickly to finance its acquisition of MCA Inc. from the Matsushita Electric Industrial Company of Japan, accepted a price well below the market value of the Du Pont shares.


Grace's Board Votes Changes Meant to Satisfy Big Investors
Ending three weeks of intense speculation that it might renege on promises to make sweeping changes to its board, W. R. Grace &amp; Company provided details yesterday of who would stay and who would go.
Big institutional shareholders, who hold huge chunks of Grace stock, had pressed the company for the changes after the sudden resignation on March 2 of J. P. Bolduc as president and chief executive.
Yesterday, the board voted to reduce the size of the board and announced which directors would be staying.
While the changes on the surface meet the demands of the shareholders, other conflicts have become evident since the board agreed to the changes on March 17.


Editorial Notebook; Fashion Week Fabrics
The guys at the office never understood the concept of day velvet.
No matter how many times it was explained to them -- day velvet is like night velvet except you wear it during the day -- they looked vaguely suspicious.
Why were luxury fabrics slinking around in daylight?


George Bush's Old Company Is Quitting Oil Patch
The Zapata Corporation founded by George Bush and a partner in 1953, announced today that it would leave the energy business, selling off its natural gas properties and finding other investments.
The Houston company said its decision was "based on the belief that businesses outside the energy industry may provide better opportunities." Avram Glazer, the company's chief executive, added that offering the energy businesses for sale did not imply that the company would liquidate.


The Story Behind a Generous Gift to Harvard Law
When Prof.
Phillip E. Areeda of Harvard Law School announced on Tuesday that he was giving the school a bequest that would eventually exceed $5 million, many on campus wondered how he had amassed a small fortune on a professor's salary of less than $150,000 a year.
Professor Areeda, 65, is widely regarded as the nation's leading authority on antitrust law, a scholar whose texts on the subject are required reading in the field.
He is also highly regarded at Harvard, where he has taught since 1961, instructing first-year students on contracts and teaching an elective course on antitrust law.


As Rwanda Trials Open, a Nation Struggles
"Every day, every month, it has become harder for me to deal with," the 26-year-old Tutsi said, recounting how he survived two months of massacres by hiding in a deserted house, drinking ditch water and eating grass.
"I had a family," said Evariste Twahirwa, glancing at bullet holes in the concrete wall of his living room, where his sister was shot a year ago by Hutu militias.


Pentagon Lists 27 Who Face Threat Of Death in Haiti
The Pentagon has sent a classified cable to the American Embassy in Haiti, warning that over two dozen political opponents of President Jean-Bertrand Aristide may have been selected for assassination, senior Defense Department officials said today.
American military officials compiled the list in the last several days from intelligence information and after analyzing supposed "hit lists" that have circulated in Haiti and in the Haitian-American press.


Art in Review
Peter Paul Rubens  Gagosian Gallery 980 Madison Avenue (at 77th Street) Through May 19
You may have been led to expect a significant exhibition from the talk beforehand about this show.
There are 16 paintings, which don't pretend to give an overview of Rubens's immense achievement, and half a dozen of them are noteworthy.
In other words, it's a welcome and pleasurable event, but not a major one.


No Bravery, Please; It's the Masters
Control.
If CBS hates being controlled by the fuddy-duddies who run the Masters, it doen't show it.
It doesn't raise questions about the autocracy behind the sainted tournament, as Frank Deford did so savagely last Sunday on HBO Sports's new magazine show, "Real Sports." He called the tournament the "last dictatorship in American sports." If CBS were to lob grenades at the Masters, the Masters would fire CBS.
Frank Chirkinian, CBS's coordinating producer/director since Francis Ouimet's heyday, can gripe about how he would prefer to televise the front nine holes or how the green jacket ceremony at the end of the event is a theatrical downer.


Gun Parts Linked to Japan Cult, Raising Fear of New Attacks
The police found parts of 10 guns today in a car belonging to the cult linked to the nerve-gas attack on the Tokyo subway system, adding to concerns about the possibility of further terrorist attacks.
Security has been tightened throughout Japan since the attack last month.
In Tokyo, 10,000 police officers have been assigned to special security duties like protecting Government officials, newspapers here have reported.


Rangers' Search Starts in the Middle
As is the case with any commodities market, the price of the goods depends on supply and demand.
Centers were coveted throughout the National Hockey League even before the recent injuries that ended the seasons of Chicago's Jeremy Roenick and Dallas's Mike Modano.
Now, those that are available are even more costly.
If the Rangers or the Devils are to obtain the needed upgrades at this position before today's 3 P.M. trade deadline, they will pay more dearly than they would have a week ago.
Or perhaps they will have to settle for a faded star like the 34-year-old Denis Savard, whom the Blackhawks reacquired yesterday.


Finals Near in U.S. Bridge
Several young players who had been doing well in the Vanderbilt Knockout Team Championship at the American Contract Bridge League's Spring Nationals here came to the end of the road Wednesday night.
John Diamond of Philadelphia and his young foursome lost by 44 imps to Mike Moss of Manhattan and three Swedish stars.


SENATE APPROVES A $16 BILLION CUT IN CURRENT BUDGET
After a week of grueling debate that had reduced it to a crawl, the Senate late tonight unanimously approved cuts of $16 billion in Government spending in the current fiscal year.
In doing so, it shifted hundreds of millions of dollars back to welfare, education and other social programs that were among the targets of a $17 billion budget-cutting bill that the House approved last month after only two days of debate.
The two versions will now be reconciled by a conference committee.


Chic and Quality From Bill Blass
Bill Blass doesn't dress the hip young crowd who care more about style than quality.
He dresses women who are willing to spend a lot of money on clothes but want value for their dollars.
Women who want what they wear to look and feel expensive, and to be in fashion for more than a season.
His customers appreciate the feel of fine woolens and alpacas, of silks satins and silk chiffons.
They cherish the luxury of hand-painted velvet and of totally beaded jackets that look like works of art.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-12  PENTAGON DRAWS HAITI DEATH LIST  The Pentagon has sent to the U.S.
Embassy in Haiti a list of political foes of President Jean-Bertrand Aristide who are believed to have been selected for assassination.
A1  RWANDA ONE YEAR LATER  On the anniversary of a plane crash that set off the massacre of hundreds of thousands of Rwandans, the survivors are trying to deal with the pain, and the first trials began for the killings.
A1


Term Limits, Though Defeated, Will Not Die; F.D.R.'s 'Extra' Years
To the Editor:
Your March 31 editorial opposing term limits was eminently on target as it named past long-term senators whose timely presence guided the ship of state through dangerous waters.
Mentioned were Daniel Webster, Sam Rayburn and Robert LaFollette Jr.
As a nation, how badly would we have suffered without the leadership and counsel of Senators Robert F. Wagner, J. William Fulbright and, yes, even Senator Mark O. Hatfield, who courageously refused on principle to cast a vote that would have rigidified the budget in a constitutional amendment.


Cutting Aid to Palestinians Won't Help Israel
To the Editor:
I was at the Jerusalem conference of presidents of major American Jewish organizations that A. M. Rosenthal describes in "Official Israeli Advice" (column, March 31).


Oilers Fire Coach
GEORGE BURNETT, the first-year coach of the Edmonton Oilers, was fired last night, two days after ousting SHAYNE CORSON as team captain.
Burnett had benched the veteran in the third period of a 7-2 loss to the Los Angeles Kings on Monday.
Corson had received a misconduct for berating the referee.
"It wasn't an easy decision to make, but with the circumstances I felt it was best for our team right now," Burnett said at the time.


Judges Can Be Problem, Not the Solution
To the Editor:
In "Put the Judges Back in Justice" (Op-Ed, April 3), Philip K. Howard states that the best tort reform is putting judges back into their traditional gatekeeping role of keeping frivolous cases from indulgent juries.
Mr.
Howard widely misses the mark.
The judges are in charge, and that is a major part of the problem.


Also of Note
Critics' choices of some other Manhattan art shows: OLIVER WASOW, Janet Borden Gallery, 560 Broadway, near Prince Street, SoHo (through April 14).
Computer-manipulated collages of apocalyptic landscapes, with nuclear plants on picturesque mountaintops and the like.
The artificially bright colors and glowing clouds suggest a dystopian version of Currier &amp; Ives (Charles Hagen).


Dim Outlook in Philadelphia Strike
With business off as much as 15 percent, Chris Carbonara and Chris Doyle have marked down the entrees they sell from their lunch wagon outside Philadelphia Community College.
Cheese steak sandwiches now cost $2.50, instead of $3, and $1 buys two hot dogs instead of one.
It is only a limited offer, of course.
The sign on their truck says, "Special ends when strike ends."


At the Bar; A Congress with fewer lawyers is a Congress with different inclinations.
For Sonny Bono, a Judiciary Committee hearing is no rock concert.
He fidgets.
He doodles.
He gets up and walks around, often wandering out of the room altogether.
At a recent committee session on the crime bill, Mr.
Bono, a freshman Republican from California, decided he had had enough.
Interrupting a colleague, he complained that all they did was talk, talk, talk.


Missing Funds For Children In Two Cases
They were both put in positions of responsibility involving children.
And yesterday, both men stood accused of stealing money that parents had entrusted to them.
One, the principal of an elementary school on the Lower East Side, was accused of stealing $11,500 from a Board of Education fund for supplies and a cash fund from the proceeds of bake sales and other community events.
The other, the former president of a Queens Little League, was accused of stealing more than $20,000 from the children's baseball teams.


U.S. Aides Say Most Signers Back Lasting A-Ban Pact
Senior Clinton Administration officials said today that a majority of the 174 nations that have signed the treaty to stop the spread of nuclear weapons had pledged to vote for permanently extending the ban.
After two months of persuasion and concessions, Administration officials said the main question was no longer whether they could muster a majority for an indefinite extension, but how big the majority would be when diplomats from around the world gathered in New York on April 17 for the vote.


A Research Team Detects Many More Galaxies
The universe evidently contains far more galaxies than many astronomers realized -- so many, in fact, that their combined mass must influence predictions about the ultimate fate of the universe.
Such was the conclusion of a report presented this week at an international astronomical meeting in Cardiff, Wales.
In presentations there, at the National Astronomy Meeting, Dr.
Christopher Impey of the University of Arizona and his colleagues reported the discovery of more than 600 previously uncatalogued galaxies in a narrow strip of sky.
All these galaxies are so dim that they had apparently escaped notice in earlier sky searches.


For Children
'Women of Valor'  Queens Theater in the Park Flushing Meadows-Corona Park (718) 268-5011 Recommended ages: 9 and up Tomorrow
Esther manipulated her husband, the King of Persia, to get rid of Haman, a dangerous anti-Semite.
Miriam made sure Moses, her brother, got safely out of the bull rushes.
Lilith was rumored to be Adam's first wife, and Eve, well, her reputation is firmly established.


Revising the Script for a Big Distiller
Edgar Bronfman Jr. has already been under pressure to explain why his ambitions for the entertainment business are not a reckless foray by a beverage executive whose heart lies in Hollywood.
Last June, at a meeting in Toronto, analysts and shareholders peppered the chief executive of the Seagram Company with questions about his $2 billion investment in Time Warner.
After yesterday's one-two punch, in which Seagram agreed to sell most of its stake in Du Pont for $8.8 billion and was close to buying 80 percent of MCA Inc. for $7 billion, Mr.
Bronfman will need more than words to satisfy investors.


As Veto Possibility Arises, White House Lashes Out
For the first time since Republicans won control of Congress, President Clinton today found himself facing tough choices about whether to wield his veto.
The pressure has left the White House frustrated and annoyed, and it has gouged the veneer of civility the Administration has struggled to maintain with the new majority.
The immediate target of a White House outburst today was a Republican effort to halt the plan to provide loan guarantees to Mexico until the Administration produces thousands of pages of related documents.
The White House press secretary, Michael D. McCurry, denounced the move as little more than harassment and intimidation.


To Follow the Pope or Conscience?; A New Athanasius
To the Editor:
In your March 31 front-page report on the new encyclical from Pope John Paul II you report an unnamed Vatican official as saying, in connection with the abortion issue: "This is a pope who wants to say 'no' to aspects of what is known as modernity. It doesn't upset him in the least to be against society."


Internet Commerce: Hold the Anchovies
A simplified plan for allowing checking and credit card transactions over the Internet is expected to be announced today in Washington, with pizza once again emerging as the favored commodity of cyberspace.
In a demonstration to be held at the National Press Club, a consumer using an "electronic wallet" displayed on a personal computer screen will try to order a Domino's pizza and pay for it using a regular credit card.
The wallet specifies the sizes, toppings and costs of various pizzas, as well as which credit cards are accepted and where the pizza is to be delivered.
The pizza would still be prepared and delivered in the traditional way.


Harnisch Joins Mets And Feels At Home
After months of not knowing whether or not he ever would be a member of the Mets, Pete Harnisch today agreed to terms with the club on a three-year contract that will pay him a minimum of $9 million.
Harnisch, obtained in a trade with the Houston Astros on Nov. 28, is a right-hander who is expected be the Mets' No. 2 starter behind Bret Saberhagen.


An American REIT Will Invest in Mexico
The Mexican Government has approved a plan to allow an American real estate trust to invest in Mexican properties for the first time.
The trust, based in San Diego, hopes to profit from depressed Mexican real estate prices and demand for industrial space along the border.
It plans to invest about $250 million from American corporate and public pension funds in Mexico over the next three years.


Bach et al., in Churches and Halls
This is a sampling of the musical presentations planned for the holiday season at churches and concert halls in New York City.
All are free unless otherwise noted (churches accept donations).
The selection, compiled by Alex Ross, is what caught this critic's eye and excited his expectations.


Ex-Nun With Odd Habits and Friends
"Amateur" was shown as part of last year's New York Film Festival.
Following are excerpts from Caryn James's review, which appeared in The New York Times on Sept. 29.
The film opens today in Manhattan.
Many romantic triangles are bizarre, but in "Amateur," Hal Hartley has concocted the most irresistibly strange one to hit the screen in a long time.
A pretty former nun is trying to earn a living by writing for pornographic magazines.
She falls for a sensitive man who has amnesia and traces of a sordid past.
He is still married to a prostitute, who is trying to kill him and leave her old life behind.
Add to this an arms dealer who sends his thugs after the prostitute, and life couldn't be more complicated or more deliciously droll.
The nun, the amnesiac and the prostitute fit neatly into Mr.
Hartley's distinctive world, a place that is always serious and comically absurd.
"Amateur" is his most ambitious view of that world yet.


Sports of The Times; Golf's Tiger At His Best In the Woods
ON the first green of his first Masters, 19-year-old Tiger Woods walked 40 feet from his ball to the cup, walked back, hunched over, glanced at the cup, then tenderly touched his ball with his putter.
His ball rolled across the grass carpet.
And rolled.
And rolled.
It slid past the cup, then slid down a steep slope and off the green, about 30 feet from the cup.
Welcome to Augusta National, kid.
"I lost my focus on that putt," he would say later. "I went brain dead."


Orsulak Deals With Private Pain
Adrianna Orsulak can pick up Michael, her younger son, who turned 3 on Monday.
She can drive a car.
She can do most everyday things -- shop for groceries, wash the dishes, attend a baseball game.
This normalcy is like a gift now.
Joe Orsulak knows that.
His wife has no hair, and her face, neck and limbs are slightly swollen, giving her a distorted look.
He does not notice.
The cancer has become a part of their lives now, good days and bad, and, as Joe said today, the Orsulaks must simply take each day at a time.


On My Mind; Stay Home, Pole
Chancellor Helmut Kohl has refused to invite President Lech Walesa of Poland to Berlin to take part in the German observances of the end of World War II.
The decision somehow hurt Poles and others who remember that Poland was selected by an earlier German Chancellor as the country that the Wehrmacht, in connivance with the Soviet Union, would invade to start the war.


Speaker Puts Aside a Speech for a Chat


Savard Returns
Desperate for an offensive center to replace the injured JEREMY ROENICK, the Chicago Blackhawks reacquired DENIS SAVARD, one of their franchise's greatest stars, yesterday.
The Blackhawks sent a sixth-round choice in the 1996 draft to the Tampa Bay Lightning for Savard, 34, who played for Chicago from 1980-90.


Market Place; In Ingersoll-Rand's battle for Clark Equipment, the struggle for the board is crucial.
Now, as Ingersoll-Rand moves forward with its fight to buy Clark Equipment, will Clark's own employees be key in the battle?
With 12 percent of Clark's 17.03 million shares outstanding in the coffers of the Clark Leveraged Employee Stock Ownership Plan, management appears to have a handy ally if push comes to shove in the tender offer that began on Monday.
"The ESOP is a very powerful defensive mechanism," said Larry Cunningham, professor of law at the Benjamin N. Cardozo School of Law of Yeshiva University.


Outdated Sentencing Laws Inflate Prison Costs
To the Editor:
Your April 1 editorial "Re-clogging the Prisons?" is on target in stressing the need to restore funds for alternative and drug treatment programs that were cut in Gov.
George E. Pataki's budget proposals.
Otherwise, the Governor's recommended amendments, as modest as they are, to New York's mandatory sentencing laws will have little actual effect on judges seeking alternative punishments for offenders they no longer have to send to prison.


METRO DIGEST
D'AMATO APOLOGIZES AGAIN FOR REMARKS
In barely audible tones, a chastened and visibly nervous Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato delivered a rare apology on the Senate floor, calling his heavily accented remarks about the Japanese-American judge in the O. J. Simpson case, made Tuesday on a radio talk show, "totally wrong and inappropriate." A1.
NEW YORK CITY


Abroad at Home; Which Side Are We On?
"Security is like liberty in that many are the crimes committed in its name." -- Justice Robert H. Jackson, 1950  In November 1989 an American nun, Sister Diana Ortiz of the Ursuline Order, was detained by Guatemalan security police, tortured and gang-raped.
She was lucky; she came out alive.
An American doctor and the Archbishop of Guatemala City said they saw more than 100 cigarette burns on her back.


A Visit With Two Indomitable Sisters
THE most provocative and entertaining family play to reach Broadway in a long time has a cast of two, a single set and a time span of something less than two and a half hours.
Yet it contains dozens of characters, represents six generations and embraces nearly 200 years of black American life, which is also white American life.
It's Emily Mann's adaptation of "Having Our Say," the best-selling memoir by Sarah (Sadie) L. Delany and her sister Annie Elizabeth (Bessie) Delany, written with Amy Hill Hearth.
The play, which opened last night at the Booth Theater, stars two enchanting actresses: Gloria Foster, who plays Sadie at the age of 103, and Mary Alice, as Bessie at 101.


Intelligence Committee May Expel Torricelli
At the behest of Newt Gingrich, the Speaker, the House Intelligence Committee will meet behind closed doors today to decide whether to remove one of its members, New Jersey Democrat Robert G. Torricelli, for violating the committee's code of silence.
Mr.
Torricelli disclosed two weeks ago that a Guatemalan colonel linked to the slaying of an American was a paid agent of the Central Intelligence Agency.
The committee will debate whether Mr.
Torricelli should be punished for the "unauthorized disclosure of classified information," according to a published schedule.


Thomas Mandel, 49, Specialist In Developing On-Line Services
Thomas F. Mandel, a computer specialist who helped develop on-line computer services, died on Wednesday at Stanford Hospital in Stanford, Calif.
He was 49 and lived in Mountain View, Calif.
The cause was lung cancer, which he had disclosed on the electronic forums he helped create.


SEAGRAM WILL BUY 80% OF BIG STUDIO FROM MATSUSHITA
Seagram has agreed to pay $7 billion to buy 80 percent of the movie and entertainment company MCA Inc. from the Matsushita Electric Industrial Company, people close to the deal said yesterday.
Matsushita acquired MCA in 1990, during the heady days of Japanese investment in the United States, but has agreed to cede control after failing to master the vagaries of Hollywood and a disgruntled American management team.


Dark Night of a Hit Man: A Farewell to Boredom
The surest sign of life in recent American movies has been a preoccupation with cold-blooded death.
Film noir is now experiencing an exhilarating rebirth, possibly because nihilism can be so darkly invigorating and possibly because the depths of the human soul can be explored on a minimal budget.
All it takes are nerves of steel and the determination to make Linda Fiorentino ("The Last Seduction") look like a Girl Scout troop leader.
The latter is a tall order, but Mark Malone's "Bulletproof Heart" gives it an impressive try.
Mr.
Malone's sleek, malevolent thriller takes place on a single night in the life of Mick (Anthony LaPaglia), a hit man about to meet his match.
He could use a few new sparks.
Jaded by crime and by his existence as a gangland Mr.
Big, Mick is bored even by the call girl he has been sent as the hit-man equivalent of a thank-you present for a job well done.
Casually aiming a scissors in her direction, he toys with the idea of inflicting harm.
"I mean, can you tell me that it matters?" he later asks a professional colleague.


Art in Review
Peter Cain  Matthew Marks Gallery 1018 Madison Avenue (at 78th Street) Through April 25
Peter Cain loves cars.
His paintings of them are big and glossy, but curiously flat.
It's a billboard style, like that of James Rosenquist, but Mr.
Cain focuses on one motif per canvas instead of piling up seemingly unrelated images as Mr.
Rosenquist does.
Mr.
Cain's preferred motif is a car's rear end, from the back wheel to the bumpers and brake lights.
Seen from the back or from the side, flat on the ground or poking into the air, the car's posterior assumes almost iconic status.


CD's in the Spirit of the Season
Here are comments by Times classical-music critics on CD's appropriate to the Easter and Passover season.
The price of a single CD ranges from $14.98 to $21. (An introduction appears on page C1.) Bach's 'St.
Matthew Passion'
In the surviving autograph score of the "St. Matthew Passion," Bach wrote the words of the Gospel in red ink, distinguishing them from the mere words of man -- his librettist, Picander -- in black.
But Bach also knew (in keeping with his subject) that the human and the divine each contained aspects of the other.


Take Action and Blood; Sprinkle With Laughs
"Bad Boys" wasn't imagined so much as it was stitched together, like some cinematic Frankenstein's monster, from the body parts of other movies.
There is the mismatched cop-buddy angle from "Lethal Weapon," this time with Martin Lawrence as the loyal family man and Will Smith as his partner, the handsome womanizer.
As they try to track down the sophisticated thieves who stole $100 million worth of heroin from the police department's evidence room, they acquire a spunky, female sidekick, a la "Speed." There is the Miami setting from "The Specialist," exploding trucks from "True Lies" and enough shattering glass to rival either of the "Die Hards." But formulas exist because they work, and "Bad Boys" is a loud, fast, action movie laced with comedy.
In this case, the genre shows few signs of wearing itself out.
Mr.
Lawrence, a stand-up comic and star of the sitcom "Martin," and Mr.
Smith of the television series "The Fresh Prince" and the film "Six Degrees of Separation," approach their roles as comic actors rather than action stars, and their playful attitude helps.
Mr.
Lawrence is Marcus, hyperactive and easily ruffled.
Mr.
Smith is Mike, the calm one, who has a trust fund and a lavish bachelor apartment but whose dedication to his work is, of course, unrivaled.
Mike and Marcus confiscated all that heroin in the first place, only to have it stolen by an arrogant European villain (Tcheky Karyo), the logical foil to the down-home detectives.
They have four days to recover the goods before the F.B.I. steps in.


On Stage, and Off
Shake-Up on the Waterfront
It's pretty late for changes like this, but "On the Waterfront," the Budd Schulberg-Stan Silverman adaptation of the 1954 movie, replaced its director, Gordon Edelstein, with Adrian Hall this weekend.
The reason, said someone associated with the play, was that Mr.
Edelstein was "not moving fast enough," and by last Saturday the show hadn't been blocked and the actors were still discussing their motivations.
Terry Kinney, who was to play the waterfront-priest role that Karl Malden handled in the film, also left and was replaced by David Morse.
The cast didn't seem too upset by the departures, the person associated with the play said, because they had been worried about how slowly rehearsals were going.


1,600 Ex-Russian Officers Are Still in Latvia
Seven months after Russia completed its military withdrawal from the Baltics, Latvia is still home to more than 1,600 officers who were in effect retired when Moscow demobilized their units before the pullout.
Their continued presence has stirred fears among some Latvians that Russia is keeping the former officers here as a fifth column, although Moscow says they will leave by the end of this year.


F.D.A. Moves to Hasten Marketing of New Devices
Hoping to head off greater changes that might be proposed in Congress, the Clinton Administration announced plans today to have the Food and Drug Administration ease the way to market for some new drugs and medical devices.
Among the plans is a two-year pilot program in which review of a number of medical devices will be turned over to private groups.


House and Science Panels Clash on Wetlands' Fate
The House of Representatives is moving toward a collision with a panel of eminent scientists over one of the most bitter environmental disputes before the Congress: the fate of the nation's dwindling wetlands.
Today, the House Committee on Transportation and Public Works approved revisions to the Clean Water Act that would sharply narrow the definition of which wetlands need Federal protection.
The new definition would probably end Federal jurisdiction over at least half the regulated wetlands, and many scientists say it is an arbitrary definition without any scientific foundation.


Kidnappings Soar in Latin America, Threatening Region's Stability
Every six hours, a kidnapping is reported in Colombia.
Every four days a kidnapping is reported in Rio de Janeiro.
But these two places, notorious though they may be, are just the tip of an iceberg of abductions looming over Latin America.
Huge income disparities, inefficient police forces, and near-total impunity for kidnappers are transforming Latin America into the world's top region for ransom kidnapping.
The threat is inhibiting investment in the region and is forcing wealthy Latin Americans to use private guards, high walls and armored cars for protection.


Javits Union Boss Says He Just Scrapes By
The union official who has been accused of being the Mafia's overseer at the Jacob K. Javits Convention Center says he is so fearful of having his assets seized by his estranged wife and other creditors that he is forced to live without a bank account, a credit card or a car of his own.
Testifying to save his job as the top official of the carpenters' union at the center, Anthony D. Fiorino said yesterday that even with a yearly salary of about $100,000, he barely scrapes by after taxes, support payments for his 10-year-old daughter and expenses to stay in shape as a paddle ball player.


Advance Magazines Announce Changes
There have been advertising and personnel changes at magazines owned by Advance Publications.
Maurie Perl, a spokeswoman for The New Yorker, said yesterday that the magazine had selected Ammirati &amp; Puris/Lintas in New York, a unit of the Interpublic Group of Companies, as its agency of record.
The agency is working on a project, she added, for which the billings were not disclosed.
The New Yorker's trade account had been unassigned since September, when the magazine and Berlin Wright Cameron Doyle in New York parted company after eight months.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  *
Comdisco Inc., Rosemont, Ill., is selling $200 million of notes due in 1998 through Smith Barney Inc.
The notes are priced at 99.768 to yield 7.337 percent.
The noncallable issue is rated Baa2 by Moody's Investors Service Inc., BBB by the Standard &amp; Poor's Corp. and BBB+ by Duff &amp; Phelps.


Corrections
Because of a transcription error, an article yesterday about Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato's remarks about Judge Lance A. Ito misquoted the Senator at one point in some editions.
In his conversation with the radio host Don Imus, he said: "I mean, this is a disgrace. Judge Ito will be well known." He did not say, "Judge Ito with the wet nose."


Merkley Newman Has a Big Night
Merkley Newman Harty in New York took top honors last night, winning five awards, at the FCS Portfolio Awards ceremony honoring excellence in financial advertising, sponsored by the Financial Communications Society.


Richard Joyce Smith, 92, Trustee In New Haven Rail Bankruptcy
Richard Joyce Smith, who as a trustee helped to guide the New Haven Railroad through a long and tricky bankruptcy reorganization, died at his home in Southport, Conn., on Wednesday.
He was 92.
The cause of death was congestive heart failure, according to the family.


Whitman Protested in Capital
Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman was in town yesterday for parties at Union Station for the New Jersey Republican State Committee and the Atlantic City Convention and Visitors Authority.
Waiting to greet her were protesters from the United States Public Interest Research Group, upset because Mrs.
Whitman signed a bill that could cut student donations to the group in New Jersey.


Fireman's Enlarged Heart
A firefighter whose death prompted an investigation by the State Health Department into the emergency care he received had an enlarged heart and probably suffered a heart attack at the scene of a Brooklyn blaze last month, a senior Giuliani administration official said.


Little-Noted Tiptoe Through a Closing Loophole
The dialogue between the two Senators on March 24 was practically incomprehensible: Senator Carol Moseley-Braun, the Illinois Democrat, and Senator Bob Packwood, the Oregon Republican who is chairman of the Finance Committee, were discussing "material terms" and "binding contract exceptions."
Nobody mentioned any names or explained any issues.
No outsider could have understood what they were talking about.
Indeed, no one could have heard them anyway -- both sides of the dialogue were inserted into the Congressional Record without ever having been spoken out loud.


Transactions
Baseball  American League
DETROIT TIGERS -- Agreed to terms with Jeff Tackett, catcher, on a one-year contract.
Invited Brian Barnes, Brian Bohanon, Kent Bottenfield, Dwayne Henry, Terry Leach and Kevin Wickander, pitchers; Terry McGriff and Ron Tingley, catchers; and Kevin Baez and Franklin Stubbs, infielders, to spring training as non-roster players.


Foster Mother's Trial Opens
Did a Camden woman take in four foster children "out of the milk of human kindness," as her lawyer says?
Or did she routinely abuse them, once forcing a 7-year-old girl to eat a dead rat, as prosecutors charge?
Gioconda Rivera, 33, is on trial here, charged with endangering the welfare of the children who were put in her care by the state.
SUSAN JO KELLER


Routine for Mattingly: The Here and the Now
Don Mattingly has a ritual for spring training, even when it begins two months late.
He ducks into the manager's office for a brief chat, hugs the clubhouse manager, Nick Priore, carefully places his Gold Glove Award-winning first baseman mitts in his locker and rushes to break his first Florida sweat.
Just as routine is Mattingly's first speech, the annual state of the Yankees address.
He is not the team's president, just the captain.
He is not the Boss.
George Steinbrenner's constant presence here leaves no doubt.
But Mattingly is still the most popular Yankee and the player most respected by teammates, so his initial words are usually scrutinized.


Critic's Choice/Film; Indian Classic of 1955 Restored and Reissued
In the most dramatic scene in Satyajit Ray's 1955 masterpiece, "Pather Panchali," a woman and her two children huddle inside their dilapidated shack in a rural Bengali village while a furious storm threatens to bring the structure down on their heads.
The older child, Durga (Uma Das Gupta), is consumed with fever.
Wild-eyed with terror, her mother, Sarbajaya (Karuna Banerjee), desperately tries to keep the wind from blasting down the door while comforting Durga and applying cold compresses to her brow.
"Pather Panchali," which today opens an extended retrospective of the Indian director's work at the Lincoln Plaza Cinemas (Broadway at 63d Street), has many themes.
But its most powerful imagery contemplates human beings in the natural world struggling along with every other creature for simple survival.
In the 40 years since it was released, the film remains unsurpassed at conveying an elemental apprehension of the human life cycle in a Neo-Realist style.


New Virus Blamed in Deaths of Australian Man and Horses
A mysterious outbreak of a deadly disease that killed one man and 14 racehorses and then subsided as inexplicably as it began has been traced to a new virus by researchers in Australia, where the outbreak occurred.
The virus, which has not been named, was found to have the characteristics of the morbilliform family, which includes the measles virus, the researchers are reporting in today's issue of Science.
It is the first new virus in the family to attack humans since what is now known as measles in the 10th century.


Hurley All-Star Coach
A high school all-star game pitting a United States squad against an international team has been added to the induction weekend at the Basketball Hall of Fame in Springfield, Mass., on May 13.


Third Trial Sought
Prosecutors in Hamburg, Germany, want another chance to imprison the German lathe operator who stabbed MONICA SELES two years ago because he wanted Steffi Graf to become No. 1 in women's tennis.
GUNTER PARCHE, given a two-year suspended sentence at his first trial in October 1993, was hauled back into court last month by prosecutors seeking a prison term.
Seles's attorneys had also appealed.
But Judge GERTRAUT GORING on Monday confirmed the earlier sentence.
The new appeal was lodged yesterday.
Parche, 41, stabbed Seles in the back with a kitchen knife as she sat on a courtside bench during the 1993 Hamburg Open.
She has not played competitively since. (AP)


Pathologist Says 5 Children Died of Deliberate Suffocation
Testifying in the trial of a woman charged with killing her five young children, the chief forensic pathologist of the New York State Police said today that all five had been deliberately suffocated and were not, as was originally believed, victims of crib death.
One after another, Dr.
Michael M. Baden read aloud from the original death certificates of Waneta E. Hoyt's five children, who died between 1965 and 1971.
Then one after another, Dr.
Baden questioned the causes of death determined at the time, citing as his evidence autopsies he performed after the youngsters' bodies were exhumed in January.


For Lung Cancer, Screening Has Value
To the Editor:
"Cancer Tests Don't Always Raise Survival Rates" by John P. Roberts, M.D. (letter, March 31), shows how difficult it is to stay current and may perpetuate misinformation about lung cancer.


Home Video
Academy Award tie-ins help sell videos, and this month Oscar-related titles including "Forrest Gump," "The Shawshank Redemption," "Quiz Show" and "Blue Sky" will appear in stores.
So will "Ed Wood," Tim Burton's black-and-white film starring Johnny Depp as the 1950's director fondly remembered as one of the worst film makers ever.
With two Oscars to show for its two nominations (for makeup and Martin Landau as supporting actor), the Touchstone film batted a thousand at the awards ceremony last week and will be released on tape by Buena Vista on April 18.
And any movie about a director naturally portrays the making of other movies by that director.
"Ed Wood" has several such titles, each with a video connection.


First Round Goes to Holmes, Without a Punch
In baggy old jeans and loose-fitting T-shirt, Larry Holmes worked the dining room at Caesars.
Whether you asked for it or not, he signed autographs on table linen.
And after his workouts, sweating, with a towel around his shoulders, he looked out over the crowd and launched into 20-minute soliloquies about life, and boxing, reminding the fans that they were seeing one of history's great fighters.


Royals Shed Cone; Braves Get Grissom
David Cone, the American League Cy Young Award winner who only last week said he thought he would be traded because of his union activity, was traded yesterday, but the Kansas City Royals said they sent the pitcher to the Toronto Blue Jays for economic, not punitive, reasons.
The Montreal Expos, acting from the same payroll-tightening motivation, completed a frenzied two-day effort later in the day by trading their outstanding center fielder and leadoff batter, Marquis Grissom, to the Atlanta Braves for three players, including two major league outfielders, Roberto Kelly and Tony Tarasco.


Warsaw Journal; Think You Waited for the Subway? Try 70 Years
Seventy years after the first hole was dug, Warsaw's subway system formally opens on Friday.
Despite what can only be politely called a protracted period of construction (to be fair, there were decades of downtime), the system is one of Europe's shortest.
Modern but modest, the subway runs 11 stops over 6.5 miles and boasts Russian-built cars, an American communications system, a Swiss computerized central command post and Italian graffiti-proof station tiles.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
9.00
9.00
6.25
DISCOUNT RATE
5.25
5.25
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
5.94
5.98
3.46
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.65
5.67
3.52
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.79
5.83
3.92
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.06
7.09
6.86
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.34
7.36
7.21
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.21
8.24
8.05
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.30
6.32
6.45
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills 8


Blackout at L.I. Control Center Delays Takeoffs in the Northeast
A power failure at an air traffic control center on Long Island blacked out the controllers' radar screens for nine minutes early yesterday and disabled computers for hours.
The failure did not cause any accidents but it delayed departures from airports around the Northeast for up to an hour.
Christopher S. Boughn, the president of the chapter of the National Air Traffic Controllers Association at the center, in Ronkonkoma, said, "We lost all the power except for the battery-operated lights." Because of the hour, about 3:30 A.M., there were only 28 airplanes under the center's control, he said.
"At that hour, it was all package haulers," he said.


Milton Horn, 88, A Sculptor Known For Public Artworks
Milton Horn, a figurative sculptor known for his public commissions, died on March 29 at the Rush-Presbyterian-St.
Luke's Medical Center in Chicago.
He was 88 years old and lived in the Lincoln Park neighborhood of Chicago.
He died after a long illness, said Paula Garrett-Ellis, a friend of the artist.


The Unsolved Mysteries of Memory
The persistence and fallibility of memory has been a central, if often hidden, theme in Mary Lucier's video installations of the last two decades.
In "Last Rites (Positano)," her terrific new piece at the Lennon, Weinberg Gallery in SoHo, Ms.
Lucier addresses the fluidity of the past and the urgency and impossibility of preserving it, in what is by far her most explicitly autobiographical work.
Combining still photographs and interviews presented on video monitors and through speakers scattered about the gallery and items of furniture suspended in midair as if in the wake of an explosion, the piece recounts a central incident in Ms.
Lucier's family history.
As with most such stories, details and even crucial facts are remembered differently, with family members offering competing tales that are fragmented, repetitive and contradictory.


A Rout Leaves Rangers Hopeful
In the locker room after the Rangers' most one-sided victory of the season -- a 5-0 conquest of the Florida Panthers -- Adam Graves was easy to spot.
The left wing's face, after a few days in the Florida sun, was as red as an overripe tomato.
"He's been bobbing for french fries," a teammate cracked.


Commuter Jet Lands on Its Back Wheels


To Follow the Pope or Conscience?
To the Editor:
The 11th Roman Catholic encyclical letter, titled "The Gospel of Life," by John Paul II (front page, March 31) poses hazards for the faithful.
Raised to follow the Catholic Church's edicts, many may find it more Christian to follow their consciences when it comes to abortion and euthanasia than to follow the commands of this Pope.


Major Retailers' Sales in March Were Weaker Than Expected
In a sign that higher interest rates may be pinching consumers, the big retailers reported March sales figures yesterday that were weaker than expected.
Analysts and merchandisers alike had been prepared for a poor year-over-year comparison, if only because Easter fell much earlier in 1994 than it does this year.
As a consequence, some sales that occurred last year in late March may be pushed into early April this year.


A Day of Problems In Simpson's Trial, And New Questions
The trial of O. J. Simpson appeared to come unglued today, as the topic shifted from contaminated gloves and blood to a possibly contaminated -- and maybe even endangered -- jury.
Three jurors reported sick today, halting testimony in the case.
But illness was only one of the jury's problems.
There were also questions, prompted by the comments of a juror excused on Wednesday, about whether jurors lied to serve in so celebrated a case, were prematurely discussing the case among themselves and were circumventing sequestration by making unsupervised phone calls.


CHRONICLE
When ANGELA LANSBURY steps onto the Carnegie Hall stage tomorrow to narrate a concert version of "Anyone Can Whistle," she will be returning to a momentous chapter in her past.
"I had never sung in a Broadway musical before," Ms.
Lansbury said yesterday of the 1964 show by Stephen Sondheim and Arthur Laurents.
"Jerry Herman saw me in it and cast me as Mame. He believed that I could carry a musical even though there was much opposition from the producers.


Reporter's Notebook; Koch Lends His Voice To Pataki's Word War
To New Yorkers with long memories, it may have seemed a bit incongruous to hear former Mayor Edward I. Koch the last few days blasting Assembly Speaker Sheldon Silver for reinforcing the upstate stereotype of New Yorkers as rude and insolent.
Mr.
Koch began his denunciation on his WABC radio show on Wednesday, when he criticized Mr.
Silver, a Manhattan Democrat, for "turning the position of Speaker into a caricature." He continued it today at a Manhattan news conference with Gov.
George E. Pataki, saying that Mr.
Silver's behavior in his budget feud with Mr.
Pataki had been disgraceful.


Liam Neeson: Man in Kilts
HONEST clansmen and corrupt aristocrats lock horns across the windswept Scottish terrain during "Rob Roy," but for now let's talk about kilts.
Liam Neeson, sporting the tartan of the MacGregors, swaggers so nobly and manfully across the landscape that he shows off the kilt as the legitimate power suit of the Highlands.
While ushering in a spring fashion trendlet that will also feature Mel Gibson (whose "Braveheart" is on the horizon), Mr.
Neeson brings to mind another Mel.
It's Brooks, and he's out of luck: at least "Rob Roy" is no "Men in Tights" in the making.
Instead, "Rob Roy" gives Mr.
Neeson his first cinematic opportunity to show off the robust physicality that made his performance on stage in "Anna Christie" such a sensation.
Along with the presence of Jessica Lange, who plays the sauciest mate in all Scotland, that charisma partly compensates for long, dry stretches of "Rob Roy" and a plot too ponderous and uninteresting for the film's visual sweep.
So "Rob Roy" is best watched for local color and for its hearty, hot-blooded stars.
Speaking of which, Ms.
Lange may be the screen's first actress to slide her hand under the kilt of a leading man.





Alms for the Affluent
House Republicans approved the last major element of their Contract With America this week by proposing to hand voters a $189 billion tax cut over five years.
At the same time, in a second, less splashy part of the bill, they proposed a $315 billion cut in discretionary spending (after accounting for inflation) over five years.
The tax cuts are tilted toward the wealthy; the spending cuts are tilted against the poor.
The double whammy makes the contract an outrageously unfair transfer of income from the needy to the rich.


After 33 Years, Competitors Don't Worry This Paper
RUTH MOLENAAR knows bold-faced news when she sees it.
Controversy on the the Puerto Rican parade.
A proclamation on Dominican Heritage Month.
A move to strengthen the embargo against Cuba.
The plight of refugees at Guantanamo Bay.
"A little bit for everybody," she said. "Or a lot for everybody."


Christian Pineau, French Hero And Foreign Minister, Dies at 90
Christian Pineau, a leader of the French Resistance who became one of postwar France's most active Foreign Ministers, died on Wednesday in Paris.
He was 90 and had homes in Paris and Vence, a resort in the French Alps.
A gentlemanly politician and Socialist, he served as Foreign Minister from 1956 to 1958.
During his tenure he signed the Treaty of Rome, one of the foundations on which the European Union is built, and spoke for France to a skeptical world in the Suez War in 1956.


Islanders Keep Trading: Hogue Dealt to Toronto
Spring cleaning has taken hold here. With a vengeance.
In the aftermath of the most significant -- and controversial -- trade Don Maloney has ever made, the Islander general manager's phone was still ringing today in anticipation of Friday's 3 P.M. trading deadline.


Corrections
A chart yesterday showing temperatures in Central Park misstated the days covered in some editions.
The figures were for Monday, Tuesday and Wednesday, not Tuesday, Wednesday and Thursday.


Treasuries Increase in Price On New Signs of Slowdown
Prices of Treasury securities ended higher yesterday on growing confidence that the economy was slowing.
Reports by retailers of weak sales in March and and an increase in new claims for unemployment insurance for the week supported the market's view of a slowdown.
But ahead of today's employment report few investors were willing yesterday to make large bets before the number was released, and trading was a lackluster.


'Megan's Law' Wins a Round
A state judge said yesterday that convicted sex offenders could be required to give local police their names, addresses and other information.
Twelve offenders from Passaic County had argued against the provisions in New Jersey's notification law for sex offenders who are released from prison.


Erich Fayer, Canadian Owner Of the Balmain Fashion House
Erich Fayer, a Canadian businessman who owned the French fashion house Pierre Balmain, has died, Reuters reported yesterday.
The news service said a statement issued by Balmain in Paris did not indicate when or how Mr.
Fayer had died.
But a report in Women's Wear Daily yesterday said Mr.
Fayer died on Tuesday in a hospital in Brussels.
The fashion industry newspaper attributed the cause of death to a "weak heart that plagued him throughout his latter years."


Accounts
* 2-Way Media Inc., Santa Monica, Calif., to Lois Colby, Los Angeles, a unit of Lois/USA, to introduce Launch, a bimonthly entertainment CD-ROM magazine.
The billings were estimated at $10 million.


An Upright, Ethical and Kind Lawyer. Really.
'Water'  PBS (In New York, Channel 13, tonight at 10)
Big decisions on what to do about water are explored in four reports, from California, Australia, Mexico City and New Zealand, each stiffly introduced by James Earl Jones as if he were rationing his words.
Although the hour does not exactly flow, it is a fount of information about the fight in Southern California over diverting to Los Angeles water once used for agriculture, the waste of fresh water in Australia's Great Artesian Basin, the dire shortages in crowded Mexico City and the consequences for New Zealand of its reliance on hydroelectric dams.
WALTER GOODMAN


'Fully Prepared,' Bennett Opts for N.B.A.
MARIO BENNETT, whose knee injuries limited his career at Arizona State to 87 games over four seasons, passed up his final year of eligbility yesterday and declared for the National Basketball Association draft.
"I'm fully prepared for the challenge that is ahead of me, and I'm confident that I not only can make it but make it big," he told a news conference in Tempe, Ariz.
Bennett, a 6-foot-9-inch, 230-pound center who led the Sun Devils to their first N.C.A.A. regional semifinal game in 20 years, said getting into the N.B.A. ahead of a rookie salary cap proposed for 1996 wasn't a major consideration.


Corrections
A report in the Food Notes column in The Living Section on Wednesday misstated the location of an exhibition of artworks involving chocolate.
It is on the third floor of the the Swiss Institute, which is at 495 Broadway (near Broome Street).


Family One-Upmanship In the Darker Realms
Flesh and Blood
By Michael Cunningham
466 pages. Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux. $22.
"Flesh and Blood," the new novel by the acclaimed author of "A Home at the End of the World," wants to be a kind of 20th-century American version of "Buddenbrooks" -- a four-generation family saga that opens out into a portrait of society at large.
But while Thomas Mann's masterpiece used the gradual spiritual and material decline of a well-to-do German family to depict the eclipse of the European bourgeoisie, Michael Cunningham's novel simply delineates a sprawling clan of dysfunctional, dyspeptic individuals, suffering from an assortment of neuroses and desires.


Touring the Outer Limits of the LeWitt Sensibility
In the early 1960's, Sol LeWitt hit on a few simple, supposedly Minimalist ideas, and since then he has never run out of things to do.
His spare yet ever-expanding vocabulary includes white grid sculptures capable of a nearly Piranesian complexity, and a profusion of wall drawings in pencil and bright ink that have left few geometric stones unturned.
These drawings are executed by assistants following written instructions whose fusion of the linguistic, the visual and the philosophical makes them a minor art form in their own right.
With Mr.
LeWitt's photographs, prints and drawings on paper taken into account, no one except Donald Judd has so thoroughly overturned the notion of the Minimal while remaining true to first principles.
At the moment, three sides of Mr.
LeWitt's complex sensibility are visible in exhibitions in SoHo and the South Village, more than Manhattan has seen in some time.
A show of enormous sculptures at Ace Gallery New York is buttressed by an exhibition of wall drawings at the Lawrence Markey Gallery and a show of 45 working drawings on paper at the John Weber Gallery, the artist's longtime representative.
Ranging from the grandiose to the delicately reticent, these shows hardly tell the whole story of Mr.
LeWitt's rich achievement, but they indicate some of its outer limits.


Time to Break Up the Banking Behemoths?; Chase Manhattan Confronts Criticism That Its Reach Exceeds Its Grasp
Are banking behemoths too ambitious for their own good?
That's the very pesky question implicitly posed by Michael F. Price, the mutual fund manager who has suddenly become the Chase Manhattan Corporation's most important investor.
The answer may have profound implications not only for Chase, but also for the half-dozen or so other so-called money center banks that are virtual conglomerates.
These banks try to serve everyone from the smallest depositor to the largest corporation while pursuing a melange of other businesses ranging from currency trading to securities safekeeping.


School Bus Drivers Threaten Strike if Contracts Are Bid
Shrugging off threats of an imminent bus drivers' strike, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani is mounting a vigorous campaign to change the way New York City awards contracts for busing schoolchildren.
He wants to eliminate longstanding union provisions that his aides argue have created the most expensive busing system in the country.
Some bus contracts are about to expire, and Mr.
Giuliani is pressuring the Schools Chancellor to recommend that the Board of Education open the contracts to competitive bidding for the first time in 16 years.
His aides say that competition could save at least $100 million of the $283 million the board now spends on student transportation.


CD's in the Spirit of the Season
Here are comments by Times classical-music critics on CD's appropriate to the Easter and Passover season.
The price of a single CD ranges from $14.98 to $21. (An introduction appears on page C1.) Handel's 'Israel in Egypt'
Listeners searching for the Passover story in the Western musical canon have little to choose from and nothing to rival Handel's exquisite 1738 oratorio "Israel in Egypt." Rossini's "Mose in Egitto" is a hopelessly muddled rendering, and Schoenberg's idiosyncratic "Moses und Aron" focuses on Moses' ascent to leadership and his 40 days on Mount Sinai, skipping the Exodus.


Turk Sees Foray in Iraq Ending in Few Weeks
With his country facing intense international pressure to end its attack against Kurds in northern Iraq, the Turkish Foreign Minister, Erdal Inonu, has said Turkey will withdraw its troops from there in "a few weeks."
In a meeting with reporters Wednesday night, Mr.
Inonu said the 35,000 Turkish troops who crossed into Iraq would be pulled out as soon as they finish ferreting out what he said were several thousand Kurdish terrorists living in caves.


The Modern and Romantic In a Single Fluid Movement
To celebrate its 10th anniversary, the Leonardo Trio is playing a three-concert series at the Miller Theater in which the centerpiece of each program is an installment of Wolfgang Rihm's "Fremde Szene" cycle.
Mr.
Rihm, one of the more interesting composers working in Germany today, is an eclectic, and in "Fremde Szene II," the trio's offering on Tuesday, he weaves shards of Romanticism into a texture that is by turn eerie, vehement, harsh and lyrical.
Those diverse qualities may seem a lot to pack into a single-movement, 20-minute work, but Mr.
Rihm writes in a fluid style that makes the progression seem natural.
At the same time, he moves back and forth between true interplay and apparent chaos.
Often the violin and cello pursue a theme in tandem while the piano explores music of an entirely different character; yet a moment later the three lines are closely intertwined.


Gaza Arabs Dispute Origin Of Sunday's Mystery Blast
A mysterious explosion in Gaza that killed a senior Muslim militant and several other Palestinians on Sunday has set off a contest of credibility between the Palestinian Authority and its chief rival, the Islamic group Hamas.
In a stream of public statements and leaflets this week, both sides have offered conflicting explanations of how the explosion occurred, their debate growing into a war of words to win over ordinary Gazans angered by the carnage in a crowded neighborhood.


Diner's Journal
Mystery Woman Is Right
Last week as I was strolling across West 56th Street, I spotted an elegant Japanese woman walking into a sushi bar.
I have seen the woman several times at Daniel and Lespinasse, and although I had planned to eat somewhere else, I was curious to see whether her taste in Japanese food was as good as her taste in French food.
I followed her in the door.
Kurumazushi is small and dark, and the sushi bar takes up most of the space.
She bowed.
The chef bowed.
She sat down, and an animated discussion ensued.
They seemed to know each other.


Beneath the Barrage, The Modern's Little Show
After a walk through the multimedia sound and fury of Bruce Nauman's retrospective at the Museum of Modern Art, with its shouting voices and casts of dead animals, even the hardiest viewer may want to decompress.
Tom Friedman's little show of paintings and sculptures in the museum's lobby gallery is a good place to start.
If Mr.
Nauman's recent work is big, loud and heavy -- brow-beatingly sardonic when it's funny, just brow-beating when it's not -- Mr.
Friedman's work is light and small, so small that it could easily escape notice.
To take an example: a minute white speck of material under Plexiglas on the wall turns out to be a self-portrait of the artist carved from an aspirin tablet.


Art in Review
Edward Avedisian 'Paintings of 1962 and 1963'  Mitchell Algus Gallery 25 Thompson Street SoHo Through April 22
These bright, asssured paintings by Edward Avedisian have not been seen in New York since they were made in the early 1960's.
Their vibrant, carefully pitched colors and controlled but clearly hand-painted lines and shapes -- pink stripes on rust encircled by pink, yellow and chartreuse, for example -- look incredibly fresh.
They give 50's biomorphism street smarts and speak of a moment just before the Big Three of 60's art -- Pop, Minimalism and Color Field Painting -- emerged as official and mutually exclusive designations and the taped edge came to be the abstract painter's best friend.
Abstract painting that was neither expressionist nor traditionally geometric was something of a rage: Frank Stella had just taken the art world by storm, and Kenneth Noland and Larry Poons were doing their best work.
So was Mr.
Avedisian.
ROBERTA SMITH


Cott Corp.(COTTF,NNM) reports earnings for Year to Jan 28


Muller Keeps Islanders Waiting for Now
Kirk Muller wasn't in uniform for the Islanders last night when they beat the Rangers by 4-3 at Madison Square Garden.
He wasn't even in New York City or on Long Island.
Obtained from the Canadiens in a multiplayer deal on Wednesday, Muller remained in Montreal and was granted what the Islanders called "personal time" he requested before reporting.
"The New York Islanders organization is more than willing to give him the time he needs to get his affairs in order," said General Manager Don Maloney.
"He was terribly upset about the deal -- being traded, not being traded to the Islanders, just being traded. He needs some time to get himself straightened out.


Corrections
An article on Thursday about the launching of an Israeli satellite misspelled the launching site.
It was Palmachim, not Pamachim.


Reviews/Fashion; Ghost's Hip Party and Clothes to Match
One reason entertainers gravitate toward fashion is that it has so much in common with their world: the iron-fist-in-velvet-glove nature of the business, the florid personalities, the buzz, the egos, the pretty women and the pressure to create.
Last year's hit CD is as irrelevant as last season's best-selling sweater.
So when a crowd of fashion editors, along with Quentin Crisp, Milla Jovovich, Minnie Driver, Darren Star (who produces the television shows "Melrose Place" and "Beverly Hills 90210") and the designers Marc Jacobs and Anna Sui packed the dimly lighted Oyster Bar at Grand Central Terminal on Thursday night for the Ghost show, it seemed for all the world like a hip music-industry party to welcome Sony Music's next big star.


Haitian Artists' Colony Flourishes in Queens
Nestled between the bodegas and car repair shops on a corner in the southeastern Queens community of Jamaica sits the Active Art Gallery, hardly the place one would expect to find some of the most colorful artworks in New York City.
But this is precisely where a large group of Haitian artists, some renowned in their homeland, regularly exhibit their work.
More than 100 Haitian artists have settled in and near this neighborhood, part of an immigrant community that was based for years in Manhattan and Brooklyn.
Many of them have not been in Haiti for decades, but they continue to paint Haitian scenes, taking their inspiration from news accounts and resurrecting images of their past from conversations with friends.


Critics Claim Javits Chief Is Not Up to the Challenge
At a small hospital tucked among the sloping woods of this Westchester County community, Robert Boyle is considered a savior.
As the volunteer chairman of the Hudson Valley Hospital Center, he brought in a new management team that helped rescue it from the brink of financial failure, turning it into a thriving competitor among the region's nonprofit hospitals.
To admiring staff members, one administrator said, "he walks on water."


Times Ads Available Over America Online
Beginning today, the three largest Sunday classified advertising sections of The New York Times will be available through the week to subscribers of the America Online computer service.
The new service is accessible from the main screen of @times, The Times's on-line service, and includes the help wanted, real estate and automotive advertisements from tomorrow's newspaper.
Several newspapers, including The Chicago Tribune and The San Jose Mercury News in California, already offer classified advertising on line.


INSIDE
Jobless Rate Inches Up
The Government reported that unemployment rose one-tenth of 1 percent in March, confirming that the economy is slowing.
Page 39.
Action on Global Warming
Delegates at a United Nations conference agreed to open negotiations to fix new limits on gases thought to contribute to global warning.
Page 4.
Challenge to DNA Fails
The defense lost a challenge to the admissibility of DNA evidence in the O. J. Simpson murder trial.
Page 6.
Shipments to Serbia
Oil rigs shipped from Iran to Serbia violated sanctions against Belgrade, western officials say.
Page 5.
2 Arts


Obsessed With Reality
The branch of a tree is as much its three-dimensional self as insubstantial shadow in Sally Gross's "Bits of Order" at the Dia Center for the Arts.
A woman slams back and forth inside two women's arms in "Out of Old Mythologies," yet the atmosphere is one of stillness.
Ms.
Gross's fascination with the accouterments of reality was at the heart of a program of six new and recent dances and excerpts that she presented on Thursday night.
That fascination was captured most perfectly -- and most wittily -- in "Raw Materials."
The piece looked at first like everything Ms.
Gross has avoided over her three decades of marching to her own choreographic drum.
A Minimalist, she was sharing the empty stage space with a monitor, a stool, a roll of white paper, and wood and metal percussive objects.
For a time, too, the video pictures that initially accompanied the live action seemed to have been achieved through that outworn device of live transmission.


Curtain Rises on Gambling
Casinos' activities were not allowed to be visible to passers-by on the Boardwalk and beach when gambling was legalized in 1977, but there is a new game in town.
The Grand casino's 12,000-foot expansion of its gambling area has floor-to-ceiling windows onto the Boardwalk.
The extension also ends a tradition of keeping gamblers from being reminded of the outside world.
Bradford S. Smith, chairman of the State Casino Control Commission, said he had no problem with casinos openly displaying their wares.
"Times have changed," he said.
"Gambling is much more accepted."


Windblown


Bridge
A woman has not won the Vanderbilt Knockout Team Championship in 32 years, but it may happen here this week at the American Contract Bridge League's Spring Nationals.
Rita Shugart of Pebble Beach, Calif., with a star-studded professional team, Thursday upset a favored squad headed by Nick Nickell of Raleigh, N.C.
The Shugart team, which includes Andrew Robson of Pebble Beach, Calif., David Berkowitz of Old Tappan, N.J., Larry Cohen of Little Falls, N.J., Michael Seamon of Miami Beach and Steve Sion of Las Vegas, Nev., built up a big early lead and held on to win by 25 imps.
In semifinal play today they face George Steiner of Seattle, Joseph Silver of Montreal, Ron Gerard of White Plains and Mike Kamil of Teaneck, N.J., who came from behind last night to win by 15 against Mike Moss of Manhattan and his team.


Judge Dismisses Case Against Police Officer
A judge yesterday dismissed charges against a police officer of the 30th Precinct in Harlem who had been videotaped slapping and kicking an undercover officer he said he believed was a drug dealer.
The indicted officer, Michael Kennedy, was one of the first members of the precinct to be arrested in what has become the biggest police corruption scandal in the city in decades.
So far, 33 officers have been arrested on a variety of charges, from perjury to drug dealing to tampering with evidence, and 15 have pleaded guilty.


Nine on Ballot in French Presidential Vote
Nine candidates were officially cleared today to appear on the ballot in the first round of the French presidential election on April 23.
A runoff vote between the two top candidates is expected on May 7.
The list of those who got the required endorsements of 500 elected officials from around the country includes two conservatives -- the front-runner and Mayor of Paris, Jacques Chirac, and Prime Minister Edouard Balladur, who for the past month has been trading second place in the public opinion polls with the Socialist candidate, Lionel Jospin.


Philippine Economy Spurs Human Exports
To the Editor:
Re "Why the Philippines Exports Its Children" (letter, April 1): While the Philippine population growth rate "is one of the highest in the world," as George Raymond Tyndall says, it is too sweeping to conclude that that is the main problem in the Philippines.
Nor should anyone make too much of the conflict on this question between the Roman Catholic Church and the Government.


Jobless Rate Rose to 5.5% During March
The slackened pace of economic growth showed up clearly in the job market last month as factories failed to add workers for the first time since September and the unemployment rate inched up one-tenth of a point, to 5.5 percent, Labor Department figures showed today.
The March results, a bit weaker than expected, were further confirmation that the economy, as policy makers desire, is decelerating rapidly to about half its breakneck 5.1 percent growth pace of late 1994.


Roadway Services Inc.(ROAD,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 25


Iraq Dismisses Limited Plan to Ease Sanctions
Iraq's Deputy Prime Minister seemed today to dismiss as unacceptable a new Security Council plan that would allow his country to sell a limited amount of oil to raise money for medicine, food and other essential supplies.
The Baghdad Government says that the sanctions imposed by the United Nations in 1990 and modified after the Persian Gulf war prohibiting most exports and imports by Iraq are causing severe hardships for ordinary people.


Give Minor Leaguers Some Major Benefits
To the Editor:
Hallelujah!
Major league baseball's owners and players have declared a truce in their battle for control of the national pastime.
Now that fans have been guaranteed a 1995 season, I would like to defend the much-maligned replacement players.


Woman Who Killed Mother Denied Harvard Admission
Harvard University has rescinded its offer of early admission to what had seemed to be a perfect candidate after learning that she had killed her mother five years ago.
The candidate, Gina Grant, 19, a high school senior, is a straight-A student, captain of her school tennis team and has taught biology to underprivileged sixth- and seventh-graders in Cambridge, Mass.
But in 1990, in what Ms.
Grant said was an attempt to defend herself from an alcoholic parent and what prosecutors called a vicious murder, Ms.
Grant bludgeoned her mother to death in Lexington, S.C.


For Toxic Dredgings, Try Deep Ocean Sites
To the Editor:
The decision by New York's Governor and New York City's Mayor to override plans by the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey and the Army Corps of Engineers to dump toxic harbor dredgings within half a mile of Coney Island and Staten Island beaches represents only a partial victory for common sense in environmental matters (news article, April 1).


New Jersey Democrat Has Enemies to Thank for Reprieve in House
All week long, Speaker Newt Gingrich has been saying he wants to throw Representative Robert G. Torricelli off the House Intelligence Committee.
He and others in the House were angry that Mr.
Torricelli had revealed evidence of Central Intelligence Agency links to the killer of an American in Guatemala.
But in the end, House Republicans decided today that they so disliked Mr.
Toricelli, Democrat of New Jersey, that they did not want to make him a martyr.
And at the last moment this afternoon they referred the matter to the House ethics committee instead.


The White House Safety Net
The conviction this week of a man who fired an assault rifle at the White House reminds us that in the blink of an eye the nation could lose its chief executive.
Likewise, the announcement that Ronald Reagan suffers from Alzheimer's reminds us that Presidents are human.
This is why in 1967 the states ratified the 25th Amendment, which insures an orderly transition of Presidential power -- temporarily or permanently.


The Du Pont Deal Was Done With Taxes Much in Mind
The Seagram Company's sale of most of its Du Pont stock back to Du Pont seems to have been carefully engineered to avoid Federal income taxes.
Those tax savings -- of much more than $1 billion -- help to mitigate the fact that Seagram was forced to accept a below-market price in getting rid of the stock.
It appears that tax avoidance -- not any great faith in the future of Du Pont -- was the reason that Seagram structured the deal to allow it eventually to buy back a large stake in Du Pont, albeit at prices ranging from $89 to $114 a share, far above yesterday's New York Stock Exchange closing price of $62.375, down $2.375 for the day.


Corrections
A picture caption on Wednesday with an article about new approaches to teaching history in high schools misstated the subject of a student discussion in a hallway of Stuyvesant High School in New York City.
The students were debating whether the word "holocaust" should apply to the experiences of African-Americans; they were not discussing the American Revolution.


Corrections
An article in The Home Section on March 16 about Treepeople, a Los Angeles environmental group that plants trees in low-income communities, misstated the year of its largest single planting.
It was 1990, not 1992.


Acclaim Entertainment Inc.(AKLM,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


Pier 1 Imports Inc.(PIR,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 25


Sanders to Go Back Into Competition
SANDERS, 22, is returning to competition in the hope of earning a spot on the 1996 United States Olympic team, she said yesterday.
In the 1992 Summer Olympics at Barcelona, Spain, Sanders won more medals than any other American swimmer: two golds, a silver and a bronze.
She had announced her retirement from competitive swimming in January 1994. (AP)


Negotiations Continue on MCA Sale; Price Said to Be $5.6 Billion
In their first public acknowledgment of talks, the Seagram Company and the Matsushita Electric Industrial Company confirmed yesterday that they were in negotiations for Seagram to acquire control of MCA Inc.
The companies said in a statement that no agreement had been reached and no price had been agreed upon.


Curtailing Civil Justice
Something that mislabels itself "civil law reform" is capturing Congress.
Lobbyists for manufacturers, backed by public relations campaigns brandishing the "reformer" label, are close to winning enactment of an arbitrary cap on punitive damages for defective products in all 50 states.
Radical as that would be for American law, even more sweeping measures already passed by the House are also being urged on the Senate.
The need for a Washington-run major overhaul of civil justice is doubtful and diminishing.
States, for two centuries the source of civil liability law, have for years been adjusting their rules for disputes over negligence and other harms.
Civil caseloads have stabilized.
For every huge jury verdict that seems unjustified there are victims of gross negligence like the Florida laborer who had the wrong leg amputated and, if self-styled legal "reformers" had their way, might find his injuries assigned a low dollar value.


ALUMINUM CO. OF AMERICA (AA,N)
The Aluminum Company of America said yesterday that its first-quarter operating earnings soared from the corresponding period a year ago, reflecting the industry's resurgence amid higher prices, strong demand and production cuts.
Alcoa, which is based in Pittsburgh, said net income was $193.8 million, or $1.08 a share, compared with profit from operations of $9.6 million, or 5 cents a share, in the 1994 quarter.


Camden Jail Lawsuit Growing
More than 100 former prisoners at the Camden County Jail want to tell it to the judge.
Potential plaintiffs hoping to join a Federal suit charging overcrowding and abusive treatment testified before a municipal judge who is trying to sort out the claims and plaintiffs in pending Federal suits.
The jail was built to hold 450 prisoners.
On March 27, it housed 1,223, 300 of whom were sleeping on the floor.
JOE SHARKEY


Bomb Is Found in Rutgers Library Three Days After a Small Blast
A small bomb was found in a Rutgers University library yesterday morning, just three days after another bomb exploded there, and the authorities shut down four campus libraries so bomb squads could search them.
The police evacuated the Mabel Smith Douglass Library on the New Brunswick campus and sealed off the area for 150 yards in all directions after a staff member found the bomb on a shelf in the lower level of the building at 9:40 A.M. yesterday.
The State Police Bomb Squad removed the device.
No one was injured.


Marlene Lopez, 55, Health Care Official
Marlene Lopez, who was a director of state psychiatric hospitals in New Jersey and New York for 15 years, died on Sunday at the Dana-Farber Cancer Institute in Boston.
She was 55 and lived in Manhattan and Hillsdale, N.Y.
She had been undergoing treatment for cancer for two years, her companion, Carl Moore, said.


Reviews/Fashion; Luxurious Armor by Karan, Klein, Mizrahi
It's no surprise that in the current atmosphere, designers should feel protective of their customers.
The pretense that designers are working with some Everywoman in mind is over.
Even Donna Karan, experimenting continuously in innovative fabrics, described her resulting prices as "scary." The clothes of Isaac Mizrahi, Calvin Klein and Ms.
Karan are a luxury the affluent alone can afford.
And what the affluent will find in their collections are comfort clothes and body armor for an increasingly dangerous world.


Flowers Industries Inc.(FLO,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 11


Shoney's Inc.(SHN,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 19


U.S. Scrambles to Block Oil Rigs From Reaching Serbia
In a secret transaction involving four countries, several companies and altered documents, two oil rigs have been shipped from Iran en route to Serbia in violation of the United Nations sanctions against Belgrade, Western officials say.
The shipment was discovered by the Central Intelligence Agency after it left Iran, officials said, and now the United States is trying to prevent the contraband from reaching its destination.


Bonds Fights Battles on Field and in Court
He left his lawyer in San Francisco, his cellular phone at his mansion and his running shoes with Jerry Rice.
Barry Bonds was punctual for his first spring training workout this morning, when it dawned on him: He is getting paid again.
That has its pros and cons.
On the plus side, he can afford more stereo equipment, but on the down side, he had better watch his wallet.


Bad Jobs News for New York, But New Jersey Registers Gain
New York's unemployment rate rose last month, raising renewed concern that the economic lag that has plagued the state would continue to kill any chance of a significant recovery any time soon, Labor Department officials said yesterday.
They said the possibility of additional layoffs of New York City workers, particularly in the health care sector, raised the prospect of even more unemployment.


David Herbert, 86, British Aristocrat And a Party Giver
David Herbert, the flamboyant English aristocrat who reigned for half a century over the British expatriate colony in Morocco, died there on Monday.
He was 86.
The cause was kidney failure, Nourdine Jdaoudi, a longtime household employee, said yesterday.


On the Face of It, Yankees' McDowell Is Excited
Jack McDowell shaved off part of his beard but left a Fu Manchu mustache and enough facial hair to possibly create trouble.
Danny Tartabull strutted into camp and declared himself on time and ready.
Buck Showalter began the opening of Spring Training II with an obsessive look that did not exist around the replacement Yankees.
The Yankees attracted roughly 250 fans to their training complex today, three times as many as the replacement team drew for its first session.
McDowell, John Wetteland and Tony Fernandez have been added to a team that had the elite record in the American League last year.


On Sidewalk, City Official Calls Mayor A Censor
Public Advocate Mark J. Green has never been a terribly welcome figure in Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani's City Hall, but yesterday he found himself banned even from a city-owned center for the elderly after the Giuliani administration decided that a forum he planned on the Republican Party's Contract With America was a political activity prohibited on city property.
As a result, Mr.
Green and Thomas M. Menino, the Mayor of Boston and a fellow Democrat, met with about 40 older people on the sidewalk yesterday morning at 93d Street and First Avenue, outside the Stanley M. Isaacs Senior Center, which the Housing Authority owns.
Afterward, Mr.
Green charged that Ruben Franco, the chairman of the Housing Authority, had engaged in "big-brother censorship." But Mr.
Franco and Mr.
Giuliani said they were only trying to protect the city's Federal housing money.
The dispute began on Wednesday, when Mr.
Green notified the Housing Authority that he and six big-city mayors -- all Democrats -- planned to discuss the Contract With America, the Republican policy agenda that has been the focus of the first 100 days of the Congressional session, at the center.
A day later, Mr.
Franco called the center and said the event was prohibited, citing Housing Authority regulations that say, "In no case may community center space be used for partisan political activities."
Mr.
Franco informed Mr.
Green as well, but the Public Advocate, a likely mayoral candidate, decided to show up anyway.
He and Mr.
Menino spent the morning telling older people on the sidewalk how Federal policies will affect them, and then he spent the afternoon telling reporters on the sidewalk outside City Hall about the damage done to the First Amendment.
"Here we have a city official who is engaging in classic prior restraint because he has decided to ban me from speaking because of his guess about the political content of what we might say," said Mr.
Green, who was joined by Norman Siegel, executive director of the New York Civil Liberties Union.
City officials defended their decision by noting that all the mayors invited to the forum were from the same party, and suggested that only one side of the Contract With America would have been presented.
"I know the mayors that were here came for a meeting that was sponsored by the Democratic National Committee to raise money," said Mr.
Giuliani, explaining why the mayors had come to New York in the first place.
"So it would have been very hard to escape the fact that what Mark Green was organizing here was a partisan political event."
Mr.
Giuliani himself has given the Contract With America mixed reviews, saying that he agrees with parts of it and disagrees with others.


Unitrin Inc.(UNIT,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


British-American Is Executed in Georgia
Nicholas Lee Ingram, a 31-year-old British-American whose death sentence for a killing here 11 years ago had created an outcry in England, was executed tonight after a one-day delay in which his lawyers went all the way to the United States Supreme Court in an effort to overturn his sentence.
The execution by electric chair took place shortly after 9 P.M. at the Georgia Diagnostic and Classification Center, a 1,400-inmate prison in Jackson, about 40 miles south of Atlanta.
Mr.
Ingram was pronounced dead at 9:15 P.M.


CHRONICLE
How can a wife surprise her husband on his birthday after 35 years of marriage?
CLARE R. GREGORIAN, who is married to VARTAN GREGORIAN, the president of Brown University, said she was "desperate" for an original gift for her husband's 61st birthday this week.


Offering Some Shares of Pride in the Yankees; Fans Into Financiers
For the right price, you can have a star named after you, own a chunk of the Berlin Wall or put a message on the zipper in Times Square.
Now Gilbert DiLucia wants to make it possible to own a tiny piece of the New York Yankees.
His plan: buy a 3.1 percent stake in the team for $8.6 million, then divide it into 20,000 shares and sell it at $500 a share, generating $10 million.
Each share would represent a little over one one-millionth of the team -- just enough, Mr.
DiLucia believes, to turn fans into financiers and vice versa.


Marion Tinsley, 68, Unmatched As Checkers Champion, Is Dead
Marion Tinsley, the perennial world checkers champion who was widely regarded as the game's best player ever, died in Humble, Tex., on Monday, five years after he ran out of worthy human opponents and began winning his last titles by beating ever more powerful computers.
He was 68 and lived in Conyers, Ga.
The cause was cancer, relatives said.
He was visiting his twin sister, Mary Clark, in Humble when he died.


Treasury Prices Turn Lower on Report Suggesting Inflation Threat
After four days of gains, prices of Treasury securities turned lower yesterday when a report suggested that inflationary pressures were still a threat.
The report, the Columbia University inflation index, quickly pared early gains from a Government report that said the economy had added fewer jobs than expected last month, pointing to a slowdown.


Using Gene Tests to Deny Jobs Is Ruled Illegal
People with a genetic predisposition to disease, but who remain healthy, cannot be discriminated against by employers concerned about future health problems, according to a determination by the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission.
The commission, in a new compliance manual defining the term "disability" under the 1990 Americans With Disabilities Act, said the use of genetic test results to deny employment could be considered discriminatory under the law.


No Excuse for Cruelty
To the Editor:
I was sorry to read "Why Should Poultry Have More Protection Than People," the April 1 letter by Abner ibn-Yahood urging the legalization of cockfighting on Indian reservations as a tourist attraction.


GINGRICH URGES 'DIALOGUE'
After three months of ceding the initiative to the Republicans and their Contract With America, President Clinton today threatened to veto a host of major bills, already passed by the House, unless they were substantially altered by the Senate.
Mr.
Clinton, defining the limits of his willingness to compromise, said he would reject House-passed versions of bills dealing with the legal system, Government regulations, crime, the use of American troops in United Nations operations, and compensation for property owners whose land loses value as a result of Federal regulations.


Ringling Sets the Standard for Animal Care
To the Editor:
I would like to respond to Mia MacDonald's and Martin Rowe's letter ("Cruel Elephant Walk," April 1) and inform your readers of the truth regarding the performing elephants that tour with The Greatest Show on Earth.
As the national press representative of Ringling Bros. and Barnum &amp; Bailey, I have the pleasure of observing and interacting with the animals, their trainers and attendants 12 months of the year.


Reitmans (Canada) reports earnings for Year to Jan 28


Pataki Faults Ally on Comment
Gov.
George E. Pataki criticized his chief ally in the State Legislature for referring to blacks and people of Hispanic background as "people that got their hands out" for welfare.


RESULTS PLUS
N.B.A.
Hill Leads Upset of Magic  The rookie Grant Hill's 21 points, 11 rebounds and 10 assists led the Detroit Pistons to a 104-94 victory over the Orlando Magic last night in Auburn Hill, Mich.
Hill's first triple-double overshadowed a 31-point, 18-rebound performance by Orlando's Shaquille O'Neal.
O'Neal and Horace Grant had 5 points each in a 10-2 Magic run that cut Detroit's lead to 62-60 with 5 minutes 45 seconds left in the third period.
But Orlando, playing without the injured starters Anfernee Hardaway and Nick Anderson, started to lose its poise, drawing three technical fouls in the period.


Emcor Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


A Monumental Spot


Block Examined After Building Falls
City buildings officials yesterday were continuing their investigation of the cause of the collapse of a vacant West Side tenement that was under demolition.
One construction worker was killed and two others injured in the accident, which occurred on Thursday at the southwest corner of 38th Street and Ninth Avenue.


Russell Braddon, 74, Australian Author
Russell Reading Braddon, an Australian author whose first literary success was based on his four years as a Japanese prisoner of war, died on March 20 in his home in Urunga on the north coast of New South Wales.
He was 74 and had returned to his native city, Sydney, in 1993 after spending most of his professional life in England.
Captured in Malaya early in 1941, he survived the prison camps set up by the Japanese to build the Bangkok-Rangoon Railway.
His 1952 book about his experiences, "The Naked Island," sold more than a million copies worldwide and was made into a play in London in 1959.


10 Years in Bowling Ball Death
Calvin Settle, who dropped a bowling ball off a highway overpass 14 months ago, killing an infant in a passing car near the Pulaski Skyway after the ball smashed through the windshield, was sentenced to 10 years in prison on a reckless manslaughter conviction.
Mr.
Settle, 19, had said the ball slipped out of his hands.


IN PERFORMANCE: CLASSICAL MUSIC
Pianist Blends Smoothly With the Masur Sound  Mitsuko Uchida, pianist Avery Fisher Hall


V. E. Maximov, 64, An Exiled Writer
Vladimir E. Maximov, a Russian writer who was a prominent anti-Soviet exile in the 1970's and 80's, died on March 26 in Paris, where he had lived since 1974.
He was 64.
He had cancer, Agence France-Presse reported.


Corning Inc.(GLW,N) reports earnings for 12wks to Mar 26


Transactions
Baseball  American League BOSTON RED SOX -- Agreed to terms with Luis Alicea and Terry Shumpert, infielders, and Wes Chamberlain, outfielder, on one-year contracts.
CALIFORNIA ANGELS -- Signed Pedro Guerrero, player-coach, to a contract with Midland of the Texas League.
CHICAGO WHITE SOX -- Agreed to terms with Kirk McCaskill, pitcher, on a two-year contract.
CLEVELAND INDIANS -- Agreed to terms with Bud Black, pitcher, on a minor-league contract.
DETROIT TIGERS -- Agreed to terms with Joe Boever, pitcher, on a one-year contract and Juan Samuel, infielder, on a minor-league contract.
KANSAS CITY ROYALS -- Agreed to terms with Pat Borders, catcher, and Brent Mayne, pitchers, on one-year contracts.
OAKLAND ATHLETICS -- Agreed to terms with Mike Bordick, infielder, and Dave Leiper, pitcher, on one-year contracts.
Agreed to terms with Bob Welch, pitcher, on a minor-league contract and invited him to spring training as a non-roster player.
SEATTLE MARINERS -- Agreed to terms with Dave Fleming and Chad Kreuter, pitchers, and Tino Martinez, first baseman, on one-year contracts.
TEXAS RANGERS -- Agreed to terms with Kenny Rogers, pitcher, on a one-year contract.
Declined to offer a 1995 contract to John Burkett, pitcher.
National League ATLANTA BRAVES -- Agreed to terms with Mark Lemke, second baseman; Jose Oliva, third baseman; and Brad Woodall, pitcher, on one-year contracts.
CHICAGO CUBS -- Agreed to terms with Mark Grace, first baseman, on a one-year contract.
Declined to offer 1995 contracts to Glenallen Hill and Derrick May, outfielders.
COLORADO ROCKIES -- Agreed to terms with David Nied, Armando Reynoso and Lloyd Peever, pitchers, and Roberto Mejia, infielder, on one-year contracts.
FLORIDA MARLINS -- Agreed to terms with Terry Pendleton, third baseman, and Jerry Browne, infielder, on one-year contracts.
HOUSTON ASTROS -- Agreed to terms to Luis Gonzalez, outfielder, on a one-year contract.
LOS ANGELES DODGERS -- Agreed to terms with Dave Hansen, third baseman; Roger Cedeno, outfielder; and Rick Gorecki, pitcher, on one-year contracts.
NEW YORK METS -- Agreed to terms with David Segui, first baseman-outfielder, on a one-year contract.
PHILADELPHIA PHILLIES -- Agreed to terms with David West, pitcher, and Mickey Morandini, second baseman, on one-year contracts.
PITTSBURGH PIRATES -- Agreed to terms with Jim Gott and Denny Neagle, pitchers, on one-year contracts.
ST.
LOUIS CARDINALS -- Agreed to terms with Vincente Palacios, pitcher, Gerald Perry, first baseman, and Scott Hemond, catchers, on one-year contracts.
Declined to offer a 1995 contract to Bernard Gilkey, outfielder.
SAN DIEGO PADRES -- Agreed to terms with Scott Livingston, infielder, and Bill Krueger, pitcher, on one-year contracts.
SAN FRANCISCO GIANTS -- Agreed to terms with Trevor Wilson, pitcher, on a one-year contract.
Basketball  National Basketball Association ORLANDO MAGIC -- Placed Tree Rollins, center, on the injured list.
United States Basketball League FLORIDA SHARKS -- Traded the rights to Brent Dabbs, forward, and their 1995 first-round draft choice to the Westchester Stallions for Westchester's 1995 first-round draft choice.
Football  National Football League ATLANTA FALCONS -- Agreed to terms with Elbert Shelley, defensive back.
INDIANAPOLIS COLTS -- Signed Mike Cofer, placekicker.
PHILADELPHIA EAGLES -- Signed Daniel Stubbs, defensive end.
Announced the resignation of George Azar, assistant to the president.
Hockey  National Hockey League NHL -- Suspended Glen Featherstone of Hartford for four games without pay for engaging in a verbal confrontation with fans, throwing his helmet and injuring an usher after he was ejected from a game against Buffalo on Tuesday.
BOSTON BRUINS -- Sent John Blue, goaltender, to Providence of the AHL.
BUFFALO SABRES -- Traded Ken Sutton, defenseman, to the Edmonton Oilers for Scott Pearson, left wing.
DALLAS STARS -- Traded Alan May, left wing, to Calgary Flames for a 1995 eighth-round draft choice.
EDMONTON OILERS -- Loaned Gord Mark, defenseman, to Cape Breton of the AHL.
FLORIDA PANTHERS -- Recalled Dallas Eakins, defenseman, from Cincinnati of the IHL.
MONTREAL CANADIENS -- Returned Martin Brochu, goaltender; Yves-Sarault, left wing; and Craig Ferguson, right wing, to Fredericton of the AHL.
NEW JERSEY DEVILS -- Loaned Kevin Dean, defenseman, to Albany of the AHL.
NEW YORK RANGERS -- Traded Corey Hirsch, goaltender, to the Vancouver Canucks for Nathan LaFayette, center.
Traded Ed Olczyk, center, to the Winnipeg Jets for a 1995 fifth-round draft choice.
Claimed Troy Loney, left wing, off waivers from the New York Islanders.
OTTAWA SENATORS -- Traded Bill Huard, left wing, to the Quebec Nordiques for Mika Stromberg, defenseman, and a 1995 fourth-round draft choice.
Traded Craig Billington, goaltender, to the Boston Bruins for a 1995 eighth-round draft choice.
PHILADELPHIA FLYERS -- Traded Garry Galley, defenseman, to the Buffalo Sabres for Petr Svoboda, defenseman.
PITTSBURGH PENGUINS -- Traded Martin Straka, center, to the Ottawa Senators for Norm Maciver, defenseman, and Troy Murray, center.
Traded Greg Brown, defenseman, to the Winnipeg Jets for future considerations.
Sent Peter Taglianetti and Greg Hawgood, defensemen, to Cleveland of the IHL and Greg Andrusak, defensemen, to the Canadian national team.
Recalled Jeff Christian, left wing, from Cleveland.
QUEBEC NORDIQUES -- Returned Aaron Miller, defenseman, to Cornwall of the AHL.
Recalled Jon Klemm, defenseman, from Cornwall of the AHL.
ST.
LOUIS BLUES -- Traded Daniel Laperriere, defenseman, to the Ottawa Senators for a conditional 1995 draft choice.
TORONTO MAPLE LEAFS -- Traded Drake Berehowsky, defenseman, to the Pittsburgh Penguins for Grant Jennings, defenseman.
Traded Mike Eastwood, center, and a 1995 third-round draft choice to the Winnipeg Jets for Tie Domi, right wing.
Traded Gord Kruppke, defenseman, to the Detroit Red Wings for other considerations.
Returned Ken Belanger, left wing, and David Harlock, defenseman, to St.
John's of the AHL.
VANCOUVER CANUCKS -- Traded Gerald Diduck, defenseman, to the Chicago Blackhawks for Bogdan Savenko, right wing, and a 1995 third-round draft choice.
Traded Jiri Slegr, defenseman, to the Edmonton Oilers for Roman Oksiuta, right wing.
Traded Greg Adams and Dan Kesa, forwards, to the Dallas Stars for Russ Courtnall, right wing.
WASHINGTON CAPITALS -- Traded Rick Tabaracci, goaltender, to the Calgary Flames for a fifth-round draft choice in 1995 or 1996.
WINNIPEG JETS -- Traded Igor Ulanov, defenseman, and Mike Eagles, center, to the Washington Capitals for 1995 third- and fifth-round draft choices.
Recalled Tavis Hanson, center, from Springfield of the AHL.


Family Dollar Stores Inc.(FDO,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


A New Take on Page and Plant
When classic rockers of the 1960's and 70's tour arenas and stadiums, they often structure their concerts so that their visual displays increase in intensity and flamboyance throughout the concert, building up to a spectacular, audience-rousing climax of lights, fireworks and other pyrotechnics for the last song in the set.
But on Thursday night at the Brendan Byrne Arena in East Rutherford, N.J., on their first tour together in 15 years, the former Led Zeppelin guitarist Jimmy Page, who is 51, and the band's former singer, Robert Plant, who is 46, gave their audience progressive sonic surprises instead of visual ones.
Mr.
Plant, Mr.
Page and their core backing band of Michael Lee on drums, Charlie Jones on bass and Porl Thompson on second guitar focused on the dynamics that made Led Zeppelin's music distinctive instead of the heaviness that made it influential. (The former Led Zeppelin keyboardist and bassist John Paul Jones was not invited on the tour and the band's drummer, John Bonham, died in 1980, causing the group to disband.)


Religion Journal; Remembering Theologian Slain by Nazis
In the Christian calendar, Palm Sunday is a day heavy with impending sorrow, marking, by the Gospel accounts, Jesus's triumphal entry into Jerusalem, six days before he would die on the cross.
But this year, the start of Holy Week tomorrow coincides with another solemn occasion, the anniversary of an event tragic in itself.
Fifty years ago on April 9, the German theologian and Lutheran pastor Dietrich Bonhoeffer was hanged by the Nazis for his part in a plot to overthrow Hitler.


Hill Is Knicks' New Challenge
The Knicks haven't had much success containing the Detroit Pistons rookie Grant Hill, and Coach Pat Riley isn't optimistic his team will find the answer Saturday night when the two teams meet at Madison Square Garden.
In three games this season, the former Duke University star has averaged 24 points against the Knicks, who have won two of the three meetings.
"He's had his way against us," Riley said today.
"I don't think anybody really matches up against him and can stop him individually."


International Dairy Queen Inc.(INDQA,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 24


Robert Lubar, 74, Writer and Editor
Robert Lubar, a former managing editor of Fortune magazine and foreign correspondent for Time magazine, died last Saturday at the Breckenridge Center in Willoughby, Ohio.
He was 74.
A longtime resident of Port Washington, N.Y., he moved to Whitingham, Vt., when he retired in 1985.
He had suffered from Parkinson's disease for a number of years, said a son, Nicholas.


Sports of The Times; Cal Ripken And the Pride Of the Orioles
FOR seven and a half months, the Baltimore Orioles and Cal Ripken carried the mantle for those who believed it wrong to replace striking major leaguers with nonunion labor.
Yesterday, the Orioles and Ripken got to put that mantle down and return triumphantly to what they always wanted: to be back on the field and in the fold, with integrity and history intact.
For the very presence of the Orioles -- the major league Orioles -- at a spring training workout signaled two victories.


State Is Abandoning Its Plans To Extend Republic Runway
The state has scrapped plans to extend the runway at Republic Airport here, a proposal that neighbors had feared would clear the way for commercial jetliners.
John Daly, the State Transportation Commissioner, said today that the runway would not be extended "now or in the future," and he emphasized that Republic Airport "will never be turned into another Kennedy, La Guardia or Islip-MacArthur Airport."


Mets Give a Thumbs Up To the Owner's Message
In many other camps, the situation would have had great potential for hot tempers and cold words.
When Doug Henry was a reliever with the Milwaukee Brewers, the mere mention of ownership brought feelings of frustration.
He could not imagine Bud Selig, the Brewers' owner and acting baseball commissioner, walking into the clubhouse and addressing the troops.
It wasn't like that today with Fred Wilpon, Nelson Doubleday and the Mets.


Firstbank Puerto Rico (FBP,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


SportsTown Inc.(SPTN,NNM) reports earnings for Year to Jan 28


Carter Willing to Return To Bosnia to Renew Truce
Former President Jimmy Carter said today that if all parties agreed, he might return to Bosnia to try to preserve a cease-fire he brokered in December that continues to deteriorate.
Mr.
Carter said he was in daily contact with the Clinton Administration on Bosnia.
He said he had a standing invitation from the Bosnian Serbs to return but would need one from the Muslim-led Bosnian Government.


International Briefs; In Brief
*
The Itochu Corporation, a major Japanese trading company, said yesterday that it planned to join with Airtouch Communications Inc. of San Francisco to offer cellular telephone services under the Globalstar satellite project in Japan.
Globalstar, a proposed network of 48 telecommunications satellites, was formed by the Loral Corporation and Qualcomm Inc.


Hillenbrand Industries Inc.(HB,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 4


Transtar Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Senator D'Amato's Apology
"What I did was a a poor attempt at humor," said a subdued and apparently chastened Senator Alfonse D'Amato when he took to the floor of the Senate on Thursday to apologize for his insulting monologue about Judge Lance Ito.
Mr.
D'Amato had derided the judge while using a fake Japanese accent on Don Imus's radio talk show.
The latest apology by the junior Senator from New York was a welcome step, even if his decision to expand on his initial, perfunctory expression of regret ("If I offended anyone, I'm sorry") came only after intense pressure to do so from colleagues and friends.
Indeed, a dignified apology was probably the only way that the loose-cannon Senator D'Amato could remain a key player in the Presidential campaign of Bob Dole, the Senate minority leader.


Noel Group Inc.(NOEL,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Reviews/Fashion; Runway Homages to a Mod Trend Setter
Grace Coddington, the fashion director of Vogue, was previewing Anna Sui's collection when a handful of photo-button icons of the mod era yielded a familiar face with a hip Vidal Sassoon haircut: her own.
Ms.
Sui's photo buttons, which peppered her clothes, were of 1960's models, rockers and actors.
"In the top 10 models, I was always No. 9," Ms.
Coddington said modestly.


Whalers' Featherstone Is Suspended
The National Hockey League suspended Hartford Whalers defenseman GLEN FEATHERSTONE yesterday for four games for throwing his helmet into the seats at Buffalo and slightly injuring a Sabres usher during Tuesday's 6-3 loss to the Sabres.
Featherstone, a former Ranger, sat out the next game in Pittsburgh pending a hearing, so he has three games left on his suspension. (AP)


G.O.P. Accuses Administration of Political Improprieties
The political warfare between the White House and the Republican-run Congress escalated today, with the House majority leader, Representative Dick Armey, accusing the Administration of "stonewalling" and using taxpayers' dollars "to conduct inappropriate political activity."
Mr.
Armey, a Texan, said Congress would use subpoenas if necessary to obtain information that Republicans wanted from the White House.


Corrections
A picture in Weekend yesterday with the Art in Review column was reversed.
In the picture, "Portrait of a Man in Armor, Probably as Mars," which is in a Rubens show at the Gagosian Gallery on Madison Avenue, the man faces left, not right.


Amstar Corp. reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


The State Budget Standoff
A week after the start of the new fiscal year, New York State is still without a budget and the partisan skirmishing in Albany has grown ugly.
The Senate Republican leader, Joseph Bruno, has struck a poisonous note by asserting that the Democrats are blocking the Governor's welfare cuts because of the power of blacks and Hispanics, "the people that got their hands out." By indulging in racial politics, Mr.
Bruno has debased the process and reduced the chances of progress on a budget deal.
When he took office, Gov.
George Pataki vowed to get a budget approved on time after more than a decade of slipped deadlines.
But he has resisted the concessions that would bring an accord without undermining his efforts to reduce the scope of state government.
An agreement to restore about $1 billion of his proposed $5 billion in cutbacks would take the edge off the budget's worst damage in health, welfare, mental health, higher education, children's services and aid to New York City, thereby winning Democratric support.


New Protocol: Heads of State Now Court Congress
There was a time when the most sought-after ticket in town was a one-on-one with the President in the Oval Office.
Not these days.


Corrections
A picture caption yesterday about the orchid show at the World Financial Center in lower Manhattan misstated the closing date.
Its last day is tomorrow, not today.


Baseball's Unemployed Work Out and Wait
They put their uniform pants on, like players in baseball's 28 other training camps, one leg at a time.
They ran laps and sprints, did calisthenics, threw, took batting practice.
The only difference in this 29th camp was that the players who began the belated version of spring training did so without jobs.
"We're going to call ourselves the Homestead Homies, the team of the misfits," Randy Velarde, formerly of the Yankees, said at the end of the 1-hour-50-minute workout.


Speaker, Celebrating 100 Days, Pledges to 'Remake Government'
Speaker Newt Gingrich celebrated the first months of the Republican-controlled Congress by addressing the nation tonight and setting out what he said would be a bipartisan map for the future.
"We're going to open a dialogue because we want to create a new partnership with the American people," he said, perched on his desk in the deserted Capitol.
He said it would be a plan "to remake the Government and balance the budget that is the American people's plan -- not the House Republican plan, not the Gingrich plan, but the plan of the American people."


Banponce Corp.(BPOP,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Canandaigua Wine Co.  (WINEA,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


Tyson Said to Be Sharp in Workout
After hitting a punching bag for the first time in more than three years, Mike Tyson was so excited and surprised with his skill that he called in his best friend and said, "You've got to see this."
The story was related today by John Horne, who along with co-manager Rory Holloway are among Tyson's closest friends.


Casino Guards Veto Union
Security guards at the Claridge Casino Hotel, in a 71-to-37 vote, said no dice to joining a union.
Had they voted in favor of joining the Federation of Police, Security and Correction Officers, the Claridge workers would have been the first casino guards to unionize.


CellStar Corp.(CLST,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


5th Trooper Pleads Guilty Plea in Scandal
The only remaining defendant in the New York State Police evidence-tampering scandal pleaded guilty yesterday in Delhi, N.Y., to obstructing the inquiry to help a fellow trooper avoid prosecution.
Under a plea agreement, Patrick O'Hara, a former lieutenant who headed the department's organized crime and drug investigations, will serve one year in prison.
As part of the agreement, prosecutors dropped a charge that Mr.
O'Hara had helped his fellow trooper fake a fingerprint in a double-murder case.


Transtar Holdings L.P. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Food Lion (FDLNB,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 25


Patent Court's Ruling Is Seen As Limiting Role of Juries
A ruling by the nation's highest patent court is likely to stem the rising number of infringement cases heard by juries, who tend to be more sympathetic to inventors than judges are and who have handed up dozens of big-dollar infringement verdicts over the last decade.
The long-awaited decision by the United States Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit, which was issued this week, essentially says that judges rather than juries should determine what a patent means.


At Capitol Rally, G.O.P. Lawmakers Applaud Themselves and Their Work
The Republican majority of the House of Representatives staged a triumphalist celebration of its labors today, reveling on the Capitol steps in the power of the Contract With America campaign stratagem that was widely belittled at its unveiling only six months ago.
"We are celebrating the act of keeping our word," Speaker Newt Gingrich of Georgia declared before a beaming array of more than 150 Republican representatives who waved American flags and shouted, "Newt! Newt!" as they headed home to a three-week Easter recess with claims of unprecedented legislative success.


Reviews/Fashion; Runway Homages to a Mod Trend Setter
Grace Coddington, the fashion director of Vogue, was previewing Anna Sui's collection when a handful of photo-button icons of the mod era yielded a familiar face with a hip Vidal Sassoon haircut: her own.
Ms.
Sui's photo buttons, which peppered her clothes, were of 1960's models, rockers and actors.
"In the top 10 models, I was always No. 9," Ms.
Coddington said modestly.


IN PERFORMANCE: POP
Trumpets and Guitar Over a Tuba's Beat  Spanish Fly
Mercury Lounge


Renewed Repression in Kenya
Kenya's President, Daniel arap Moi, has an easy answer for critics who charge that his Government is corrupt and dictatorial.
They are, he says, all in league with Uganda-based Communist guerrillas out to overthrow his Government.
The latest to be smeared by him are Kenya's conservative Roman Catholic bishops.
In a pastoral letter Sunday, the bishops lamented that "too many of our people are living in fear," and complained that "it would seem there is no law, no justice, no protection, except for the powerful." Similar concerns have been expressed by international human rights organizations and the State Department.


Oregon State Picks Payne as Coach
EDDIE PAYNE, who coached East Carolina to an 18-11 mark this past season, the most Pirates victories in 20 years, was hired yesterday to help boost the Oregon State program.
Payne, 43, replaces JIM ANDERSON, who coached the Beavers for six seasons. (AP)


Merry-Go-Round Enterprises Inc.(MGR,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 28


Federal Officers in Mexico Tied to Killing of Police Chief
Almost a year after the slaying of a reform-minded police chief in the northern city of Tijuana sent shock waves across Mexico, officials said today that federal police agents working for drug traffickers had carried out the killing.
The slaying of the police chief, Jose Federico Benitez, came after several weeks in which he had publicly questioned a federal inquiry into the assassination in Tijuana of a former presidential candidate of the governing party, Luis Donaldo Colosio.


O'Bannon Receives the Wooden Award
ED O'BANNON, whose final game at U.C.L.A. was a 30-point, 17-rebound effort against Arkansas that led the Bruins to their first National Collegiate Athletic Association championship in 20 years, won the John Wooden Award yesterday as college basketball's player of the year.
O'Bannon, a 6-foot-8-inch senior, averaged 20.4 points and 8.3 rebounds in leading U.C.L.A. to a 31-2 record.
The award is named for JOHN WOODEN, the former U.C.L.A. coach who guided the Bruins to 10 N.C.A.A. championships in a 12-year span ending in 1975, when he retired.
Wooden, 84, made the presentation to O'Bannon, 22, in Los Angeles.


Ex-Simpson Juror Tells of a Racial Rift
Embellishing on her portrait of a panel riven by racial frictions, a black juror who was removed from the O. J. Simpson murder trial on Wednesday said today that a white juror had kicked her while in court and had stepped on the foot of a black colleague.
But the discharged juror, Jeanette Harris, backed away from an assertion that the jury might have been tainted because members had prematurely discussed the case among themselves.
She said her comments had been misinterpreted.


Power Corp. of Canada reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


CONGRESS CREATES BOARD TO OVERSEE WASHINGTON, D.C.
Congress today approved legislation to create a financial control board for the District of Columbia, a measure that would effectively end home rule for the city for at least eight years.
President Clinton is expected to sign the bill into law shortly.
Like similar boards established to guide New York, Philadelphia and other cities through earlier fiscal crises, the five-member financial control panel, whose members are to be appointed by Mr.
Clinton, would have vast authority over municipal spending, financial planning, borrowing, hiring and contracts.


Don't Count on Us, Unionized Workers Say
Unionized city employees said yesterday that they would not transport students to and from school if bus drivers go on strike, despite a contingency plan by the Mayor and Schools Chancellor that relies on their help.
A strike by school-bus drivers would affect 150,000 schoolchildren, and Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani and Schools Chancellor Ramon C. Cortines have said they were counting on teachers, administrators, transit workers and Parks Department employees to transport some of the children in city-owned vans and buses.


A Look at Children and Social Justice
A new season finds "The Perils of Charlayne," otherwise known as "Rights and Wrongs," in a more favorable time slot on Channel 13, with a promise of prime time to come.
The argument over this series of half-hour magazine programs on human rights around the globe, anchored by Charlayne Hunter-Gault, has been undisguisedly political.
Critics see it as yet another leftish addition to already-suspect public broadcasting.
Friends see it as a courageous innovation with its heart in the right, which is to say left, place.
Last week's opener, on intolerance, gave grist to both sides.
It presented a picture of racism and community conflict on the rise in the United States, with the Los Angeles riots described as "an insurrection fueled by intolerance." The main voice was that of Cornel West, Christian theologian and self-described "radical Democrat," who had nothing kind to say about Newt Gingrich.


METRO DIGEST
DEFYING SCHOOL DRIVERS' STRIKE THREAT Pushed by Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani, Schools Chancellor Ramon C. Cortines said that he wanted to break the lifetime job guarantees for school bus drivers, even if the drivers carry out their threat to strike.
Page 1.
CITY UNIONS TO BACK BUS DRIVERS Unionized city employees said they would not take students to and from school if bus drivers strike, despite a contingency plan.
Page 28.
NEW YORK CITY  CHARGES DISMISSED IN 30TH PRECINCT A judge dismissed charges against a police officer of the 30th Precinct in Harlem who had been videotaped slapping and kicking an undercover officer he said he thought was a drug dealer.
Page 27.
MANHATTAN'S WOMAN IN SHANGHAI In Shanghai, the fourth of six Asian cities she is visiting, Borough President Ruth W. Messinger said her tour was a way "to deepen economic, cultural and governmental ties between New York City and Asia." Page 27.
ADVOCATE BANNED FROM SENIOR CENTER Public Advocate Mark J. Green and Thomas M. Menino, the Mayor of Boston, met with about 40 elderly residents on the sidewalk outside a city-owned senior center after the Giuliani administration banned the planned discussion, a forum on Republican policy.
Page 27.
TERROR MISSION IN PHILIPPINES RECOUNTED A year after the bombing of the World Trade Center in New York, the man accused of engineering the attack arrived in the Philippines to organize similar terrorist attacks, say American and Philippine officials.
Page 26. 5 YEARS' PROBATION IN MOSQUE MELEE The only man arrested in connection with a melee between the police and worshipers at a Harlem mosque in January 1994 has been sentenced to five years' probation for assaulting a police officer.
Officers were responding to a 911 call, which turned out to be a hoax.
Page 26.
REGION  BRIBERY CASE ENDS IN MISTRIAL A mistrial was declared in the case of a Suffolk County politician accused of taking bribes from John McNamara, the former Buick dealer who has confessed to bilking General Motors out of $436 million.
Page 29.
BOMB FOUND IN RUTGERS LIBRARY A small bomb was found in a Rutgers University library, just three days after another bomb exploded there.
The authorities shut down four campus libraries so that bomb squads could search them.
Page 29.
GUILTY PLEA IN EVIDENCE TAMPERING The last defendant in the New York State Police evidence-tampering scandal pleaded guilty in Delhi, N.Y., to obstructing the inquiry to help a fellow trooper avoid prosecution.
Page 29.
RUNWAY EXTENSION PLAN DIES New York State has scrapped plans to extend the runway at Republic Airport in East Farmingdale, L.I.
Neighbors had feared the proposal would clear the way for commercial jetliners at the airport.
Page 29.
About New York by David Gonzalez...27


Into the Woods in Asia; Myanmar? North Korea? No Sweat for Hong Kong Firm
Francis Pike liked what he saw in North Korea on a reconnaissance trip for Peregrine Investment Holdings Ltd., the Hong Kong investment bank, in the fall of 1993.
It was a place of pervasive tyranny and cultish obeisance to a "great leader." The Communist Government was an international pariah, accused by the United States and other Western countries of feverishly building nuclear weapons, shipping missiles to the Middle East, fomenting terrorism, kidnapping its critics abroad and crushing domestic dissent.
And the country was overwhelmed by poverty.


Fish Don't Observe the 200-Mile Limit
To the Editor:
Your coverage of the fisheries dispute between Canada and Spain helps inform the public of a problem global in scope: too many people chasing too few fish.
Such a situation cannot continue indefinitely.
The Food and Agricultural Organization of the United Nations has recently warned that some 70 percent of the world's fish stocks are either fully utilized, overfished or rebuilding from previous overfishing.


Provigo Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 28


As Playoffs Approach, Nets Move Backward
The Nets looked bad tonight, and their chances of making the playoffs looked even worse.
Fading in the third quarter, the Nets (27-47) lost their sixth consecutive game, 107-92, to the Milwaukee Bucks at the Bradley Center.
And the Nets suffered another injury when Kenny Anderson (10 points, 13 assists) left the game after three quarters with a sore lower back.
Anderson said he planned to have his back examined Saturday, and was questionable for that night's home game against the Miami Heat.


Seaway Food Town Inc.(SEWY,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 25


Business Digest
Clinton Warns G.O.P.
He Will Veto Bills  After three months of ceding the initiative to Congressional Republicans, President Clinton defined the limits of his willingness to compromise, saying he would veto bills dealing with legal and regulatory reform, crime, the use of United States troops in United Nations operations and compensation for property owners whose land loses value as a result of Federal regulations.
While he did not specifically say he would veto the $189 billion tax cut bill enacted by the House as the climax of the Republicans' first 100 days, Mr.
Clinton called it a "fantasy." "We can't afford it," he said.
Page 1.
Inquiries Into Seagram Deals  Canadian securities regulators and the Toronto Stock Exchange plan to investigate Seagram disclosures of its plans to sell a stake in Du Pont and buy control of MCA. 40.
From the start, Matsushita and MCA were an odd couple.
Matsushita is conservative in nearly every way, from the dull blue employee uniforms to the frugal beliefs that pulled the purse strings on MCA's desires.
By contrast, Hollywood is instinctively ostentatious and extravagant.
"Matsushita basically gave up," one analyst said. 40.
McCaw Offers $3.3 Billion for LIN  AT&amp;T's wireless unit, McCaw Cellular Communications, will offer $3.3 billion for the part of LIN Broadcasting it does not already own.
McCaw will acquire approximately 26 million LIN shares for $127.50 each in cash.
The price was recommended by Wasserstein Perrella &amp; Company on March 7 after advisers to AT&amp;T and LIN placed widely different values on the company. 41.
Dow Retreats on Profit Taking  The Dow retreated 12.79 points, to 4,192.62, as traders took profits from the week's record-setting rally.
Stocks were weighed down by the March unemployment report that showed that manufacturers' payrolls shrank as the unemployment rate rose one-tenth of 1 percent.
In the currency market, the dollar fell to another low against the yen, settling in New York at 83.82 yen. 43.
Inflationary pressures pushed the price of the 30-year Treasury bond lower. 51.
Mexico Backs Off on Bonds  The Mexican Government now concedes that this year it is unlikely to bring to market a new kind of treasury bond to replace those tied to the dollar -- called tesobonos.
Nor is the Government expected to issue new versions of the tesobono this year.
Instead, officials say they will raise funds by offering commercial paper sometime after May that would be backed by loan guarantees from the United States.
The tesobonos had been identified as a principal cause of Mexico's economic troubles, and investors were not sorry to see them disappear.
"Good riddance to them, absolutely," said one analyst in the United States. 42.
Netscape Sells Stake to Investors  Netscape Communications, which makes the most popular software program for browsing the World Wide Web, has sold a 11 percent stake to a group of investors consisting of Adobe Systems, Hearst, Knight-Ridder, Tele-Communications and Times Mirror. 41.
Judges Get More Power on Patents  A ruling by the nation's highest patent court --essentially saying that judges should determine what a patent means -- is likely to stem the number of infringement cases heard by juries. 41.
Paine Webber Alters Compensation  Paine Webber introduced a new compensation plan in an effort to increase sales by 10 percent this year and to encourage brokers to stay with the securities firm. 43.
B.C.C.I.
Suit Is Thrown Out  A Federal court dismissed a lawsuit filed by depositors against the people they contended were responsible for the collapse of the Bank of Credit and Commerce International. 43.
Breaking Up the Yankees, for Profit  A New York lawyer is trying to buy a 3.1 percent stake in the New York Yankees so that he can divide it into 20,000 shares and sell them for $500 apiece. 25.
American Stock Exch. . . . 48 Company Earnings . . . 40 Company News . . . 41 Credit Markets . . . 51 Currency Markets . . . 38 Dividend News . . . 45 Foreign Exchange . . . 38 Foreign Stocks . . . 38 Futures Markets . . . 38 Highs and Lows . . . 45 Index Options . . . 38 International News . . . 42 Key Rates . . . 51  Mutual Funds . . . 49 Nasdaq National Mkt. . . . 46 New York Stock Exch. . . . 43 Stock Options . . . 44 Treasury Issues . . . 51


In America; The New Slavery
The transaction took place right beside me, in the chill of early morning, on a slatted bench at the edge of Central Park.
The dealer counted the money, folded it, and nodded.
The buyer slid the packet, probably containing heroin, into his jacket pocket.
"Thank you, my brother," said the buyer.
The dealer smiled.
The two young men stood and clasped hands, then walked off in different directions.


Richard Nolan, 87, State Labor Leader
Richard H. Nolan, a retired New York labor leader and state official, died on Wednesday at the North Broward Medical Center in Pompano Beach, Fla.
A long-time resident of Eastchester, he was 87 and lived in Hillsboro Beach, Fla.
He suffered a short illness, according to the New York State AFL-CIO.


El Paso Electric (ELPAQ,NNM) reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Rutgers Tuition Increasing
Tuition charges at Rutgers University will go up about $146 next year, to $3,786, for most New Jersey undergraduates, the university announced yesterday.
Room and board will also increase by 4 percent, to $4,936.


For Matsushita, Life Without MCA Probably Means a Return to Nuts and Bolts
If the flamboyance and extravagance of Hollywood has an antithesis, it may be the penny-pinching tradition of Osaka, Japan, where older folks still greet each other with "mokarimakka," or Have you made money today?
That difference in attitude and business outlook helps explain the reason for the imminent parting of the Matsushita Electric Industrial Company, the world's largest consumer electronics company, and MCA Inc., one of America's most dynamic movie and music studios.


MIRAGE RESORTS SAYS BANKS HAVE INCREASED CREDIT LINE
Mirage Resorts Inc. said yesterday that Bank of America and 19 other banks had increased the company's bank credit line to $1 billion from $525 million at 7.125 percent.
Mirage will use some of the money to finance its previously announced call of the last $126 million of 9.875 percent Treasure Island casino bonds.
Mirage will also use some of the money to start construction this year on its planned Beau Rivage casino resort on the Las Vegas Strip, which may cost $1 billion.


George Woodbridge, History Teacher, 86
George Woodbridge, a history professor and author who advised governments on economic recovery, died on March 27 at Rex Hospital in Raleigh, N.C.
He had lived in Washington and the New York area for much of his career and in Raleigh since 1987.
He was 86.
The cause was renal failure, said his son, David G. Woodbridge.


A New Mexican Bond Fails to Materialize
When Mexico's economic crisis was taking a turn for the worse in early January, Government officials promised that in two weeks they would introduce a new kind of treasury bond to replace those that were pegged to dollars and which had been identified as a principal cause of Mexico's economic troubles.
Three months later, the Government not only has failed to create a new bond, but officials now also concede that they are unlikely to bring to the market any version of the dollar-based bonds -- known as tesobonos -- this year.
Instead, they say they will raise funds by offering commericial paper sometime after May that would be backed by loan guarantees from the United States, if the market accepts it.


Another Plot Is Laid to Bombing Suspect
A year after the bombing of the World Trade Center in New York, the man accused of engineering the attack arrived half a world away in the Philippines with a similar mission: organizing terrorist attacks against Americans and others seen as enemies of Islam, according to American and Philippine officials who have tracked his movements in this country.
As in New York, they say, the suspect, Ramzi Ahmed Yousef, quickly worked here to convert Muslim fundamentalists into terrorists.
Investigators say they believe he found dozens of willing recruits, choosing them from among longtime Arab residents of the Philippines and from among the large community of Filipino Muslims.


Review/Fashion; Beene: Innovative and, Yes, Intellectual
Over the years, American sportswear pieces that were classics in the 1950's and slowly evolved into basics by the 90's became the fashion equivalent of a golden retriever: eager to please, comfortable and dull-witted.
Instead of doing what many designers do, which is camouflaging their American sportswear and claiming it is anything but that, Geoffrey Beene grabbed American sportswear and hauled it up to couture level by the straps of its overalls, in a collection he called American Primitive.


Laurie Anderson, With Humanity
Laurie Anderson, once a seemingly dispassionate observer of machines and codes, lets humanity emerge in "The Nerve Bible," her first full-scale multimedia work in five years.
It's a chain of stories, songs and wordless imagery flashing across video screens.
It's a globe-hopping artist's travelogue entwined with tall tales, and it's also a ruminative elegy.
Just before intermission of her show on Thursday night at the Neil Simon Theater, Ms.
Anderson put aside her cool, stylized voice and movements to talk about a trek in Tibet, where she nearly died.
She was pulled through, she said, by a companion who kept her conscious with nonstop conversation: "Maybe you know what it's like to be saved this way, just by the sound of another person's voice." It was as close as she has ever come to sentimentality, while it was also, implicitly, a statement of purpose. ("The Nerve Bible" is to continue tonight and tomorrow night at the Neil Simon Theater, 250 West 52d Street, Manhattan.)


Nations Pledge to Set Limits By 1997 on Warming Gases
Defying the pessimistic predictions of some environmentalists, delegates at a United Nations conference agreed today to open negotiations to fix new limits on heat-trapping gases that threaten to change the global climate.
Delegates from industrial countries pledged that by 1997 they would conclude a protocol containing specific limits and goals for further reductions "within specified timeframes, such as 2005, 2010 and 2020." Negotiations are to begin this summer.


Bigger Haul With Toy Gun
A bank robber whose take declined after he graduated from using a toy gun to a real one in three robberies last year pleaded guilty in Federal Court yesterday.
Albert J. Voute, 20, of Oradel, got $10,422 last May brandishing the toy weapon at a Dumont bank.
Two months later, packing a real gun, his haul fell to $3,048 at a Riverdale bank and $1,245 at a bank in Milford.
He faces up to 70 years in prison.


Corrections
The House Proud column in The Home Section on March 16 about the renovation of a tiny Greenwich Village apartment credited the design and contracting incompletely.
Much of the design was by Earl Culberson, the apartment's previous owner, and the contractor was Lee Bush.


Executive Changes
CLAYTON, DUBILIER &amp; RICE INC., New York, a private investment firm, said it had named Donald J. Gogel and Alberto Cribiore to the newly created positions of co-presidents.
DILLON, READ &amp; CO., New York, said William O. Hiltz had joined the firm as a managing director in the corporate finance department.
He had been a managing director at Smith Barney, a unit of Travelers Inc.
GENERAL FELT INDUSTRIES, Saddle Brook, N.J., a unit of Foamex International, named Terry J. Kall president.
SAVIN CORP., West Caldwell, N.J., a subsidiary of Ricoh Corp., appointed Jim Ivy president and chief executive.
YAMAICHI INTERNATIONAL (AMERICA) INC., New York, a unit of Yamaichi Securities Co.
Ltd., named Isamu Ogasawara chairman and chief executive, David F. Sexton vice chairman and Noboru Aiba president.


Bringing Art to Life


French Socialist Facing Uphill Presidential Run
It's not easy being the Socialist candidate to succeed the Socialist President, Francois Mitterrand, after 14 years.
So Lionel Jospin is just hoping voters will let him win second place in the first round of the elections on April 23.
That would make Mr.
Jospin the standard-bearer of the French left in an expected runoff with either Mayor Jacques Chirac of Paris or Prime Minister Edouard Balladur, both conservatives, on May 7.


Corrections
An obituary on March 28 about Dr.
James S. Coleman, a University of Chicago sociologist, referred imprecisely to his survivors.
He had three sons from his first marriage, to Lucille Richey Coleman -- Thomas, of Greenwich, Conn.; John, of Madison, Wis., and Stephen, of Baltimore -- and a fourth son, Daniel, of Chicago, from his marriage to Zdzislawa Walaszek.


IN PERFORMANCE: CLASSICAL MUSIC
Experiencing Sylvia Plath Through Words and Music
New York Virtuosi Alice Tully Hall


Princeton's Hill Heads to Columbia
ARMOND HILL, Ivy League player of the year at Princeton in the 1975-76 season and an assistant coach there the last four seasons, was named head coach at Columbia yesterday, replacing the 63-year-old JACK ROHAN, who resigned last month.
Hill, a 41-year-old Brooklyn native, coached the Lawrenceville School to the New Jersey prep title in 1990.
From 1976-84, he played in the National Basketball Association with four teams -- Atlanta, Milwaukee, Seattle and the San Diego Clippers.


Netscape Sells an 11% Stake to Investors
The Netscape Communications Corporation said today that it had sold 11 percent of the company to a group of private investors consisting of Adobe Systems Inc., the Hearst Corporation, Knight-Ridder, Tele-Communications Inc. and the Times Mirror Company.
Terms were not disclosed.
Netscape is the producer of Netscape Navigator, the most popular software program for browsing the World Wide Web, a multimedia portion of the Internet, the global web of computer networks.
Primarily distributed free, Navigator is used by some three million people.
Netscape also sells versions of Navigator for companies that are operating sites on the World Wide Web for $1,500 to $5,000.


Pioneer Hi-Bred Intl.(PHYB,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


IN PERFORMANCE: POP
Hard-Core Music, Harder-Core Integrity  Fugazi
Irving Plaza


Man Convicted in Harlem Mosque Melee Is Sentenced to Probation
The only man arrested in connection with a melee between the police and worshipers at a Harlem mosque last year has been sentenced to five years' probation for assaulting a police officer.
The confrontation, on Jan. 9, 1994, turned into an early crisis for the Giuliani administration.


Mistrial Called in Bribe Case Of Suffolk County Politician
A deadlocked jury led to a mistrial today in the case of a Suffolk County politician accused of taking bribes from John McNamara, the former Buick dealer who has confessed to bilking General Motors out of $436 million.
Jurors said they had voted 11 to 1 to convict Anthony Aliperti, a former member of the Brookhaven Town Planning Board, of accepting bribes from Mr.
McNamara in exchange for his vote in favor of Mr.
McNamara's development projects.


Civitavecchia Journal; Crying Madonna, Blood And Many, Many Tests
It has been two months since 5-year-old Jessica Gregori first spotted the tears of blood running down the face of the statue of the Virgin Mary in her family's front yard on the outskirts of this down-and-out port city.
Since then, all of Italy has been gripped by the mystery of the crying Madonna.
The phenomenon has been made more compelling by reports of at least 12 other statues around the country shedding tears of blood -- more than in the last 10 years combined.


Accountant Fined in Bribery
A $1,500 bribe to an Internal Revenue Service agent resulted in a $15,000 fine to Harold Hofflin, an accountant from Fort Lee who was also sentenced to two years' probation by a Federal judge.
Hofflin, who works for the firm Gelbord, Roth &amp; Company of New York, admitted to conspiring with Arthur Lubell, a lawyer, in 1991 to bribe the I.R.S. agent during an audit.
Mr.
Lubell, who pleaded guilty in November, is awaiting sentencing.


Governor Criticizes A Chief Ally
Gov.
George E. Pataki criticized his chief ally in the State Legislature today for referring to blacks and people of Hispanic background as "people that got their hands out" for welfare.
The unusual rebuke from a fellow Republican came in response to comments the Senate majority leader, Joseph L. Bruno, made in a Newsday interview published today.
In that interview, Mr.
Bruno attacked Assembly Speaker Sheldon Silver, a Democrat from Manhattan, for representing what he called the interests of "the lowest-income people" over those of the middle class.


Fresh Del Monte Produce N.V. reports earnings for Year to Dec 30


Stolt-Nielsen SA reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


Rich Nations Criticize U.S. On Foreign Aid
An organization of wealthy industrial nations issued a stinging report today criticizing the United States for moving to cut foreign aid when it already gives a smaller share of its economic output to such assistance than any other industrial nation.
The Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development, a Paris-based group of 25 nations, said the United States, once far and away the world's leading donor, was setting a poor example by cutting its aid budget and warned that the move might prompt other countries to follow suit.


Golf; Haas Follows His Uncle's Footsteps to Top of the Masters Board
The Masters, more than any other tournament, is inexorably linked to the past.
Old champions return year after year to be a part of the scene, sometimes to walk the fairways where they won, sometimes just to breathe the air at golf's summit once again.
Usually, though, they don't ride invisibly on the shoulders of their kinfolk, whispering advice into their ears.
Until today, that is, when Jay Haas heeded some old advice from his Uncle Bob and rode it to the top after two rounds of the 59th Masters.


Crenshaw Recalls Tutor
After a 67 today that moved Ben Crenshaw within two strokes of the Masters lead going into Saturday's third round, the little Texan who learned to play golf under the wise eyes of the late Harvey Penick remembered his "one last lesson" from the renowned teaching pro.
"He was in bed a week ago Sunday," Crenshaw said of Penick, who died Sunday after a long illness at the age of 90, "and he said, 'Can you please get a putter and show me how you're stroking the ball.'


Torricelli Stirs Anger
House Republicans are angry that Representative Robert G. Torricelli of New Jersey revealed C.I.A. links to the killer of an American in Guatemala.
But, not wanting to make the Democrat a martyr, they decided not to throw him off the House Intelligence Committee.
Article, page 25.


Haitians Intercepted At Sea Are Returned
A Coast Guard cutter intercepted a boat carrying 140 people from Haiti and the Dominican Republic 25 miles east of Miami Beach on Thursday and is taking them back to Port-au-Prince, the State Department said today.
Christine Shelly, a department spokeswoman, said the 50-foot sailboat was stopped because it was dangerously overcrowded and American officials believed the 128 Haitians and 12 Dominicans aboard were seeking to immigrate illegally.


A Sense of Scale With Juilliard Students
"Werther" fits the Juilliard Theater.
The space provides a correct environment for young voices, and Massenet's endearing operatic corruption of Goethe adds just the right music for them.
The opera arrived on Wednesday night peopled by singers and players from the Juilliard School and led by Guido Ajmone-Marsan.
Mr.
Ajmone-Marsan has a good effect on his young pit orchestra, which played not just with competence but also with style and understanding.
Opera has a way of heightening human passions by simplifying relationships.
Thus the Edouard Blau libretto embraced by Massenet is about star-crossed love: lovers wrapped in a hopeful embrace that will never really be.
Goethe's Werther is more interesting because his life is lived on the inside.
He is the ruminating delusionary to whom Albert and Charlotte, a devoted couple, remain loving friends until death.
Romantic opera copes poorly with subtleties like this.


Centura Banks Inc.(CBC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Apparitions Case to A.C.L.U.
Publishers of a newsletter dedicated to reports of religious apparitions at a Monmouth County site will be defended in court by the American Civil Liberties Union.
Judge Patrick McGann of Superior Court had ordered Vincent and Karen Bove not to publish their newsletter unless he first approved what it said.
The newsletter reports sightings of the Virgin Mary, which have drawn unwanted crowds to the property of Joseph Januszkiewicz in Marlboro.
The restraining order, which also prohibits the Boves from encouraging believers to gather or hold vigils, is a "blatantly unconstitutional" attempt at prior restraint on guarantees of free speech as expressed in the First Amendment, the A.C.L.U. said in a motion challenging the action.


CPI Corp.(CPY,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 4


CHRONICLE
Spontaneity may be a hallmark of "Live With Regis and Kathie Lee," the morning show on ABC-TV, but no one could have predicted yesterday's surprise: a bomb threat.
REGIS PHILBIN and CRISTINA FERRARE, who was filling in during Kathie Lee Gifford's vacation, were in the midst of interviewing the models Naomi Campbell, Elle MacPherson and Claudia Schiffer when Mr.
Philbin suddenly announced that there had been a bomb threat and told everyone to leave the studio immediately.


Drug Emporium Inc.(DEMP,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 25


COMPANY BRIEFS
BOISE CASCADE OFFICE PRODUCTS CORP., Boise, Idaho, a forest products company, sold 15.4 percent, or $100 million worth, of its office products unit in Itasca, Ill., in an initial public offering of 4.63 million shares at $25 a share.
MAPLE LEAF FOODS INC., Toronto, advised that its shareholders should accept a $923 million takeover offer from Wallace McCain, co-founder and former president of McCain Foods Ltd., Florenceville, New Brunswick, and the Ontario Teachers' Pension Plan Board.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
9.00
9.00
6.25
DISCOUNT RATE
5.25
5.25
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
5.94
5.95
3.36
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.66
5.65
3.54
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.81
5.79
3.94
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.10
7.06
6.91
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.39
7.34
7.25
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.26
8.21
8.10
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.29
6.30
6.40
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills 8


No Headline
There's no disgrace being here.
There's no reason to be ashamed about being here.
If there wasn't a strike, we wouldn't be here. -- DAVE STEWART, a pitcher, at a special spring training session for baseball's free agents.  [ 35:1. ]


Finding Friends Among Competitors
NO money down.
Down, more like broke and depressed, is how Jesus Rodriguez felt after an accidental fire incinerated his Bronx hardware store one July morning in 1992.
Within hours, flames destroyed his business and five others that shared a bustling stretch of Tremont Avenue.
They nearly destroyed any chance of rebuilding.


Messinger Ventures West of 12th Avenue
Like New Yorkers, residents of China's largest city have a reputation for aggressiveness, savvy and style.
But when it comes to comparisons, there is no Shanghai equivalent to Manhattan.
With 14 districts instead of 5 boroughs, Shanghai has no single cultural, financial and political center.
Nor is there an equivalent to Manhattan Borough President Ruth W. Messinger, who visited Shanghai this week with a dozen New York businessmen and three members of her staff.


Layoffs at Daily Racing Form
The thoroughbred horse-racing industry is shrinking, and so is the work force at The Daily Racing Form.
The paper is laying off between 50 and 80 pressmen, drivers and clerical staff at its printing plant here.
The venerable racing sheet is consolidating its printing operations.


John Callender, 86, Architect and Editor
John Hancock Callender, an architect and editor who was an expert on building materials and more efficient methods of construction, died on March 30 at the Meadowood Retirement Community in Worcester, Pa., where he moved five years ago.
A longtime resident of Lebanon, Conn., he was 86.
The cause was cancer, said his wife, Mary Carnwath.


Cortines Supports a Plan to End Lifetime School Bus Driver Jobs
Pushed by Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani, Schools Chancellor Ramon C. Cortines said yesterday that he wanted to break the lifetime job guarantees for school bus drivers, even if the drivers carry out their threat to strike.
Both the Chancellor and the Mayor say the lifetime job provision has made New York City's school transportation costs the highest in the nation.


Observer; Boons And Buffoons
Politicians are rarely more enchanting than when they are engaged in some outrageous piece of chicanery like the tax giveaway to the fancier classes just passed by the House of Representatives.
This is because there is always something both touching and amusing about hypocrisy so blatantly displayed.
For absurdity it would be hard to improve on the spectacle of the Republican hordes rushing to cut taxes even while howling that the nation is being destroyed by a deficit.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 2-5  MEXICAN POLICE LINKED TO KILLING  Almost a year after the slaying of a reform-minded police chief of Tijuana, officials said that Mexican police agents working for drug traffickers were responsible. 1  IRAQ SPURNS U.N.
Editorials/Op-Ed 22-23  Editorials  The state budget standoff.
Renewed repression in Kenya.
Senator D'Amato's apology.
Curtailing civil justice.
Letters  Russell Baker: Boons and buffoons.
Bob Herbert: The new slavery.
Mark Hertsgaard: Global warning.
Birch Bayh: The White House safety net.
Chronicle 24 Bridge 19 Crossword 18


Most Nigerians Feel Relieved That Coup Failed
To the Editor:
Re your March 27 editorial on Nigeria: Gen.
Sani Abacha did not become head of state immediately after the annulment of the June 12, 1993, presidential election, as you imply.
Nor did he annul the election.


Bold Plan Seeks to Wrest Control of Federal Lands
When it comes to outsiders, especially those wearing military uniforms and suits, the ranching and logging families of Otero County have always been a little suspicious.
But one newcomer, a Los Angeles lawyer whose monogrammed white shirts and splashy ties contrast with his clients' dusty boots and jeans, has become something of a hero.


Yesterday in Washington
THE REPUBLICANS Speaker Newt Gingrich celebrated the first months of the Republican-controlled Congress by addressing the nation and setting out what he said would be a bipartisan map for the future.
The televised address during prime time was virtually unprecedented for anyone but a President.
The address came after House Republicans staged a celebration of their success with the Contract With America before heading home for a three-week recess.
Senator Robert C. Byrd, the West Virginia Democrat who has vowed to fight the contract's provisions as they arrive, dismissed the House Republicans' legislative agenda as "the wish list of the extreme faction of one political party packaged to sell better by giving it the legitimacy of 'contract.' "


Hockey; Rangers Roll Out a Welcome Mat for the Islanders
It is becoming increasingly apparent that this might not be another Year of the Rangers.
A year and a month after they acquired four key players for the stretch run to the Stanley Cup, the Rangers basically stood pat at the trading deadline yesterday.


SHL Systemhouse (SHKIF,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


Charles Bell, 60, Photo-Realist Artist
Charles Bell, a Photo-Realist painter specializing in still lifes, died on Saturday at New York University Hospital.
He was 60 and lived in Manhattan.
The cause was lymphoma, and he had AIDS, said Louis K. Meisel, his New York dealer.


BENEFITS
PEN on the Green  TUESDAY -- PEN American Center in New York, the literary organization, will be the beneficiary of a dinner-dance and awards ceremony at Tavern on the Green.
The black-tie evening will begin with drinks at 7, followed by dinner at 7:45 and dancing.
Betty Comden and Sam Waterston will read poetry, and Gay Talese will present the awards.
Tickets, $800, from (212) 334-1660.
Bunny Hop  TUESDAY -- The associate committee of the Society of Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center is holding its fourth annual Bunny Hop from 7 to 9 P.M. at F.A.O.
Schwarz, 767 Fifth Avenue at 58th Street.
There will be entertainment for children, who are encouraged to bring Easter baskets and wear bonnets, and Madeline, Gumby and Popeye will be on hand.
Tickets, $80, or $40 for those age 17 and under, from (212) 639-7972.
For the Everett Rock Garden  TUESDAY -- A reception to benefit the New York Botanical Garden's T. H. Everett Rock Garden will be held at the Sea Grill at Rockefeller Plaza, beginning at 5:30.
Tickets, $75, from (718) 817-8773.
The Newest Neil Simon  TUESDAY -- The Goddard Riverside Community Center, a Manhattan settlement house, will benefit from an opening-week performance of Neil Simon's new comedy, "London Suite," at 8 P.M. at the Union Square Theater, 100 East 17th Street.
The event will begin at 5:30 with dinner at Canastel's restaurant, 233 Park Avenue South at 19th Street.
A raffle will include jewelry, dinners and trips.
Tony Randall will be the guest speaker.
Tickets, $150, or $100 for the play alone, from (212) 873-4448.
Folk Art at Sotheby's  TUESDAY -- An auction of folk and fine-art items from the 18th century to the present at Sotheby's (1334 York Avenue at 72d Street) will benefit the Museum of American Folk Art.
Donna Hanover Giuliani is the honorary chairwoman.
Cocktails and a silent auction at 6:30 P.M. will be followed by a live auction at 7:30 and dinner at 8:30.
Tickets, $350, or $150 for the cocktails and auctions only, from (212) 977-7170.
For the Pratt Institute  TUESDAY -- Bill Cosby will perform and the singer Judy Collins will be the mistress of ceremonies at a black-tie dinner at the Plaza to raise money for the Pratt Institute Scholarship Fund.
Richard D. Parsons, the president of Time Warner, will receive the Pratt Institute Founders Award.
Drinks at 6:30 will be followed by dinner and dancing.
Tickets, $500, from (212) 517-3547.
Spring Ahead Gala  WEDNESDAY -- The Jeffrey Modell Foundation, which helps children with inherited immune system deficiencies, will hold a benefit at the Plaza.
Cocktails at 7 will be followed by dinner and dancing at 8.
Tickets, $400, from (212) 575-1122.
Under the Big Top  WEDNESDAY -- The Children's Advocacy Center of Manhattan, a child-abuse treatment clinic that is scheduled to open this summer at the New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center, will benefit from a performance by the Canadian troupe Cirque du Soleil.
The evening begins at 6 with a cocktail party at the New York Athletic Club, 19 West Street (off Battery Place).
Guests will then proceed across West Street for the 8 o'clock performance at Battery Park City.
Tickets, $200, or $50 for children, from (212) 685-1095.
Performance-only tickets, $50. 'Wings' in 3-D  WEDNESDAY -- The premiere of "Wings of Courage," the first dramatic movie filmed in Imax 3-D, will benefit the Make-a-Wish Foundation.
The film will be shown at 5:45 and 8:30 P.M. at Sony Theaters Lincoln Square, Broadway at 68th Street.
A reception and buffet supper at Tavern on the Green with the film's director, Jean-Jacques Annaud, and two of its stars, Craig Sheffer and Elizabeth McGovern, will follow the 8:30 screening.
Tickets, $150 for the 8:30 screening and reception, or $50 for the 5:45 screening alone, from (212) 605-0215.
Cooper-Hewitt Tabletops  WEDNESDAY -- Lady Henrietta Spencer-Churchill, Geoffrey N. Bradfield, Katina Arts Meyer, Jordan Mozer and other designers have created one-of-a-kind tabletop arrangements that will be offered in a live auction at Christie's.
The event, from 6 to 8 P.M., is to benefit the Cooper-Hewitt National Design Museum.
The evening includes champagne and hors d'oeuvres and a silent auction.
Black tie.
Tickets, $150, from (212) 860-6163.
For the Juilliard School  THURSDAY -- A black-tie dinner and a performance by Karen Gormio, a violinist, at the Juilliard Theater, 155 West 65th Street, will benefit the Juilliard School's scholarship programs.
The evening will begin with drinks and hors d'oeuvres at 7, followed by a tour of the school at 7:45, dinner and the performance at 9.
Tickets, $500, from (212) 799-6780.
Two Passover Seders  FRIDAY AND SATURDAY -- Two nights of Passover seders at Capsouto Freres, a restaurant at 451 Washington Street off Watts Street, will raise money for the American Jewish Joint Distribution Committee's programs for Ethiopian Jews in Israel.
The organization aids needy Jewish communities worldwide.
The events begin at 6:30.
Tickets, $75, from (212) 966-4900.
Theater History  APRIL 17 -- A benefit for the Hudson Guild Theater, 441 West 26th Street, will be held there at 7:30 P.M.
Geraldine Fitzgerald, Tammy Grimes, Kate Burton, Daniel Gerroll, Loni Ackerman and others will speak about the history of the theater and perform scenes from plays.
Katie Kelly will be the mistress of ceremonies.
A reception will follow at 9.
Tickets, $15, from (212) 760-9812.
By Mannes Alumni  APRIL 17 -- At Alice Tully Hall at 8 P.M., the mezzo-soprano Frederica von Stade and the soprano Olga Makarina, both alumnae of the Mannes College of Music, will perform in a concert to raise money for a new scholarship.
An alumnus, Yves Abel, will be the guest conductor of the Mannes Orchestra.
The concert is a tribute to Dr.
Charles Kaufman, the dean of Mannes, after whom the scholarship will be named.
The event will begin with a reception with Dr.
Kaufman and the artists at 6:30 in the Rose Building, 70 Lincoln Center Plaza.
Tickets, $100, or $15 for the concert only, from (212) 496-8524.


On Stage at the Met
No opera but plenty of fans at an annual black-tie fund-raising event, April 2.


U.S.O.C. Experts Call Drug Testing a Failure
Medical experts from the United States Olympic Committee today called drug-testing procedures a failure in this country and called for increased out-of-competition tests that would give athletes little or no notice.
The U.S.O.C. has conducted about 1,400 out-of-competition drug tests since 1992, said Dr.
Wade Exum, director of the Olympic committee's drug-control program.
Only one athlete has tested positive, Exum said, which made him question the effectiveness of catching cheaters.


After 100 Days, a 'Legacy of Unfairness' or a 'Bolder Direction'?
Congress broke on Friday for its first major recess since Republicans won control of the House and Senate after 40 years of almost unbroken Democratic majorities.
The first 100 days were a blur of debate, dispute and legislation.
Speaker Newt Gingrich had long promised House action on the entire Contract With America, the Republican legislative agenda, during this period, and he delivered.
But the outlook for much of this legislation in the Senate is unclear.
And a fierce debate is under way over the significance of this parliamentary sprint and its meaning for Americans.


April 2-8; A Senator's Lesson on Fighting Words
It wasn't Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato's first attempt to wow an audience with a funny accent, or even the first time he was accused of making insensitive remarks.
But it was the first time the New York Republican, who himself has shed tears over perceived slurs on his Italian heritage, offered an apology for his remarks on the floor of the Senate.


Antipasti Shine in Old-Fashioned Setting
AT Rialto Restaurant in Carle Place the Venetian connection is elusive.
No paintings of pigeons in St.
Mark's Square nor gondolas on the Grand Canal grace its walls.
The chef and owner, who was chatting with diners, mentioned that the restaurant was named, not for the island in Venice, but for his elementary school near Trieste.
Whatever its inspiration, Rialto Restaurant is an attractive spot and a standout in an unlikely neighborhood that includes a medical-supply store and an automobile-body shop.
Inside, a glistening array of antipastos delights diners, as do the pretty antiques, beamed ceilings, sparkling white stucco walls, elaborately framed mirrors, beautiful breakfront, brass sconces and dark woodwork.


AN ABORTIONIST'S CREDO
Finally, someone has illuminated, in a few powerful sentences, the fact that giving birth to a human child is not the same as having a litter of pups.
A woman has reason and emotions as well as instinct.


ANSWERS: Star Trek Luggage
No flying object may be as well known as the Starship Enterprise of the "Star Trek" television programs.
When a question was posed on these pages about why so few people boarding the Enterprise came with suitcases ("What Happened to Their Luggage?" Feb. 26), readers came up with some inventive answers.
Here's a sampling:
-- All Federation luggage is routinely beamed by Delta travel agents through the baggage facility at the Denver Airport.
Any further questions?
N.
Cialoppi, Weston, Conn.


Fraud Charged on Eve of Peru Vote
As Peruvians prepared to go to the voting booths on Sunday, the integrity of the country's elections was called into question tonight when Javier Perez de Cuellar, who is opposing President Alberto K. Fujimori, accused the President of direct involvement in a ballot tampering scheme.
Mr.
Perez de Cuellar, the former United Nations Secretary General who is trailing far behind the Mr.
Fujimori in opinion polls, said in a meeting with reporters that he had received information that the voter fraud discovered in the city of Huanuco on Thursday was common throughout the country.


Douglas Gardner, Jennifer Radding
Jennifer Ty Radding, a daughter of Linda and Edward Radding of Longmeadow, Mass., was married in New York last evening to Douglas Benjamin Gardner, the son of Charlotte and Joseph Gardner of New York.
Rabbi Charles Davidson officiated at the Essex House.
Mrs.
Gardner, 28, is an associate at Proskauer Rose Goetz &amp; Mendelsohn, the New York law firm.
She graduated magna cum laude from Tufts University, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa.
She received her law degree from Harvard University.
Her father is the president of Radding Signs, an outdoor advertising agency in Springfield, Mass.
Her mother teaches the fourth grade at the Pottenger Elementary School there.


Everett Is Deeper in the Doghouse for Snapping at Segui
Dallas Green could not believe what he was hearing.
It was the middle of a simple outfield drill this morning at the Mets' spring training complex, and Carl Everett, his new center field prospect, was cursing out David Segui, a veteran player.
Everett apparently felt that Segui, in left field, was not running hard enough for fly balls that fell between left and center.
He accused Segui of not working hard.
He complained about how much running he had to do to get to the balls.
He said some things -- in a shout that could be heard clear across the field in the bleachers -- that are too impolite to print.


Teen-Age Angst


For Bargain Hunters, Outlets vs. Thrift Shops
To The Editor:
"Shopping the Outlets: Are They Worth the Trip?" (March 26) prompts this observation.
Why spend hours shlepping to Secaucus when bigger bargains await on the Upper East Side?
Last month, at a tony thrift store on 77th Street, I bought a $15,000 Dior suit -- better than anything available at Bergdorf's or Barney's -- for 40 bucks.
A Scaasi gown, worth $9,000, was mine for $9.
One problem: if you become a regular, you may need a larger apartment.
BRIAN M. SCHWARTZ Manhattan


Big Race, Big Moment Becomes Big Nothing
In a power play that was tantamount to a Hollywood movie deal, the America's Cup defenders took it upon themselves last Tuesday to rewrite the outcome of racing to fit personal interests.
Sport -- as a contest decided on merit -- ended up taking second billing, and yacht racing gave itself a black eye.
Dennis Conner's Stars &amp; Stripes and Bill Koch's Mighty Mary were scheduled in a sailoff to decide which boat would become the second qualifier for the Citizen Cup defenders finals.
But less than two hours before the start of the race, syndicate heads agreed instead to give all three teams a place in the finals.
By killing the sudden-death playoff, negotiators upstaged the most important match of the trials so far.


Sorry, No Men to Die For; Backpacks, Party Packs
UPTOWN -- The crowd at the "Art of Dying" conference presented by New York Open Center and Tibet House on April 1 and 2 was a cheerful one.
Robert Thurman, the chairman of the Columbia University department of religion and the author of a new translation of "The Tibetan Book of the Dead," said he wasn't surprised.
"Once people decide to face death and dying, they find it liberating," he said on April 1 in the lobby of the Holiday Inn Crowne Plaza in midtown, where the conference was taking place.
"It makes you recognize the essential things in life. Also, because many of the people here are health-care workers or care givers who comfort the dying, they find being together a cheering thing."


NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-15  A REAPPRAISAL OF VIETNAM  Robert S. McNamara, once a champion of escalating the Vietnam War, has concluded in a new memoir that the United States should have withdrawn earlier. 1  CHECHEN HEALTH CARE CRISIS  Like most things in the capital of the Russian breakaway republic of Chechnya, Grozny, the health care system is in ruins, with only three civilian hospitals functioning. 3


Easter Music of Solemnity and Joy
MUSIC that underscores one of the most solemn religious observances of the year is to be heard in dozens of programs across Westchester County, including requiems by two towering and vastly different composers.
Based on the Roman Catholic Mass for the Dead, the term Requiem aeternam, or rest eternal, has inspired numerous eponymous works, among the most notable are those of Mozart and Faure.


Rivalry and Graft Mire West African Nations
There has never been a war between Ghana and Burkina Faso, but anyone trying to get from the capital of one of these West African neighbors to the capital of the other could be excused for thinking otherwise.
Both countries have national airlines with their own regional routes, yet there are no flights between them.
Large numbers of Burkinabe have long lived in Ghana, and yet the main road linking the two countries is so strewn with potholes that, according to a local joke, the only drivers seen traveling in straight lines on the highway are drunks.


Searching for Answers by the Sea
THE convent is on the side of a mountain at the edge of the sea.
We work every day with the sisters, shelling pigeon peas.
In the afternoon I go down into the jungle at the foot of the road and shake nutmeg out of trees.
Or watch the men with machetes cutting bananas and plantains.
Or the children stripping bark from the cinnamon tree, or picking mangoes, papayas, cocoa, cashew fruit.
In the early morning a donkey brays in the nearby village of La Digue.
We have our room and meals for 16 American dollars a day.
Nothing is required of us.
My friend and I are here for the last few days of our vacation in Grenada.
It is April, the end of the dry season.
The Council of Bishops arrives next week to fill the halls of the retreat center adjacent to the convent, but now we are the only two guests.
Our rooms are close to the sisters' quarters.
In the early afternoon, in the steamy heat of the day, when we rest, I can hear canned laughter from a television, and somebody coughing, somebody singing.
I can hear a young boy's pleading voice, and Sister Philomena's measured no, followed by the boy again.
I can hear the soft swish of a mop in the hallway, and the hollow sound of a bucket, and the sound of the bathroom door opening, a heavy door.
When the day cools in the evening, sometimes we walk the path that leads from the convent out to the edge of the cliff.
Half a mile below, the sea breaks on reefs stretching to the horizon.


Versatile Asparagus for Spring Dishes
ASPARAGUS is now available year round, so we have come to take it for granted.
But for me, it is still a food associated with spring.
It is at its peak in April and May when it is plentiful and inexpensive.
Steamed asparagus, dipped in melted butter and eaten by hand, is one of the delights of the season.
But there are many other ways to prepare this versatile vegetable.
It makes a delicious soup: served plain or laced with a dollop of goat cheese or a quenelle made from crab meat or a sprinkling of small shrimp with basil.
It is also good stir-fried with scallops and sesame seeds to go with rice or sauteed with shiitake mushrooms as a sauce for pasta.


Confessions of a Rapper Who Done Wrong
NOTORIETY SELLS: TUPAC (2Pac) Shakur's new album, "Me Against the World," zoomed to No. 1 when it was released in mid-March.
His newest fans were drawn by reports of his conviction for sexual abuse, a few days after he'd been shot in a robbery at a Manhattan recording studio.
As other rappers strive to prove their "realness," 2Pac has become a certified outlaw, with bullet wounds and a one-and-a-half- to four-and-a-half-year prison sentence to prove it.
"Me Against the World" (Inter scope; CD and cassette) starts out with simulated news bulletins (about the shooting, not the sexual abuse trial).
But that's as specific as the album gets about Shakur's situation.
"If I'm insane, it's the fame made a brother change," 2Pac raps at one point, without follow-up.
The most relevant track begins, "Who you calling rapist?" and then flings accusations in all directions: at "devils," at "crooked cops," at people who are "jealous of a brother when he rise.""It's hell where they're sending me," 2Pac raps.


ALOFT IN MILAN
On top of an old cheese factory, an Italian architect has created an apartment of accumulated charm.
Flea-market finds, architectural artifacts, folk art, hand-colored tiles: many of the furnishings are humble.
But put them all together, light a few candles, and the effect is soft and glamorous.
Under the whitewashed beams of what was once a gorgonzola warehouse, the architect and design consultant Paola Navone has created an apartment that epitomizes a modern point of view.
Here, the simplicity of handmade objects and rough-hewn materials is enhanced by a sophisticated choice of furnishings and bold use of color.


The Land Enthralled By Mopeds
By 6 P.M. a thick, noxious haze hangs over this city, obscuring the vision and attacking the lungs.
The loud sound of engines announces the heavy evening traffic.
At one of Ouagadougou's rare stoplights, two young male drivers rev their engines.
Each has a female companion aboard.
Not quite capable of a screeching peel-out, with a wink between them, nonetheless, each has placed a bet that he will be first through the dusty intersection.


Room Service


At A. &amp; S., a Sign* of the Future
The large white tarpaulin hanging on the wall of the A. &amp; S. headquarters on Fulton Street still bears the two doomed initials in maroon lettering, but the future peeps out from underneath in the form of an asterisk.
It is the trademark asterisk that Macy's uses as an apostrophe.
Macy's, which will replace the A. &amp; S. next month, has already hung its nameplate on the wall.
The A. &amp; S. tarpaulin will come off at an unveiling ceremony on April 27.


WHAT, US WORRY?
Todd S. Purdum's conversation with Ann Richards, Lowell Weicker and Mario Cuomo is helping me deal with the current absurdities in the Congress, in state capitals and on the airwaves across the land ("What, Us Worry?" March 19).
Their comments are marked by grace, intelligence, wisdom and humor, qualities noticeably lacking in those who arrogantly bray about some kind of mandate to dismantle a system which, as Cuomo says, has served the American middle class very well indeed.
WILLIAM J. JACKSON North Springfield, Vt.


Valerie Gordon, Marvin James
Valerie Mitchell Gordon, a daughter of Willie Mitchell of San Diego and the late Dolores Howard, was married on Wednesday to Marvin James, the son of Leonard and Katherine James of Jamaica, Queens.
The Rev.
Dr.
Calvin O. Butts 3d performed the ceremony at the Abyssinian Baptist Church in New York.
Mrs.
James, 30, is an executive assistant at MacAndrews &amp; Forbes Inc., a holding company in New York.
Her father, who retired as a sergeant in the Army, is a bus driver with the San Diego Transit Authority.
The bride's first marriage ended in divorce.


Works by Water, Wind and Fire
WHEN IT COMES TO rock collecting, C. C. Wang is something of a late bloomer.
Most people begin and end their rock collecting before their first outbreak of pimples.
But Mr.
Wang was well into his teens when he bought his first rocks, and he kept on buying them for 60 years.
Rock collecting for Mr.
Wang, an 88-year-old painter, was more than a hobby: he uses rocks as models for the mountains in the landscapes he paints.
But in recent years as Chinese rocks have grown in popularity, Mr.
Wang, a Chinese-American, has begun to part with his collection.
"I'm getting old, and my children like other things," he said.
"So, I'd rather give the rocks away or sell them. They should go to people who love them."


Rangers Allege That Nordiques Tampered With Zubov
Pierre Lacroix, general manager of the Quebec Nordiques, has denied that he tampered with Sergei Zubov of the Rangers by asking Zubov's agent if Zubov would accept a trade to the Nordiques.
"I never did anything like that," Lacroix said from Ottawa, where the Nordiques played the Senators last night.


In Search of an Exit To Call Home (No Joking)
GUY in the neighborhood made sweet wine in his garage and occasionally would come into possession of a large load of appliances or lawn furniture that many of us liked to imagine was his percentage of a mob truck heist.
Then there was the local hotel, a dark, nondescript box, but with a pedigree: Its zoning variance sparked a corruption investigation.


ON THE TOWNS
Music BASKING RIDGE COUNTRY CLUB The Philharmonic Orchestra of New Jersey presents "Overtures for Singles." Today, with a social hour at 5 P.M. and the concert at 6 P.M.
Tickets: $15.
Morrisville Road in Basking Ridge. (908) 356-6165.
CENTER FOR VISUAL ARTS The Arbor Chamber Music Society presents the St.
Lawrence String Quartet.
Today, 7:30 P.M.
Tickets: $16; the elderly, $12; students, $5. 68 Elm Street, Summit. (908) 232-1116.
GLASSBORO CENTER FOR THE ARTS "The Caribbean Jazz Project" with Paquito D'Rivera, Andy Narell and Dave Samuels.
Today, 7 P.M.
Tickets: $12.50-$17.50.
Rowan College, Glassboro. (609) 256-4545.
JOHN HARMS THEATER "Anything Goes," Cole Porter's toe-tapping musical.
Today, 3 and 7 P.M.
Tickets: $34, $28, $25 and $20. 30 North Van Brunt Street, Englewood. (201) 567-5797.
RUTGERS ARTS CENTER "Nuestra Voz -- Nuestra Opera." Songs and choruses from Latin American zarzuelas and musical shows.
Today, 3 P.M.
Tickets: $10, $8.
Rutgers University, George Street at Route 18, New Brunswick. (908) 932-7511.
Theater CROSSROADS THEATER COMPANY "Harriet's Return." Today, 3 and 8 P.M.
Tickets: $22-35. 17 Livingston Avenue, New Brunswick. (908) 249-5560.
FORUM THEATER GROUP "Two by Two," a Richard Rodgers and Martin Charnin musical.
Today, 2:30 P.M.
Tickets: $23-$27. 314 Main Street, Metuchen. (908) 548-0582.
GEORGE STREET PLAYHOUSE "Off Key," a musical by Richard Adler and Bill C. Davis.
Tuesday through Saturday, 8 P.M.; Sunday, 2 and 7 P.M.
Through April 30.
Tickets: $30. 9 Livingston Avenue, New Brunswick. (908) 246-7717.
PAPER MILL PLAYHOUSE Lerner and Loewe's "Brigadoon." Through May 28.
Wednesday through Sunday, 8 P.M.; matinees Thursday, 2 P.M., and Saturday and Sunday, 3 P.M.
Tickets: $29-$44.
Brookside Drive, Millburn. (201) 376-4343.
Museums and Galleries BERGEN MUSEUM A series of photography exhibitions created by teen-agers of the area.
Through May 21.
Suggested admission: adults, $2.50; children, $1. 327 East Ridgewood Avenue, Paramus. (201) 265-1248.
COMMON BOUNDARIES Visitors to the gallery can pick up a brush and paint over someone else's painting.
It's all part of "Art Amok," an experiment in creative anarchy.
Through April 23.
Monday to Friday, 7 to 10 P.M.; Saturday and Sunday, 11 A.M. to 7 P.M.
Free admission. 68 Mercer Street, Jersey City. (201) 333-0949.
MONTCLAIR ART MUSEUM "What Is a Print?" Works of 60 artists, demonstrating the wide range of prints produced in America over the last 150 years.
"Native American Jewelry" surveys the evolution of this Southwestern art.
Through June 25.
Admission, $4; the elderly and students with ID, $3. 3 South Mountain Avenue. (201) 746-5555.
NEWARK MUSEUM "A World of Their Own: 20th-Century American Folk Art," a show focusing on art made in isolation.
Through May 14.
"Protecting the Pinelands Through Art" illustrates the ecology of the New Jersey Pinelands.
Wednesday through May 21.
"Gods and Goddesses in Indian Art" features paintings, cloth hangings and tiny brass icons dating from the 11th to the 19th centuries.
Through June in the Indian Gallery..
"The Arts of Nepal" includes sculptures and paintings of the Himalayan kingdom.
Through June in the Himalayan Gallery.
"African Design: Heirs to the Trans-Saharan Trade" examines the shared designs in North and Sub-Saharan African arts in the last hundred years.
Through June 1996. 49 Washington Street. (201) 596-6550.
NOYES MUSEUM "Messages From the Planet: Artists Work to Save the Earth," two- and three-dimensional works by artists in the mid-Atlantic region.
Through June 18.
"Looking Due South: Paintings of South Jersey by Glenn Rudderow." Through July 9.
Wednesday through Sunday, 11 A.M. to 4 P.M.
Admission, $3; the elderly, $1.50; students and children under 18, 50 cents.
Free on Fridays.
Lily Lake Road, Oceanville. (609) 652-8848.
PATERSON MUSEUM "Transitions" are painting and computer photo constructions by Robert Anderson.
Through April 23.
"Songs of My People," a photography exhibition featuring 31 African American photojournalists.
Through next Sunday.
"From Celestial to Earthly: Exploring the Environment Through Ourselves." Through next Sunday.
Tuesday through Friday, 10 A.M. to 4 P.M.; Saturday and Sunday, 12:30 P.M. to 4:30 P.M. 2 Market Street. (201) 881-3874.
SOUTH BRUNSWICK LIBRARY An exhibition on the posters of the Guerrilla Girls.
Through Saturday.
Monday to Thursday, 10 A.M. to 9 P.M.; Friday, noon to 6 P.M.; Saturday, 10 A.M. to 5 P.M.; Sunday, 1 to 5 P.M. 110 Kingston Lane, Monmouth Junction.
WATCHUNG ARTS CENTER "Landscapes in Transition," by Gary Godbee.
Monday through Saturday, 1 to 4 P.M.
Through April 29. 128 Stirling Road. (908) 753-0190.
ZIMMERLI ART MUSEUM The Rutgers Collection of Original Illustrations for Children's Literature: "Riders Up! Preparing for a Pony Race," an exhibition of photographs and other materials by Barbara Beirne for her book about a young girl and her pony as they prepare for their first race.
Through July 31.
Free.
Rutgers, corner of George and Hamilton Streets, New Brunswick. (908) 932-7237.
Clubs B-ZARR BAR Wednesday, Soul Finger.
Thursday, Bums in the Park.
Saturday, Pumpin Ethyl and Yo Cuz.
All shows at 10 P.M. 72 Route 46 East, Lodi. (201) 773-1330.
CHAPLINS Wednesday, "The Pink Floyd Show" with Crazy Diamond.
Admission: $7.
Thursday, the Side Show performers.
Free.
Friday and Saturday, dance party.
Admission: $3. 52 South Washington Avenue, Bergenfield. (201) 384-8765.
J.
MALLORY'S Thursday, the UUU.
Friday, Johnny Youth.
Saturday, Katrina Chester Band and Straight Wired.
Admission: $4. 10:30 P.M. 40 Homans Avenue, Closter. (201) 784-8666.
JUNKYARD Thursday, the Party Dolls.
Admission: $5. 352 West Passaic Street, Rochelle Park. (201) 843-1343.
LAUGHING BEAN Wednesday, Kate Jacobs and Thinmen.
Admission: $5. 14 Monmouth Street, Red Bank. (908) 681-8900.
MOTHERS Thursday, the Willies.
Friday, the Nerds with Lurker Park.
Saturday, Information Society with Aim Cryer. 10:30 P.M. 1056 Route 23, North Wayne. (201) 633-5544.
SAINT Today, Jim Josselyn Quintet, $5.
Wednesday, Dillon Fence, $6.
Thursday, Gypsy Feed, $5.
Friday, Outcry, $6.
Saturday, Fly Spinach Fly, Gumbo Junkie and Dig Bumblebee, $6. 601 Main Street, Asbury Park. (908) 681-8900.
Spoken Word ENGLEWOOD PUBLIC LIBRARY Dr.
Miriam Offenberg, a Cliffside Park poet, will read original Holocaust poetry.
Today, 3 P.M. 31 Engle Street. (201) 568-2215.
IRISH AMERICAN CULTURAL INSTITUTE "Stepping Out of History," an illustrated lecture on the history and development of Irish dance, presented by Dr.
Catherine Foley as part of the "Irish Perceptions" series.
Monday, 7:30 P.M.
Tickets: $7.
Women's Club of Westfield, South Euclid Avenue, Westfield. (201) 605-1991.
BLOOMFIELD COLLEGE Edwidge Danticat, a Haitian-American novelist, will talk about her life as a writer and her experiences growing up in Haiti and immigrating to this country.
Monday at 10:30 A.M.
Free.
Robert V. Van Fossan Theater, Fremont and Franklin Streets, Bloomfield. (201) 748-9000, extension 287.
PARK PASTRIES CAFE Paul F. Peacock's Exhibition of Formalist Poetry continues with "Twenty One: Coming of Age," featuring 20 formalist poems and one prose poem in a visual presentation.
Tuesday through Friday, 7 A.M. to 7 P.M.; Saturday, 7 A.M. to 5 P.M.; Sunday, 7 A.M. to 3 P.M.
Corner of Eighth and Park, Hoboken. (201) 659-1199.
Sports ICE HOCKEY Devils vs.
N.Y.
Rangers, today; vs.
N.Y.
Islanders, Friday; vs.
Hartford, next Sunday; vs.
Philadelphia, April 22; vs.
Pittsburgh, April 26; vs.
Florida, April 28; vs.
Quebec, April 30.
The Meadowlands. (201) 935-3900.
MINOR LEAGUE BASEBALL Trenton Thunder vs.
Canton-Akron Indians, today, 1:35 P.M.; vs.
Hardware City Rock Cats on Monday, Tuesday and Wednesday, 7:05 P.M.; Thursday, 12:35 P.M; vs.
Bowls Bay Sox, April 24, 7:05 P.M, April 25, 12:35 P.M.; vs.
New Haven Ravens, April 28-30. 1 Thunder Road. (609) 394-3300.
PRO BASKETBALL Nets vs.
Philadelphia, Saturday; vs.
Atlanta, April 19; vs.
Washington, April 21; vs.
Boston, April 23.
The Meadowlands. (201) 935-3900.
Children BERGEN MUSEUM "Portraits of Art" will allow children to explore the world of portraits and to recognize some of the most imporant ones of all time.
Today, 2:45 P.M. $4. 327 East Ridgewood Avenue, Paramus. (201) 265-1248.
FORUM THEATER GROUP "Free to Be . . . You and Me," conceived by Marlo Thomas.
April 19, 22 and 29, 1 P.M. $8. 314 Main Street, Metuchen. (908) 548-0582.
MEADOW THEATER Final performances of "The Velveteen Rabbit." Today, 11 A.M. and 1 P.M. $6.
Galleria Atrium, Bridge Avenue and West Front Street, Red Bank. (908) 758-0099.
NEWARK MUSEUM "Cosmic Questions," for ages 6 to 10, at 1 and 3 P.M., and "Journey Through Time and Space," for ages 9 and older, at 2 and 4 P.M.
Saturday and Sunday through June 25.
Adults, $2; children under 12, $1. 49 Washington Street. (201) 596-6550.
PAPER MILL PLAYHOUSE The Shoestring Players present "Fire in the Snow," a collection of one-act plays, and the Audience Participation Adventure, featuring interaction with the cast.
Tuesday,. 10 A.M. and 12:30 P.M.
Ticket information: (201) 376-4343.
Brookside Drive, Millburn.
STATE THEATER Sesame Street Live's "Where's the Birdie?" Tuesday through next Sunday.
Tickets: $10.50, $12 and $15. 19 Livingston Avenue, New Brunswick. (908) 247-7200.
Etc.
BROOKDALE COMMUNITY COLLEGE "Introduction to Yoga" with Joe DeOrio, instructor.
A one-time session for beginners.
Wednesday, 7 P.M. $10 fee. 765 Newman Springs Road, Lincroft. (908) 224-2880.
DINNER THEATER The $42 ticket includes dinner and "Deep Space Noir," a futuristic detective story.
Saturdays, 8 P.M.
Il Giardino Restaurant, 41 Ridgedale Avenue, Cedar Knolls. (201) 301-0562.
NEW JERSEY FILM FESTIVAL "Heavenly Creatures," today; "Dial M for Murder," Friday; "1995 Thomas Edison Black Maria Film and Video Festival," Saturday; "North by Northwest," April 21; "Hoop Dreams," April 23, and "Green for Danger," April 28.
All show times 7 P.M.
Friday and Saturday tickets: $4.
Rutgers University in New Brunswick, College Avenue campus, Milledoler Hall, George Street and Seminary Place.
Sunday showings are at the State Theater, 19 Livingston Avenue, New Brunswick, and tickets are $7. (908) 932-8482.
ST.
LUKE'S EPISCOPAL CHURCH Six panels of the Names Project AIDS Memorial Quilt are on display through April 23.
Weekdays, 8 A.M. to 4 P.M.
Main Street, Gladstone. (908) 234-0002. 5 Play 2 From Russia  The New American Quintet, composed of five emigre musicians, returns to its roots, performing works by Russian composers: the Quintet for Piano, Two Violins, Viola and Cello by Alfred Schnittke (above) and Shostakovich's Quintet in G Minor for Piano and Strings, Op. 57.
ZIMMERLI ART MUSEUM at Rutgers.
Today, 3 P.M.
Free admission.
George and Hamilton Streets, New Brunswick. (908) 932-7237.
Flap, Flap  Joe D'Angeli is a bat conservationist, one of only two people licensed to keep and raise bats in New Jersey.
In a program called "Exploring Bats," Mr.
D'Angeli will bring along several Egyptian fruit bats, show slides and tell stories in an effort to improve the public image of these misunderstood flying mammals.
FLAT ROCK BROOK NATURE CENTER 443 Van Nostrand Avenue, Englewood.
Tickets: $4.50.
Today from 1:30 to 2:30 P.M. (201) 567-1265.
Beam Up If TV reruns don't satisfy the Trekkie in you, the interactive exhibits of "Star Trek: Federation Science" may.
MORRIS MUSEUM 6 Normandy Heights Road, Morristown.
Through April 30.
Tickets: $9; the elderly, $8; students, $7; children, $6. (201) 538-8069.


Laimbeer and Johnson Are Now Partners
BILL LAIMBEER and VINNIE JOHNSON, who were teammates on the Detroit Pistons, plan to go into business together in a box factory.
Johnson will be a majority owner of Piston Packaging Inc. and Laimbeer will be his partner.
The company plans to start renovations at a former Cadillac factory in Detroit this week and will hire about 125 people, Johnson said.


INSIDE
INVESTING IT /Page 5  The people who write annual reports have come up with a clever new tactic: candor.
By Patrice Duggan Samuels.
SPENDING IT /Page 8  Investors are cheering about the part of the new Republican tax bill that would index capital gains.
Some of them are also scratching their heads.
By Robert D. Hershey Jr.
VOICES /Page 10  A management expert tells the investment profession to think about rewarding prudence.
EARNING IT /Page 13  Of ogres, bullies and broken telephones.
When bosses declare war on their workers (and vice versa).
By Lawrence Van Gelder.


The New 'New Jersey': Brickbats and Hallelujahs
To the Editor:
Has Tina Brown taken over this paper too? ROBERTA NATALE Bridgewater


Corrections
The Directory of Cruises on Feb. 5 included an outdated entry in a list of companies that provide passenger accommodations on freighters.
Lykes Lines informed The Times in a recent letter that it no longer offers such accommodations.


Former L.S.U. Player Is Charged
HOWARD CARTER, a former Louisiana State forward who has been playing basketball in France, was charged with buying and using drugs after the police arrested him and seized a dose of heroin, the authorities in Le Havre said yesterday.


Good Dog! Bad Dog!
A DOG'S LIFE By Peter Mayle.
Illustrated by Edward Koren. 192 pp.
New York: Alfred A. Knopf. $20.
MY DOG SKIP  By Willie Morris.
Illustrated by Mikhail Ivenitsky. 122 pp.
New York: Random House. $15.


Music in the Air In France and Germany
Two musical opportunities await late-spring travelers to Europe.
The Manhattan School of Music is sponsoring a trip to Paris that combines opera with private concerts and visits to embassies and instrument collectors, and Dailey-Thorp Travel will take a group to Germany for the Wurzburg Mozart Festival.
Highlights on the Paris trip, from May 27 to June 3, include "I Capuleti e i Montecchi" by Bellini at the Opera de la Bastille, "La Petite Renarde Rusee" by Janacek at Theatre du Chatelet, a concert in the Church of St.-Gervais-St.-Protais and an organ concert at the Church of St.-Eustache.
The price of the seven-night stay is $5,000, which includes hotel accommodations and meals and a tax-deductible contribution of $750.
Air fare from the United States is extra.


Correction
Three picture credits on March 19, with a review of "New York 1960," misidentified the photographer.
The pictures -- of Avery Fisher Hall, Lever House and the Seagram Building -- are by Ezra Stoller, not Erica Stoller.


Pursued by a Bean
MEMOIR FROM ANTPROOF CASE  By Mark Helprin. 514 pp.
New York: Harcourt Brace &amp; Company. $24.


For Vacation Rentals, the Sun is Shining
OVERLOOKING the Sheepscot River near Wiscasset, Me., Cabin 11 sits at the bottom of a hill, a Lilliputian barn-red bungalow with a miniature screened-in porch, well-worn outdoor wicker furniture and, inside, an immaculate, much-vacuumed gold-colored shag rug.
There is a small bedroom, no kitchen, and a window box on the side that, in the summer, will be filled with geraniums.
The cabin, at the Edgecomb Inn in North Edgecomb, rents for $69 a night in high season.
Take it for a whole week, and the price drops to $59 a night.


In Macedonia, New Fears of a Wider Balkan War
With the United Nations scaling back its forces in Croatia and a resurgence of fighting in Bosnia, fears that the Balkan conflict will move south into Macedonia have been renewed.
Internal ethnic conflicts and a worsening economy in Macedonia add to the anxieties about political stability in this new nation.


So, What's in a Matzoh? Much More Than Flour and Water
Pessy Weber quickly cut and tossed chunks of dough to 20 volunteers -- women in colorful head coverings and a man in a yarmulke -- standing on either side of a long table covered by a fresh sheet of brown paper.
"Nu, nu, hurry up," she urged. "Everybody hurry up with the matzoh."


Marci Dolgins And Mark Gerber
Marci Dolgins, a daughter of Barbara and Stuart Dolgins of Neponsit, Queens, was married last evening to Mark Jay Gerber, a son of Ione and Irwin Gerber of Monsey, N.Y.
Rabbi Ronald Mass performed the ceremony at the Plaza in New York.
Mrs.
Gerber, 27, is a buyer for the French Connection, a wholesale and retail clothing company in New York.
She graduated from the University of Maryland.
Her father is the executive vice president and chief operating officer of the Hagstrom Map Company and the American Map Corporation, both in Maspeth, Queens.
Her mother teaches business education at Lincoln High School in Brooklyn.


INVENTION: When Life Imitates B-Movies
In the new Russia, all things are possible, perhaps even flying saucers.
Indeed, the large photo above shows a model of a new flying machine that could soar as fast as a conventional jet and come to earth either on land or water.
With eight jet engines and a capacity of 2,000 passengers, the ship would be the airbus that science fiction has been promising since the 1920's.
The chief designer, Lev Schukin, says the craft was originally developed as a military project, starting in 1978.
The project, now commercial, is like many Russian enterprises, in need of funds.
Test flights of a full-size radio-controlled model are due this year and manned test flights in 1996.
The test saucer is under construction 460 miles southeast of Moscow is the town of Saratov.


Time Capsule Blurs With Age
With 900 students eagerly watching, Henry Moses, the headmaster of the Trinity School, reached into a 100-year-old time capsule last Friday with hopes of catching a glimpse of life at the school in the 1890's.
Would there be an artifact from the school's old rifle range, or perhaps a McGuffey Reader?
"It's the headmaster's prayer book," Mr.
Moses said with mustered enthusiasm, pulling out one religious tract after another.
"And a whole bundle of newspapers."


Putting Poetry Back Into Langston Hughes's House
When Albert Davis bought the four-story brownstone at 20 East 127th Street in 1985, he knew that the writer Langston Hughes had lived there.
But he was amazed to find, in the basement and attic, three of Mr.
Hughes's typewriters, his piano and desk, dozens of original manuscripts and historic pictures and even an old tax return.
The cache inspired Mr.
Davis, who had only a passing familiarity with Mr.
Hughes's work, to turn the house into an informal museum.
The piano, desk and a typewriter -- a gray Royal manual -- are displayed in a first-floor parlor.
By appointment, visitors may tour the upstairs office where Mr.
Hughes wrote poetry, plays, essays and nonfiction, and the bedroom where Mr.
Davis's children found a copy of one of Mr.
Hughes's musical plays, "Tambourines to Glory."


GRAND SWEEP
The huge living area in this Manhattan apartment could easily be called a room with no view.
Although its most luxurious feature is a gigantic picture window, the commanding 22- by 27-foot space looks out on an uninspiring city street.
"The first thing people remark on is the room's scale," says the interior designer Glenn Gissler.
"It's almost like being in a church. You have the effect of looking to the heavens." But since the view isn't celestial, Gissler focused on the window itself. (The circa 1910 building was originally used for art studios, and the ceilings are almost 20 feet high.) Gissler hung a rippling bronze-colored silk-and-linen drapery on the window over a sheer polyester curtain, so that it looks elegant but not overwhelming.


The Glory of Ruth
To the Sports Editor:
Heywood Hale Broun's poetic remembrance of Babe Ruth's final game on the mound ("The Autumn of the Babe on a Bright Fall Day," The Times, April 2) served as a wonderful introduction to the delayed, but anxiously awaited, start of spring training.
One statistical tidbit: Ruth remains the only player in baseball history to pitch in at least 10 seasons and have a winning percentage above .500 every year he pitched.
His worst year was 1919, when his record was 9-5 (.643).
ALLAN WOOD  New York


Correction
An article on this page last Sunday misstated the year of Babe Ruth's last game as a Yankee.
It was in 1934.
Oct. 1, 1933, was his last game as a Yankee pitcher.


Why Is the Children's Zoo Still Closed?


Navratilova and Graf a Wimbledon Team
MARTINA NAVRATILOVA and STEFFI GRAF, who faced each other on Center Court in three consecutive Wimbledon finals in the 1980's, will team up to play doubles at Wimbledon this year, a spokeswoman for the International Management Group said yesterday.
LINDA DOZORETZ said the 38-year-old Navratilova was excited by the prospect of returning to Wimbledon with Graf, who will regain her No. 1 ranking tomorrow.
The two players met in the Wimbledon singles final in 1987, 1988 and 1989 with Navratilova winning the first and Graf the next two.


Knicks Come Home and Catch a Breather
With the playoffs looming, this is the kind of efficient work that Knick Coach Pat Riley wants to see.
After losing three of their last four games at Madison Square Garden, the Knicks needed a solid showing before the home crowd last night against the young and mistake-prone Detroit Pistons.
That's exactly what the Knicks turned in during their 113-96 victory.
New York's overall team play was enough to douse the sporadic brush fires provided by the Pistons' Grant Hill, Joe Dumars and Allan Houston.


Bankers' Hours for the O. J. Case?
It would be a miracle if the jury in the O. J. Simpson trial were magically exempted from all the foolishness in the air.
Even with all the absurdity that has marred the case and obscured the sadness of a double murder, it was still surprising to read the words of the chatty dismissed juror, Jeanette Harris.
Mrs.
Harris, a 38-year-old employment interviewer, was expelled on Wednesday by Judge Lance Ito for failing to disclose on her jury questionnaire that she had once charged her husband with abuse.


Royal Fish and Frogs, Jaguars and Cormorants
RUST RED, blood red, the coppery hue of the so-called naked Indian tree, which grows among the ruins of Tikal, in Guatemala: "Painting the Maya Universe," at Yale University Art Gallery, is proclaimed by these colors rather than by the ceramics they adorn.
This is only to be expected, for the objects -- pots, bowls, plates and the like, all designed for royalty -- were primarily intended as supports for imagery.


Lauren B. Cramer, Demetrius Fexy
Lauren Beth Cramer, a daughter of Barbara Browne Cramer and Gerald B. Cramer, both of New York, was married on Friday to George Demetrius Fexy Jr., the son of Maria-Josee Fexy Rusnak of Kirkland, Wash., and the late Mr.
Fexy.
Rabbi Carol Carp officiated on the mountain at Taos Ski Valley, N.M.
Mrs.
Fexy-Cramer, 35, is a founder and the executive director of the Fay Simpson Dance Theater in New York.
She graduated from Northwestern University and received a law degree from Syracuse University.


F.Y.I.
Good News, Bad News Q.  Why is that scaffolding still around the Paramount Building (the old Gulf &amp; Western Building) on Columbus Circle?
Is there any hope of its being removed?
A.
First the good news.
Donald J. Trump, whose company now manages the building, at 15 Columbus Circle, says the scaffolding will be removed in three weeks.
Now for the bad news.
It'll immediately be replaced with what Mr.
Trump calls "new, improved, more beautiful scaffolding."
The 50-foot-tall scaffolding was initially put up in December 1993 to keep pedestrians from getting hit by falling glass windows.
The 44-story building has structural defects: it pops its windows as it twists perceptibly in high winds.
The building is being transformed into the Trump International Hotel and Tower, a combination hotel and luxury apartment rental.
The Trump Organization along with the Galbreath Company manages the building with the General Electric Pension Trust, the current owners.
They are stripping down the building to the metal, reinforcing the structure, and putting up a "new skin" designed by Philip Johnson: bronze with silver accents and floor-to-ceiling bronzed glass.
Mr.
Trump says the new scaffolding will have "great signage and lights" and will be up at least until the end of the year.
And the windows will pop no more, they say.
If the Sticker Lies . . .
Q.
I often find it difficult, if not impossible, to open the back doors on city buses.
This despite the sticker on the door that says all you have to do is touch the yellow tape.
Why, why, why?
A.
Patience, weary passenger.
Or strength!
That's actually an either-or proposition: Either you're pushing too hard when the doors want to open in their own good time, or the sensor's not working and you're stuck hefting their true weight.
Charles Seaton, a spokesman for the Transit Authority, says the doors are designed to open on their own.
A hard push on the tape to hurry them up will only meet resistance.
"So touch it lightly," Mr.
Seaton says, "and be patient."
On the other hand, he admits, the strip could be damaged by vandalism or simple wear and tear, leaving the doors -- extra wide to accommodate wheelchairs, and therefore extra heavy -- susceptible only to brute strength.
There are 3,700 New York City Transit Authority Buses and the majority have electronic sensor technology.
Mr.
Seaton says that each bus is periodically checked to make sure the sensors are working.
Green Arm of the Law
Q.
How much legal authority do park rangers wield?
I was recently ticketed at my Manhattan Beach park for having my dog off the leash.
When I couldn't produce I.D., the surly ranger threatened to arrest me for vagrancy.
How much intimidation must I tolerate?
Must I carry I.D. to walk around my own neighborhood?
A.
Rangers can indeed arrest you.
The 40 Urban Park Rangers in New York City and the 200 officers in the Park Enforcement Patrol (called PEP officers) who patrol the city's 1,560 park properties are authorized to issue summonses, request identification, take someone into custody and bring the person to the police station, i.e., make an arrest.
"They are trained, certified peace officers," said Alexander Brash, chief of Urban Park Service, which oversees both units.
The rangers and PEP officers go through eight weeks of training on Randalls Island and carry batons, pepper gas and handcuffs (but no guns).
The rangers wear big-brimmed Smokey Bear-type hats; the PEP officers' hats are more like the ones worn by state troopers.
In 1994, the two groups made 170 felony arrests (for crimes like setting a car on fire) and confiscated 116 weapons (mostly knives).
And they issued 7,866 environmental summonses, 9,774 parking violations (mainly to people who drove on the grass) and 1,010 criminal court summonses.
And, if they see an offense being committed on park property and they are in uniform, they can even follow the perp out of the park.
But if you think that a park officer is not acting within these constraints, you can complain to the Urban Park Service, (212) 360-2781.
MONIQUE P. YAZIGI


It's a Sin
WE'VE GOT trouble, my friends, right here in Sin City -- so much trouble, in fact, that this may be the last day anyone with a straight face can call it Sin City.
After midnight tonight, Prim City would be more like it, although the most accurate name would probably be The Big Nanny.
It was bad enough last year when one of Times Square's great movie theaters -- the kind that used to show classics like "She-Gods of Shark Reef" and "Hot Saddle Tramp" -- was turned over to the Disney company.
Then last month the Mayor and the City Council agreed on a plan to close most of New York's strip joints and X-rated businesses.
Now, at midnight tonight, a new ordinance takes effect that states, in essence: Smoking is forbidden in any location where a person might reasonably be expected to enjoy a cigarette.


Forgotten Men
To the Sports Editor:
So they got within hours of their Field of Dreams -- the replacement players, that is.
I believe they came for the greatness of the game, giving up hearth and home for a shot at the show.
It would have been better for the game if they had the opportunity to play, even a few games.
They would have given us, the forgotten fans, a glimpse at the fantasy -- a second shot at risking everything for a chance to make it.
I hope some of them will be called back to the majors, if only to let us know that it is still possible.
As for the players and owners, a plague on both their houses.
ROBERT S. WEBBER  Teaneck, N.J.


SoHo and Beyond: Beef Is Back
BAROLO ** (212) 226-1102; 398 West Broadway, near Spring; $$$; all major credit cards


Tom Stoppard, Virtuoso and Show-Off
HERE IS WHAT YOU GET FROM a Tom Stoppard play that is lovable: a flow of ideas, facts and emotions that constantly expands and contracts.
It is not unlike watching the sinewy but languorous Balanchine-Stravinsky ballet "Agon."
Mr.
Stoppard is a virtuoso, and he is always trying out approaches or trying on styles.
Here are variations on metaphysical themes; here is romantic realism; here is the kind of cold-war drama associated with John le Carre; here are characters who time-travel in the style of H. G. Wells and Caryl Churchill.
And for all the intellectual displays, he is not above the business of stagecraft either: who loves whom; who tricks whom; who gets double-crossed, who gets slapped, who gets exposed as a fool?
In "Arcadia" these complicated machinations are carried out among such characters as a 13-year-old mathematical genius and her charming tutor, who is in love with her mother, who is, in turn, enamored of a series of gentlemen who regularly visit Sidley Park, her country estate.


Streetscapes/647 Fifth Avenue; A Versace Restoration for a Vanderbilt Town House
THIS fall the design firm Gianni Versace will open its flagship store at 647 Fifth Avenue in what is promised to be a restoration of the 1904 building, the northerly unit of a town-house pair built as the "Marble Twins" by the Vanderbilt family.
And so the preservation of this unusual survivor falls to an unlikely party, for the Vanderbilts erected 645 and 647 Fifth Avenue, between 51st and 52d Streets, as a final unsuccessful attempt to keep out stores and businesses of the sort that have been there for more than half a century.


Excess Identities
NATIVE SPEAKER  By Chang-rae Lee. 324 pp. New York: Riverhead Books. $22.95.


Q and A
Renting an RV in Germany
Q.
We are planning to travel in southern Germany in May and would like to rent either a pop-up trailer or a small travel trailer.
Can you suggest rental places and give me rates for the Black Forest region? -- K. Neufeld, Red Bank, N.J.


Meet With the Boss? Thanks, but I'd Rather Be Hit By a Car
When The Times asked readers about their bad bosses, by E-mail and snail mail the stories of wrongdoing rolled in: phone-smashing bosses, Jabba-the-Hut bosses, even fire-'em-in-their-hospital-beds bosses.
Here, stories from some of our outraged correspondents.
There are some things they never teach you in law school.
During his first Christmas season after graduation, Ralph Hummel, a lawyer in Huntington, L.I., got an unusual assignment from his boss.
It wasn't a chance to work on a big case.
It was a chance for Mr.
Hummel to use his own car to carry the boss's Christmas tree.
Shades of Scrooge and Cratchit dancing in his head, Mr.
Hummel asked why.
The boss's reply: "Well, you wouldn't want the tree to scratch my Mercedes, would you?"
At the time, getting hit by a car didn't seem like a great idea.
But in retrospect, Barbara Zapson says maybe it all worked out for the best.
The accident, which caused a hairline fracture of her spine, happened one July after Ms.
Zapson, a New Yorker, had been working for years as an executive assistant in a large company.
"My boss never called, never sent flowers or even a card," she writes.
But on the third day after the accident, a Friday, he called to ask if she'd be in on Monday.
He already knew, of course, that the doctors said Ms.
Zapson needed six weeks of bed rest.
But the boss said he couldn't do without her.
For eight days she worked out of her home.
And when she returned to the office, it was with a promise from the boss that his chauffeur would pick her up and drive her home to spare her the rigors of mass transit.
When she came to the office, the boss told her he had good news and bad news.
The bad news was that she had used up all her sick leave and now owed him five days.
Next, he said that it was no longer convenient for her to use the chauffeur.
The good news was that if she gave up her vacation in August, he wouldn't dock her salary.
Ms.
Zapson promptly quit.
The boss followed her into the street, begging her to come back, telling her he'd give her anything she wanted.
She asked to work 9 to 5.
"Done," he said.
She asked him to pay for cabs for the next four weeks.
"Done," he said.
When she asked for her vacation, he said, "Impossible." Ms.
Zapson said goodbye.
Her P.S.: "For the past three years, I'm happily enjoying the best job and best boss I've ever had!"
Bosses with tempers?
P.H. says, "I actually had a boss at a German bank who once had it written in his contract that he could smash only a certain number of phones per month. What that number was I never found out. Other than that, he wasn't such a bad fellow."
F.J.D. has a number of fond memories of his boss.
One of them concerns a salesman who fell from a ladder while decorating his house for the holidays.
From his hospital bed, the injured man read F.J.D. a short note from the boss, informing the poor fellow he was being dismissed.
That, of course, was the bad news.
The good news was the boss's chirpy closer: "Get well soon."
"It is always an unwelcome surprise to wake up one day and find that you are working for Jabba the Hut," is the way Don Mennie, of Mendham, N.J., begins his account of woe.
Stretching the limits of his physical endurance, he was commuting 160 miles a day to a technical writing job.
On a snowy Friday in March, Mr.
Mennie called ahead to say his arrival for the weekly staff meeting might be delayed.
When he arrived 15 minutes late, the boss was in a snit.
"I was called on the carpet and accused of every imaginable misdeed. My work output was insulted, and I was put on a humiliating 'probation,' which was supposed to run three months while I 'improved my computer skills.' It lasted only about a week." Despite praise from others within the company, Mr.
Mennie was told to resign or be terminated.
During his last days with the company, Mr.
Mennie discovered that the boss had recruited an old crony, desperate and unemployed, to take his job, and the sham of probation was designed to insure that there were no gaps in the work flow while the deal was made.
Mr.
Mennie concludes with these observations: "Forget snipers in the post office. Don't get excited about nerve gas in the subways. For most people, this scenario is what workplace terrorism is really all about today."
Not all bad bosses are found in the corporate office.
One New York woman, M. L. Maiscott, says, "My worst boss was a mother superior I had when I was in the convent many years ago." The mother superior was paranoid, and after complaints from the parents in the school where Ms.
Maiscott taught, the mother superior was reassigned.
And not all bad-boss stories have unhappy endings.
"Since I left the religious life the same day she went to her new post," Ms.
Maiscott writes, "I heard only later about the fireworks set off from the convent roof by the nuns who, cheering, watched her car drive off."
With a nod toward "A Visit From St. Nicholas" comes this memorial to bad bosses from a poet who prefers anonymity.:
"Good morning," she started, "You all look so happy!
I don't want to waste time, so I'll just make it snappy.
With Hay points and re-orgs I have you confused,
So you can't fight my policy changes," she schmoozed.
"You'll get sick no longer, 'cause that's just a ruse.
If your kid's in the hospital, it's vacation you'll use.
Your benefits, too, will be cut, I might add.
The good times are over, and that makes me glad."
"Forget about service, or doing what you should.
I think everything's fine if the numbers look good!
Reputation on paper is vital to me;
The actual product's just fodder, you see.
Well, now that I've solved the morale problems here,"
It's time to move on, that's perfectly clear."
Then, as she waved goodbye and threw us a rose,
She said, "I love you all!" and our salaries froze!
She went off in search of her next job with glee,
Always ahead of the fallout is she.
With overtime banned, it was time we went home,
Defeated, downtrodden and numb to the bone.
The ride to the lobby was as quiet as before,
Just one day at work, nothing less, nothing more.
And we heard her exclaim, and so matter of fact,
"This place might be ruined, but my ego's intact." Late to Work? Let Us Know!
You were helping an old woman cross the street, eh?
The Times seeks readers' tales of excuses for arriving at work late.
Send your story to On the Job, Money and Business, The New York Times, 229 West 43d Street, New York, N.Y. 10036.
Or by E-mail to onthejob@nytimes.com.
Include your phone number.
All submissions become the property of The Times and may be republished in any medium.


Shirley F. Royal, Stephen W. Jenks
Shirley Ferguson Royal, a fund-raising consultant in New York, was married yesterday to Stephen William Jenks, the president of Hollenbeck Investments in Falls Village, Conn.
The Rev.
Mitzi M. Noble, an Episcopal priest, performed the ceremony at the South Canaan Meeting House in Falls Village.
Mrs.
Jenks graduated from Manhattanville College and received a master's degree in art history from the Courtauld Institute of Art in London.
From 1989 to 1994 she was the development officer, in New York, for the American Academy in Rome.
She is a daughter of Helen Dale Ferguson of New York and the late Charles A. Ferguson.
The bride's father was a special agent of the Federal Bureau of Investigation, based in Washington.
Her mother retired as a legal assistant at the General Motors Corporation in New York.


Debra A. Post, David E. Bamberger
Debra Allison Post, an associate at the New York law firm of Skadden, Arps, Slate, Meagher &amp; Flom, was married last evening to David E. Bamberger, a partner in Olshan Grundman Frome &amp; Rosenzweig, a law firm in New York.
Rabbi Abner Bergman performed the ceremony at Temple Judea of Manhasset, L.I.
The bride, 30, graduated summa cum laude from Tufts University, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa.
She received her law degree from New York University.
She is a daughter of Dr.
Robert and Marlene Post of Manhasset Hills, L.I.


'Matthew Passion' Is Offered
THE Music at Concordia Series presents its traditional Palm Sunday performance of Bach's "Passion According to St. Matthew" at 2 P.M. today in the Sommer Center for Worship and the Performing Arts.
Ralph Schultz, the Concordia College president, is the conductor, presiding over the Festival Chorus and Orchestra, with Stephen Oosting featured as the Evangelist and Charles Robert Stephens taking the role of Jesus.
The other soloists are Ruth Ann Cunningham, Nance Herrara, James Brown and John Packard.
"The performance," Dr.
Schultz said, "promises to deliver a dramatic spiritual experience to lead into Holy Week and the glory of Easter."
Today at 4 P.M., Mary Jane Newman, minister of music at the Presbyterian Church in Mount Kisco, conducts the Chancel Choir and the Collegium Antiquum Orchestra in the Mozart Requiem; and yet another Palm Sunday concert, at 5 P.M. at the Larchmont Avenue Church, focuses on the music of Beethoven, with Judith Brown leading the Festival Choir in the finale of the Choral Fantasia and a work the composer pronounced "very dear to my heart," the Mass in C major.


United for Once, Newark Parents And Officials Battle Takeover
Newark's school system has been so troubled for so long that the drastic remedy the state proposed in July -- a full takeover by the Department of Education -- might have been expected to produce a stampede of local support.
But as the struggle for control heads toward a courtroom showdown, advocates for a takeover are hard to find here.
The nine-member Board of Education opposes the state, of course.
But so do Mayor Sharpe James, the city's political establishment and a small but vocal corps of parents.
While eager to toss out Superintendent Eugene C. Campbell and the board, these parents say state bureaucrats will give them even less of a voice.
The vast majority of the 23 candidates in the April 18 elections for the school board oppose the state.


Ballads and Guitars, Brahms and Jazz
THE folksinger Sally Rogers and the classical guitar duo of Michael Newman and Laura Oltman will perform ballad settings of Aaron Copland and Benjamin Britten in a free concert this afternoon at 3 at the Yale Center for British Art in New Haven.
The information number is 432-2850.
A pair of season finales at 4 today involve very different tonal collaborations.
To wind up the Chamber Music Series at St.
John's Episcopal Church in Salisbury, Martin Canin joins members of the resident Filharmonia Quartet for Brahms's Piano Quartet in C Minor and Schumann's Piano Quintet in E-flat (435-0439).
In Westport, improvisations at the piano are the 4 o'clock order of business as the Fairfield County Jazz Club closes its series at the Arts Center with Derek Smith and Bill Charlap (222-7070).


Beg to Differ
To the Sports Editor:
I must disagree with Dave Anderson that the shortened schedule is a major stain on baseball.
It must be remembered that prior to the first expansion, each of the eight teams in the league played a 154-game schedule.
How many home runs would Babe Ruth have hit in a season, or in a lifetime, if he had played the 162-game schedule now in effect?
Would Hank Aaron ever have overtaken him?
Would Ted Williams have hit over .400 if he had to play eight more games, or would he have raised his average?
Didn't asterisks go out with Roger Maris?  ROBERT R. SIROTY  Dover, N.J.


New &amp; Noteworthy Paperbacks
MAKE ME WORK By Ralph Lombreglia.
Penguin, $9.95.
Working is exactly what the protagonists of these stories don't like to do.
Usually male, they are emotional refugees from the 1960's, longing for an innocence they never had.
The book's nine tales, often delving into these men's relationships with women, "are both funny and profound," Louis B. Jones said here last year.


MY MOTHER IS SPEAKING FROM THE DESERT
Gordon's memoir about her mother's old age is filled with grief, remorse and unresolved childhood feelings.
I have been where she is today, and I have learned that old age has its demons.
But it is the human condition.
We will all grow old, if we don't die first.


Fashion Weeks A la Wintour
If the fashion world is feeling like a ship without a captain, perhaps it is time to recall that every great designer created his best work as part of a dialogue with a woman of taste.
Since ready-to-wear replaced couture houses, this collaboration has all but vanished.
With it has gone designers' authority to set worldwide trends.
Women of taste still exist, but they no longer have access to designers' studios, where the exchange of ideas developed clothes that related to their lives.


Olympic Tickets: Ready, Get Set!
ON May 1, the starting pistol will go off for a key Olympics event -- the race for tickets.
The 1996 Olympic Summer Games, to be held in Atlanta July 19 through Aug. 4, 1996, are expected to be the largest Olympics ever, both in number of athletes, expected to total 10,000 from 200 places, and in attendance.
There will be 11 million tickets, according to Laurie Olsen, a spokeswoman for the Atlanta Committee for the Olympic Games.
She described this as more than the combined total for the Summer Games in Barcelona in 1992 and in Los Angeles in 1984, the last in the United States.
Of these, the Associated Press estimates that seven million will be available to the general public, with four million spoken for by sponsors and patrons. ("Patron packages" cost $50,000 for a pair of tickets to each of 32 events.)


No Sprawl, Please. This Is Connecticut.
UNLESS a lot of thinking in Connecticut changes for the better, Laura Weir Clarke warns, in two decades the state could look like -- horror of horrors! -- northern New Jersey.
That means, she said, a place of sprawling malls and superstores with huge parking lots, gridlock traffic congestion, more air pollution, more noise and less open space, fewer barns, fewer trees, fewer fields, fewer traditional New England vistas.
"We could see the utter degradation of the Connecticut landscape in 20 years," she said.


Sports of The Times; It Is Time We Took Aaron Into Our Hearts
HENRY Aaron has finally come home.
Home? Some might wonder where Aaron has been if not home.
He has been enshrined in the Baseball Hall of Fame, entrenched in baseball record books.
Young superstars like Ken Griffey Jr., Frank Thomas and Barry Bonds concede that no one in their generation will challenge Aaron for home run supremacy.


Headstrong
Behold, fashion's newest center of gravity: the well-endowed nose.
An inevitable reaction to the cookie-cutter proboscis, it is best set off with an ample hat and an upturned chin.


Unabsolute Truths; Clifford Geertz
"SO THE QUESTION IS, WHAT DO YOU DO?"
Clifford Geertz fidgets on the bright orange couch in his office at the Institute for Advanced Study in Princeton, N.J., twirling his horn rims in one hand and staring at the seashells dangling from a foot-high statue of a Dewi-Sri, a Balinese rice goddess, on the coffee table between us.
He's reliving a dilemma he faced as a young anthropologist in the field, in a tiny village on Bali at the start of his career in 1957, when his landlord's toddler had a high fever, and Geertz had the only jeep.


Players Are Right
To the Sports Editor:
Regarding the baseball strike: As long as anyone (the owners) is allowed to extract surplus value (profit) from the wealth created by labor (the players), I will always support the workers in any attempt to gain a larger percentage of revenue they generate.


One Damn Thing After Three Anothers
THE FOURTH PROCEDURE By Stanley Pottinger. 550 pp. New York:  Ballantine Books. $23.95.


MY MOTHER IS SPEAKING FROM THE DESERT
Mary Gordon's perception and honesty are qualities that I have long enjoyed through her novels, and I looked forward to reading her article.
Much of what she described was indeed a reflection of what I had witnessed for myself, but I was chilled by her insistence that the desert from which her mother speaks is one she has -- if only, as Gordon qualifies, "in part" -- herself created, "through a dark will and sense of worthlesness."
I am now a grandmother who followed two women I had known so well as they entered this "desert." They were very different, but their decline was very similar -- and similar to Anna Gordon's.
One was educated, ambitious, a successful businesswoman, financially, socially, domestically secure.
The other was diffident, modest, mother of a large family, wife of an errant husband.
Somewhere in their mid-70's, I noticed signs of a relaxation of previously high standards -- counters wiped, not scrubbed; things tucked out of sight under cushions, not in drawers; lipstick blurred, a drooping hem, crumbs.
A year or two later, relaxation had grown into carelessness.
Then carelessness became confusion, as declining appetite and haphazard meals led to general decline in health, and medication for the accompanying aches and upsets was forgotten or taken twice . . . or more.


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
The Leader of the Pack
FOR the Huntington premiere of "She Lives to Ride" the Cinema Arts Center decided to find some who did.
To showcase the movie about female motorcycle riders, the center sought out the Sirens, a group of female bikers from Long Island.
The Sirens were to ride up to the theater door, pose for pictures and attend an opening-night reception before viewing the film.
"This is kicking off our International Women's Festival," Roseanne Braun of the cinema said.
"The theme is women and the wheel."


Destination: Spring; 5 Restless Writers Head Outside And Report Back On What They Found There
Whatever the calendar says, spring really begins with the first irresistible urge to head outside.
Our senses quickened more by instinct than the outward signposts of the season, we shed the deadness of winter and we get going.
Barely greening trails, muddy as often as not, are blazed anew by the first hikers of the year.
Roads and pathways fill with runners and cyclists sharpening their skills for a long race or rally, or just airing out their lungs at long last.
Shore towns, shut down tight just yesterday, begin to primp for a summer that's still months away.
At nurseries and garden stores, long lines form at cash registers as suburban farmers dream of harvesting the perfect tomato.
Weekday road warriors get into their cars, roll down the windows, hopefully, and just drive, heading nowhere but away.


Private Company Given Power to Pick Teachers
Faced with desperate problems, the school board of this faded, working-class Pittsburgh suburb came up with a radical solution: it sent layoff notices to the teachers at one of its four schools and hired a fledgling Tennessee company to pick its own teachers and run the school.
The agreement, approved after the district sought proposals from all comers on how to manage the schools, is the first in the nation in which a private company is being brought in with the authority to replace the teachers in a public school.
As such, it goes even further than for-profit ventures like Education Alternatives Inc., the company hired by school districts in Baltimore and Hartford to run their schools using existing teachers.
The Edison Project, based in New York, which plans to open its first for-profit schools next year, would largely use existing teachers and work in cooperation with teachers unions.


Fund Pickers Aren't Staying Home
BUYING American was more than just patriotic in the first quarter. It was lucrative.
Domestic stock funds rose 7.4 percent on average, while funds that invest abroad fell 2.9 percent.
Painfully aware of that border gap, some investors may be tempted to bail out of foreign funds and bring their money home.
Especially if those investors are in emerging markets, which have soured in the last 12 months.


55 or Faster?
SHOULD the speed limit on New Jersey highways be raised to 65 miles per hour, or is the current limit, 55, right?
Burning Fossil Fuel


Year of the Women (Just a Little Late)
TWO YEARS AFTER THE Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences proclaimed the Year of the Woman, women appear to have arrived.
Behind the scenes -- as directors and producers -- and as the center of a number of stories, accomplished women are in vogue, at least at the moment.
And this phenomenon extends beyond the boundaries of the United States.
Five recent movies tell women's stories -- "Boys on the Side," "Dolores Claiborne," "Losing Isaiah," "Circle of Friends" and "Muriel's Wedding." More than two dozen American films due this year are directed by women, from Kayo Hatta's "Picture Bride," which opens later this month, to Antonia Bird's "Mad Love," due in May.
Disney even has a female hero in the animated "Pocahontas," arriving in June.
"Jane Eyre" is being remade, Demi Moore will star in "The Scarlet Letter" in September, "Emma" is on the drawing boards, and "Sabrina" is being filmed.


The Budget Buster
We fiscal hawks are presumed to be distraught over the Senate's failure to pass the Balanced Budget Amendment.
But there is a silver lining.
Victory could have been worse than defeat.
The Senate leadership might have paid the price demanded by wavering senators, which was to exempt the Social Security trust funds from the amendment's definition of budget balance.
The exemption would have ruined long-term budget reform.
It is worth revisiting the Social Security exemption now that many senators (including Bob Dole, the majority leader) have vowed to bring up the balanced budget amendment for another vote before the 1996 elections.


Corrections
A headline about the cleanup of an industrial site in Farmingdale, L. I. in some editions last week imprecisely summarized the views of the site's current owner.
The owner, Jefry Rosmarin, described his difficulties in working with government agencies on the cleanup of the site as a "disaster." He was speaking of the process, not the site itself.


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: April 9, 1995
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
2
THE CHAMBER, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $7.50.) A lawyer represents a racist who is on death row for his part in a 1967 bombing.
2
2
UNTIL YOU, by Judith McNaught. (Pocket, $6.50.) An American woman who is a chaperone in Georgian England finds romance.
3
11
TOM CLANCY'S OP-CENTER, created by Tom Clancy and Steve Pieczenik. (Berkley, $6.99.) The operations of a secret Government agency.
4
8
ACCIDENT, by Danielle Steel. (Dell, $6.99.) A car collision involving four teen-agers tragically alters the lives of five families.
5
3
DECIDER, by Dick Francis. (Jove, $5.99.) An architect gets caught between the warring factions of a clan that owns a racecourse.
6
11
THE DAY AFTER TOMORROW, by Allan Folsom. (Warner Vision, $6.99.) A doctor stumbles into a tangle of conspiracies.
7
6
INCA GOLD, by Clive Cussler. (Pocket, $6.99.) Dirk Pitt contends with a ring of thieves for possession of ancient artifacts in the Andes.
8*
2
DAYBREAK, by Belva Plain. (Dell, $6.99.) Two families are divided and then united by a series of surprising developments.
9
4
MISTRESS, by Amanda Quick. (Bantam, $5.99.) A former schoolteacher's efforts to unmask her aunt's blackmailer in London.
10
24
CONGO, by Michael Crichton. (Ballantine, $6.99.) An American team seeks to discover why a group of archeologists died among ruins.
11
2
ANGEL, by Barbara Taylor Bradford. (Ballantine, $6.99.) The reunion of four people is transformed by two celebrated men.
12*
43
THE SHIPPING NEWS, by E. Annie Proulx. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $12.) A man mourns his adulterous wife in Newfoundland.
13
6
THE ROBBER BRIDE, by Margaret Atwood. (Bantam, $6.50.) A woman who long manipulated three friends suddenly reappears.
14
2
MURDER ON THE POTOMAC, by Margaret Truman. (Fawcett, $6.99.) A law professor discovers a corpse in the Potomac River.
15
13
CIRCLE OF FRIENDS, by Maeve Binchy. (Dell, $6.50.) The coming of age of women in an Irish village and in Dublin's academia.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
NonFiction
1
29
EMBRACED BY THE LIGHT, by Betty J. Eadie with Curtis Taylor. (Bantam, $5.99.) A woman's near-death experience.
2
65
CARE OF THE SOUL, by Thomas Moore. (Harper Perennial, $12.) Everyday spirituality.
3
6
THE HIDDEN LIFE OF DOGS, by Elizabeth Marshall Thomas. (Pocket, $5.99.) An analysis of canine behavior.
4
5
SAVED BY THE LIGHT, by Dannion Brinkley with Paul Perry. (Harper Paperbacks, $5.99.) An account of two near-death experiences.
5
11
HOW WE DIE, by Sherwin B. Nuland. (Vintage, $13.) A surgeon reflects on "life's final chapter."
6*
28
HAVING OUR SAY, by Sarah L. Delany and A. Elizabeth Delany with Amy Hill Hearth. (Dell, $5.99.) The reminiscences of two black sisters.
7*
17
SOUL MATES, by Thomas Moore. (Harper Perennial, $13.) Love and relationships.
8*
596
THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $10.95.) Inspiration.
9*
7
MAKES ME WANNA HOLLER, by Nathan McCall. (Vintage, $12.) The life of a young black man in America.
10
2
REVIVING OPHELIA, by Mary Pipher. (Ballantine, $12.50.) The everyday dangers that beset teen-age girls.
11
16
SEINLANGUAGE, by Jerry Seinfeld. (Bantam, $5.99.) Observations on life's pleasures and ordeals by the star of "Seinfeld."
12
24
WOULDN'T TAKE NOTHING FOR MY JOURNEY NOW, by Maya Angelou. (Bantam, $5.50.) Essays on life and death, good and evil.
13
1
THE AGENDA, by Bob Woodward. (Pocket, $6.50.) The inner workings of the White House in the first year of the Clinton Administration.
14
110
I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS, by Maya Angelou. (Bantam, $4.99.) The poet's depiction of her childhood and adolescence.
15*
38
REENGINEERING THE CORPORATION, by Michael Hammer and James Champy. (Harper Business, $13.) Innovation in business.
16*
32
A HISTORY OF GOD, by Karen Armstrong. (Ballantine, $14.) The development of monotheism over the past 4,000 years.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Advice, How-To and Miscellaneous
1
28
CHICKEN SOUP FOR THE SOUL, compiled by Jack Canfield and Mark Victor Hansen. (Health Communications, $12.95.) Stories meant to "open the heart and rekindle the spirit."
2
206
THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE, by Stephen R. Covey. (Fireside/S&amp;S, $12.) Principles for success.
3
8
THE CELESTINE PROPHECY: An Experiential Guide, by James Redfield and Carol Adrienne. (Warner, $8.99.) Ways to apply the inspirational message of the novel "The Celestine Prophecy."
4
2
DRIVEN TO DISTRACTION, by Edward M. Hallowell and John J. Ratey. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $12.) Coping with attention deficit disorder.
Rankings reflect sales, for the week ending March 25, at 3,050 bookstores plus wholesalers serving 38,000 other retailers, statistically weighted to represent sales in all such outlets nationwide.
An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.


Sports of the Times; Masters Moments You Never See
INSTEAD of turning off Gary McCord's television microphone, the Masters' green coats should cancel their television blackout of Augusta National's front nine.
Minutes after Curtis Strange's seven-under-par 65 would lift the two-time United States Open champion within two strokes of the co-leaders, Ben Crenshaw and Brian Henninger, going into today's final round, CBS began its third-round coverage.
It showed taped highlights of Strange's round, but it never showed any videotape of Jack Nicklaus's second eagle of this Masters at the 435-yard fifth hole.


PHOTOGRAPHER'S JOURNAL


MY MOTHER IS SPEAKING FROM THE DESERT
"So," as my kids would say, "what's the point?" Mary Gordon couldn't forgive her mother for having polio and now she can't forgive her for growing old.
FELICE LIBURD Uniondale, L.I.


If They Built a Memorial to the War In the Streets
The war memorial may be our most distinguished form of "victim art." For generations, American cities have carved out special places to honor those who have sacrificed their lives for a cause.
From Augustus Saint-Gaudens's Memorial to Robert Gould Shaw to Maya Lin's Vietnam Veterans Memorial, artists have sought to wrest dignity and meaning from conflict and death.
The projects presented on these pages, many realized on site via computer graphics, commemorate people killed in a war that may never be officially declared.
They are casualties of urban violence.
School children, subway riders, shop clerks: people who found themselves on the losing side of a battle for the right to dwell in cities without risking their lives.


Marlene Lopez, 55, Health Care Official
Marlene Lopez, who was a director of state psychiatric hospitals in New Jersey and New York for 15 years, died last Sunday at the Dana-Farber Cancer Institute in Boston.
She was 55 and lived in Manhattan and Hillsdale, N.Y.
She had been undergoing treatment for cancer for two years, her companion, Carl Moore, said.


Appeal of the Shade-Loving Barrenwort
TO be goofy about a particular plant is, well, goofy.
But gardeners are allowed certain enthusiasms.
Take, for example, Epimedium.
Few gardeners know this plant by its common name, barrenwort, and that probably is a good thing.
The plant is far from barren and could be considered the perfect ground cover.
The reasons for extolling this plant are many, but probably its most praiseworthy quality is that it is easy to grow.
Epimedium makes few demands on those who set it out, literally growing on its own and in the shade, too.
For landscape designers especially, it is one of the most useful groundcovers around.


Trading Places
This latest round of fashion shows, which began in Milan five weeks ago and ended here in New York on Friday, will go down in history as the season of insurrections.
First there were the walkouts staged by the French press, who had agreed to leave any show starting more than 30 minutes late. (One editor last season counted seven and a half hours' waiting time in a single day.) Then there was the dispute at Claude Montana between a TV cameraman and a bouncer, ending in fisticuffs and prompting the photographers to boycott the show.
As for those of us less inclined to public protest, who could blame us if, in those idle moments when we were waiting for the lights to dim, we succumbed to fantasies of what would happen if we turned the tables. . . .


The Daily Digital
SOME PEOPLE THINK THEY SEE THE handwriting on the computer screen saying, "NEWSPAPERS ARE EXTINCT." Some of these anxious folks work for newspapers and are fairly described as prematurely gray.
Some are politicians frankly impatient for the day.
Some are professional historians, expert in the burial of the horse and ocean liner.
Some are professional futurists who, when television first appeared, airily predicted the burial of film and radio.
That newspapers live on borrowed time is not a new idea.
I have always thought them a precarious business, no matter how great the journalism.
Just think about the technology of The New York Times: it trucks processed trees from the forests of Canada down into the center of New York, stamps the pulp with inked impressions, cuts, folds and bundles the product into individual papers and trucks these back toward the readers, two-thirds of them scattered along the East Coast from Richmond to Portland, Me.
Every day.


The Many Hats of David Cone
If you are a major leaguer and you want to be traded, there are usually four good triggers to pull: Buy a house, send out your laundry, change your name to Roberto Kelly or become a union activist.
Now, David Cone, the pitcher, can't be confused with Kelly, the All-Star center fielder who has been traded by the Yankees, Reds and Braves in the last three years.
But the other categories?


'The Sweet Side' Of Young Fathers
A DECADE ago, caring for teen-age mothers led the Young Women's Christian Association to take care of the young men who had fathered the children.
The Y.W.C.A. started a program of workshops and classes for the male partners of the young mothers they already had classes for.
The program, for fathers from 16 to 25, offers academic instruction aimed at acquiring a high school equivalency diploma as well as instructions in parenting.
Vocational and personal counseling is available.
Tomorrow the Y will play host to an anniversary conference, "Young Dads: Present and Accounted For," with the main speaker to be Congressman Kweisi Mfume, who became a father at 19.


Benefit of Living Wills
To the Editor:
"Withholding Care From Patients: Boston Case Asks, Who Decides?" (front page, April 3) underscores the need for primary physicians to communicate with patients and their families about life-sustaining treatment and do-not-resuscitate directives.
These discussions should begin early as part of history-taking while individuals are healthy and ambulatory in order to begin a dialogue about these issues and encourage deliberation.


Shari L. Birnbach, Laurence Y. Pels
Shari Lynn Birnbach, the daughter of Lily and Richard Birnbach of Great Neck, L.I., was married last evening to Laurence Yves Pels, the son of Laura and Donald Pels of New York.
Cantor David Benedict performed the ceremony at the University Club in New York.
Mrs.
Pels, 26, and her husband, 27, graduated from Syracuse University.
She is a saleswoman at the Horizon Textiles Corporation, a textile converter in New York, of which her mother is the executive vice president.
The bride's father is the managing partner in Cummings &amp; Carroll, a certified public accounting firm in Great Neck.


To Reduce Tire Mountain:
There may be two to four million tires on this five-acre Kings Park site; they have been accumulating since 1987.
A company that planned to recycle the tires went out of business in 1990.
A new plan by Smithtown would send millions of old tires from the Izzo brothers' site in Kings Park to be shredded and burned at the incinerator in East Northport, helping to generate and sell energy.
Page 4. (Vic DeLucia/The New York Times)


Correction
Because of an editing error, a picture caption last Sunday about the NBC comedy series "Friends" misidentified two cast members.
The actor seated at the left, with his arms on a chair back, was Matt LeBlanc, not Matthew Perry.
Mr.
Perry was shown standing, third from the left.


Corrections
The quiz in the Education Life supplement last Sunday gave an incomplete answer in some copies to a question about Beethoven's symphonies.
To the question, "Which symphony has a choral movement; what is this movement's title?" the complete answer is: Ninth; "Ode to Joy."
An article in the supplement about repaying student loans misstated the rate for bank fees.
It is 4 percent, the same as a direct Federal loan.


Third Graders Learn Value of Storytelling
WITH dramatic gestures and unerring poise, Meredith Boylan held her audience spellbound as she spun out a Russian fairy tale about tests and trickery, using props and voice changes.
What made her performance different from other storytelling appearances is that Meredith was performing for her classmates, who in turn would have an opportunity to share a story with their peers.
The children, clustered in a circle in Jane Van Beek's third-grade classroom at the Brookside School here, appeared eager to have their moment in the spotlight.


Corrections
An article yesterday about a request for an ethics investigation of Representative Robert G. Torricelli, Democrat of New Jersey, misstated its origin.
It was Mr.
Torricelli who requested the inquiry regarding his statements about C.I.A. involvement in Guatemala; House Republicans went along with that approach rather than seek his removal from the Intelligence Committee.
The article also referred to Mr.
Torricelli's involvement in the House bank scandal incorrectly.
His 27 overdrafts were covered by the bank; the checks did not bounce.


Corrections
The quiz in the Education Life supplement last Sunday gave an incomplete answer in some copies to a question about Beethoven's symphonies.
To the question, "Which symphony has a choral movement; what is this movement's title?" the complete answer is: Ninth; "Ode to Joy."


That Man In a Cape Is Still Flying
O.K., SO THIS TIME HE DIDN'T LEAP TALL ratings obstacles in a single bound.
But he kept trying.
And now ABC's "Lois and Clark: The New Adventures of Superman" seems about to prove all over again that the comic-book character created in 1938 by Jerry Siegel and Joe Shuster is truly indestructible.
Once again, the man of steel from another planet is poised to triumph over an opponent, though in this case it could be argued that NBC's "Seaquest DSV" committed suicide.
When the two shows squared off on Sundays at 8 P.M. a season and a half ago, they were battling for a network audience left over from CBS's long-running and still enormously popular "Murder, She Wrote." Older viewers are fiercely loyal to Angela Lansbury.
ABC and NBC aimed for a younger market, the 18-to-49 crowd.
Although "Lois and Clark," with its sardonic 90's twist on the legendary superhero, generally received the more favorable reviews, "Seaquest" took an early and seemingly insurmountable lead in the ratings.


One Change Is Not in the Contract
BACK when Democrats ran Congress, they liked to yammer on about their determination to pass stringent campaign finance laws that would rein in the influence of special interest groups.
But the bluster never brought reform.
The Republicans have a different approach.
Now that they have sampled power -- and the largess of those special interests -- many do not even pretend to want reform.
It was by design that there was no mention of campaign finance or lobbying in the House Republicans' Contract With America.
There are no plans to take up those issues anytime soon.
And Republicans are making no apologies.


What to Do to Safeguard Plants in the Event of a Cold Snap
If you are weeping over those brown flowers on what was a glorious magnolia before the deep freeze a few days ago, stop crying over spilled milk.
There's no way to save blackened flowers.
But you can do plenty to safeguard other plants if the cold persists or returns later in spring.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
AGAINST THE GRAIN  The New Criterion on Art and Intellect at the End of the Twentieth Century.
Edited by Hilton Kramer  and Roger Kimball.
Ivan R. Dee, cloth, $35; paper, $16.95.


Knicks Come Home and Catch a Breather
With the playoffs looming, this is the kind of efficient work that Knick Coach Pat Riley wants to see.
After losing three of their last four games at Madison Square Garden, the Knicks needed a solid showing before the home crowd last night against the young and mistake-prone Detroit Pistons.
That's exactly what the Knicks turned in during their 113-96 victory.
New York's overall team play was enough to douse the sporadic brush fires provided by the Pistons' Grant Hill, Joe Dumars and Allan Houston.


A Century of 'the Funnies'
Humbly, we note that this is the centennial year of an institution known to readers of other newspapers as the comics.
The exact day a newspaper first published this indigenous American blend of art and story is in dispute, but it was 1895 in The World, Joseph Pulitzer's New York daily, and the comic was a street urchin called "The Yellow Kid."
It proved so popular that William Randolph Hearst hired the artist away to draw the kid for The Journal.
Pulitzer then signed another artist to continue the character in The World.


In the Region/Westchester; Rules Restricting Home Offices Are Reconsidered
A CITY COUNCILMAN here is seeking to remove obstacles to people who would prefer to telecommute from home offices rather than spend weary hours commuting to corporate offices.
At the same time, an increasing number of builders are including computer-ready home offices in their subdivisions.
City Councilman Joseph L. Latwin is leading a campaign to lift this city's restrictions on a wide range of home businesses that can be conducted by computer.
"If we don't, we'll lose out to other communities that recognize telecommuting as the wave of the future," he said.


Diana Jacobson, David Waldman
Diana Ruth Jacobson, a daughter of Nancy and Jerold D. Jacobson of Kings Point, L.I., was married last evening to David Todd Waldman, the son of Lois Jacobs of New York and stepson of Jerry Jacobs.
Rabbi Allen Block officiated at the Metropolitan in Glen Cove, L.I.
Mrs.
Waldman is the recruiting and benefits coordinator at Wenner Media in New York.
She graduated from Hofstra University.
Her father is a senior partner in the New York law firm of Proskauer Rose Goetz &amp; Mendelsohn.
Her mother is a visiting nurse for North Shore University Hospital in Manhasset, L.I.


THE NATION: Bootstraps; 'Not My Job.' 'Not Our Job.' So Whose Job Is It?
A GREAT battle was joined in the first 100 days of Speaker Newt Gingrich and Republican rule, and if you believe it was over taxes or welfare or the deficit, you are only a little right.
The real struggle is over a vastly more important issue: who owes what to whom.
This most hoary and basic of all social debates is usually afforded the reverence and inattention of great art: People know it's there and mostly, they ignore it.
Whatever else happened in the last three months, the debate became impossible to ignore.
For the last 60 years, the United States's version of the contract between man and society was clear: society's purpose was man's betterment.
The incoming legislature has its own Contract, and it is not too much to say that it stands that concept on its head.


Gabriella Sassi And Thomas Hill
Gabriella Maria Sassi, a daughter of Michael and Christina Sassi of New York, was married yesterday to Thomas Warren Hill, the son of Kenneth and Barbara Hill of Vienna, Va.
The Rev.
Lynda J. Bates officiated at the Purdys United Methodist Church in Purdys, N.Y.
Mrs.
Sassi-Hill, 25, is a special education teacher at Fairhill Elementary School in Fairfax, Va.
She graduated from Keene State College and received a master's degree in special education from the University of Virginia.
Her father is a portfolio manager at Lynch &amp; Mayer, money managers in New York.


Heidi Briggs, Bernard Buonanno 3d
Heidi Anne Briggs, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Robert M. Briggs of Roseland, N.J., was married yesterday to Bernard Vincent Buonanno 3d, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Buonanno Jr. of Providence, R.I.
The Rev.
Dr.
William W. Elkins officiated at the Livingston (N.J.) United Methodist Church.
The Rev.
Thomas R. Peterson, a Roman Catholic priest, took part in the ceremony.
Mrs.
Buonanno, 27, was until recently a production manager at Adrienne Vittadini, the women's clothing manufacturer, in New York.
She graduated from Dartmouth College.
Her father is a plastic and reconstructive surgeon in Livingston.


Funds Roar Back After Dismal '94
NOW that's more like it!
Mutual fund investors, battered by bad markets in 1994, are now breathing a sigh of relief, even of pleasure, after the funds' strong showing in the first quarter of 1995.
Bond funds rebounded, stock funds soared -- indeed, practically every kind of fund, except those that invest overseas, turned in its best performance in several years.
The funds that Americans own the most -- those that hold home-grown equities -- jumped 7.4 percent, according to Morningstar Inc.
Last year, those funds were modestly in the red, losses that have now been wiped out by the first quarter's spectacular gains.


Met Titles: A Ping-Pong Of the Mind
"OVER MY DEAD BODY," JAMES LEVINE proclaimed a few years ago about proposals to project texts on screens during Metropolitan Opera performances.
Yet Mr.
Levine, the company's artistic director, seemed in good health at a news conference recently, just after the Met had demonstrated its new simultaneous translation system, which is unique in its complexity.
"I am against the idea," Mr.
Levine still insisted.
"That goes without saying." But both he and the company's general manager, Joseph Volpe, believe they have made the best of a bad thing.
I do not think they have.
In fact, the Met is introducing problems into what is basically a good thing: displaying translated texts to viewers.


Termites? Use a Modem
WHILE on line with her computer one recent evening, Sheri Garrett, a homeowner from Fayetteville, Ohio, came across an electronic cry for help from a woman in Springfield, Va., who had suddenly noticed "sewage smells" in her bathroom.
Ms.
Garrett composed a reply and dispatched it over the telephone lines into cyberspace.
"The problem could be that the drain pipes are not properly vented," she wrote, providing one of many responses the Virginia woman received from sympathetic strangers scattered across the country.


Players Are Right
To the Sports Editor:
Regarding the baseball strike: As long as anyone (the owners) is allowed to extract surplus value (profit) from the wealth created by labor (the players), I will always support the workers in any attempt to gain a larger percentage of revenue they generate.


Sports of The Times; It Is Time We Took Aaron Into Our Hearts
HENRY Aaron has finally come home.
Home? Some might wonder where Aaron has been if not home.
He has been enshrined in the Baseball Hall of Fame, entrenched in baseball record books.
Young superstars like Ken Griffey Jr., Frank Thomas and Barry Bonds concede that no one in their generation will challenge Aaron for home run supremacy.


A Correction: The Track Record for New Mutual Funds


Midway Moves Hub To Raleigh-Durham
Midway Airlines has relocated its hub from Chicago to Raleigh-Durham, N.C., leasing at least seven gates formerly used by American Airlines.
The establishment of the new hub in North Carolina provides opportunities to expand not available at its former home at Midway Airport, according to the airline.
After the move last month, Midway reduced its service to Chicago to a single daily flight between Midway and Raleigh-Durham.


Correction
Three picture credits on March 19, with a review of "New York 1960," misidentified the photographer.
The pictures -- of Avery Fisher Hall, Lever House and the Seagram Building -- are by Ezra Stoller, not Erica Stoller.


RESULTS PLUS
BASKETBALL  Another Loss for Magic  Dana Barros had 25 points, 15 assists and a career-high 10 rebounds as Philadelphia handed visiting Orlando its second straight loss, 109-99, last night.
The rookie Derrick Alston had a career-high 22 points for Philadelphia, while Shawn Bradley had 19 points and 6 blocks.
The 76ers, who have the second-worst record in the Eastern Conference, had lost eight in a row to the Magic, who have the second-best record in the National Basketball Association.
Horace Grant had 25 points and 14 rebounds for Orlando, while Shaquille O'Neal had 23 points and 12 rebounds.
The Magic, which played without the starters Anfernee Hardaway and Nick Anderson, have lost 13 of their last 16 road games. (AP) HOCKEY
Flyers Beat Capitals  Eric Lindros's 23d goal broke a 1-1 tie early in the third period as the visiting Philadelphia Flyers beat Washington, 3-1, snapping the Capitals' four-game winning streak.
The victory evened Philadelphia's road record at 8-8-3. (AP) CANADIENS 2, PENGUINS 1: Defenseman Lyle Odelein and the newly arrived center Pierre Turgeon scored first-period goals as Montreal continued its home-ice domination of visiting Pittsburgh.
The Penguins have lost their last 11 games at the Forum. (AP) BRUINS 5 LIGHTNING 1: Jozef Stumpel and Steve Heinze each scored twice as Boston beat visiting Tampa Bay.
The victory was the Bruins' first in four games. (AP) MAPLE LEAFS 4, JETS 3: The newcomer Benoit Hogue had a goal and an assist as Toronto Maple beat visiting Winnipeg, earning its first victory in four games. (AP) TENNIS  Martinez Plays Sabatini  Top-seeded Conchita Martinez and No. 2 Gabriela Sabatini posted straight-set semifinal victories yesterday and will meet for the Bausch &amp; Lomb championship today on Amelia Island, Fla.
Martinez needed only 83 minutes to defeat No. 3 Magdalena Maleeva of Bulgaria, 6-2, 6-3, while Sabatini defeated No. 8 Sabine Hack of Germany, 6-3, 6-2, in 87 minutes.
The final will be the 14th meeting between the fourth-ranked Martinez and the seventh-ranked Sabatini, who leads the series by 9-4.
Martinez used a powerful ground game to overwhelm Maleeva for the second straight week, having beaten her in last weekend's final at Hilton Head Island, S.C. (AP) MUSTER BEATS SANCHEZ: Third-seeded Thomas Muster of Austria ousted Emilio Sanchez of Spain, 6-2, 6-4, yesterday and will play Spain's Alberto Costa for the title in the Estoril Open in Lisbon.
Costa, who is unseeded, trounced Fabrice Santoro of France, 6-1, 6-0, in the other semifinal in the tournament. (AP) HORSE RACING  Grand National Winner  Royal Athlete, a 40-1 shot, pulled away from Master Oats, the favored Gold Cup winner, three fences from the end yesterday to win the Grand National, the world's most grueling steeplechase, in Liverpool, England.
The 12-year-old chestnut gelding, ridden by Jason Titley, won the 4 1/2-mile race by seven lengths.
Party Politics, the 1992 winner, was second and the 100-1 shot Over the Deel was another six lengths back.
Master Oats, bidding to become for the first Gold Cup winner since 1934 to win the National in the same season, wound up seventh.
Royal Athlete's victory was a second in the race for the trainer Jenny Pitman, who had five other horses in the race. (AP) TRACK  Lewis Upset in Dash  Maurice Greene, a virtual unknown from Kansas City, Kan., won the Texas Relays' 100-meter dash yesterday in a stunning upset of Carl Lewis, the two-time Olympic 100-meter gold medalist.
In a wind-aided 9.88 seconds, Greene edged Raymond Stewart, who ran 9.89, with Lewis third in 9.94 in Austin.
"Everybody thought Carl would win the race, but I knew I was just as capable," said the 20-year-old Green, who was sixth in the Mobil/USA indoor championships and finished fourth in the world indoor championships last month.
Twenty minutes earlier, Lewis, who like almost everyone had to ask who Greene was, had anchored the Santa Monica Track Club to the year's fastest time in the 400-meter relay, 38.43.
BROOKLYN TEAM WINS: Boys and Girls High School of Brooklyn won four varsity events and took the boys' team title in the sixth annual Kings Relays at Downing Stadium on Randalls Island.
The Kangaroos tallied 61 points with Fordham Prep and Mount St.
Michael a distant second with 22 points each.
The boys' victories came in the 400 (44.1 seconds), 800 (1:30.2 seconds), 1,600 (3:23.3) and 3,200 (8:06.7) relays.
South Shore, also of Brooklyn, took the girls' team trophy at 32 points with Jamaica, Queens, second with 26.


PHOTOGRAPHER'S JOURNAL


Fred Harrington, University Chief, Is Dead at 82
Fred Harvey Harrington, a former president of the University of Wisconsin, died yesterday at Meriter Hospital in Madison.
He was 82.
Mr.
Harrington was credited with raising the university's academic standing in the 1960's and broadening its mission before being driven from office by widespread campus unrest in 1970.
The cause of death was complications from a stroke, his family said.


At Last, a Bond Rally To Be Excited About
FOR investors who held on to their bond funds throughout last year, the first quarter brought unexpected pleasure.
Outsized gains in the first three months virtually erased the losses of 1994.


Albanians in Kosovo Fearful of a U.S. Deal With Yugoslavia
Many Albanians in the southern Yugoslav region of Kosovo are watching in fear as the United States and its allies negotiate over the United Nations sanctions against Serb-dominated Yugoslavia.
A Western deal with President Slobodan Milosevic of Serbia would take away their hope that pressure from the Western allies will force Mr.
Milosevic to end the repression of the Albanians here, and grant them autonomy, if not independence.


Laimbeer and Johnson Are Now Partners
BILL LAIMBEER and VINNIE JOHNSON, who were teammates on the Detroit Pistons, plan to go into business together in a box factory.
Johnson will be a majority owner of Piston Packaging Inc. and Laimbeer will be his partner.
The company plans to start renovations at a former Cadillac factory in Detroit this week and will hire about 125 people, Johnson said.


In Fallen Chechen Capital, Medical Care Is in Ruins
Grozny's Hospital No. 4, one of only three hospitals still open in this city eviscerated by war, is barely functioning, with most of its buildings in ruins.
Only a few rooms are open, with four to six beds each, most of them full.
An old woman lies awkwardly, her skin swollen and black, while her relatives hover around as in any hospital anywhere, hoping for the best.


MARKET TIMING
Monday  A long-awaited report by U.N. weapons monitors will be released to the Security Council and is expected to find fault with Iraq's compliance on biological weapons.
The critical report is expected to temporarily end the movement to lift the oil embargo against Iraq.
First-quarter reports for Advanced Micro Devices, Champion International and Dow Jones are scheduled today.
Analysts expect Advanced Micro to come in at 86 cents a share, Champion at $1.05 and Dow Jones at 47 cents.
Tuesday  The Labor Department will release producer prices for March.
Forecast: The prices of finished good should have risen 0.2 percent.
Two major Japanese commercial banks, Sanwa Bank and Dai-Ichi Kangyo Bank, will lower their short-term prime lending rates to 2.75 percent from 3 percent.
Mitsubishi Bank will cut its rate on Wednesday.
International Paper is releasing first-quarter earnings.
Forecast: $1.75 a share.
Wednesday  The nation's main inflation gauge, the consumer price index, is due out for March.
Economists say the numbers are likely to increase moderately.
Forecast: up 0.3 percent, the same rate since January.
International Multifoods first-quarter earnings are due.
Forecast: 40 cents a share.
Thursday  The Commerce Department announces chain store sales for March.
Forecast: up 0.4 percent.
Chrysler is scheduled to release first-quarter earnings, which are expected to be much weaker than the similar period last year.
Forecast: $2.13 a share, down from $2.55.
Friday  The Federal Reserve will release industrial production and capacity utilization for March.
Forecast: industrial production, up 0.2 percent; capacity utilization at 85.7 percent, no change from February.
The Commerce Department reports February business inventories.
Forecast: up 0.5 percent.


The New 'New Jersey': Brickbats and Hallelujahs
To the Editor:
Judging by the misspelling of "independent" in a pie chart on the front page of your premiere section, the Garden State may indeed be showing the rest of the country the way -- leading the national charge toward illiteracy.


Caveman's Delight
The Spanish mountain village of Galera in the Andalusian province of Granada lets visitors get close to the hillsides -- literally inside them.
Fourteen caves in Galera, newly decorated with reproductions of rustic Spanish furniture, are available at rates ranging from $30 a day (at 129 pesetas to the dollar) and $170 a week for a one-bedroom cave to $70 a day for a four-bedroom cave for eight people.


Former L.S.U. Player Is Charged
HOWARD CARTER, a former Louisiana State forward who has been playing basketball in France, was charged with buying and using drugs after the police arrested him and seized a dose of heroin, the authorities in Le Havre said yesterday.


The Prisoner of Vichy
PRISON JOURNAL, 1940-1945 By Edouard Daladier.
Edited by Jean Daladier with Jean Daridan.
Translated by Arthur D. Greenspan.
Illustrated. 376 pp.
Boulder, Colo.: Westview Press. $34.95.


With a Gimlet Eye on Restaurants; Zagat (the Man, Not the Book) Makes His Nightly Rounds
It isn't surprising that Tim Zagat, who publishes the ubiquitous Zagat restaurant surveys, knows the New York restaurant scene, that he can walk into any of the city's first-rate kitchens and find a friend (the chef) or that he has a few opinions on the business of serving food to the public.
"I can review any restaurant accurately about 75 percent of the time without eating in it," he said recently during an evening tour of restaurants in lower Manhattan.
"I wouldn't do it. But I could."


No Headline
"We were wrong, terribly wrong. We owe it to future generations to explain why." ROBERT S. MCNAMARA, former Defense Secretary, on Vietnam.  [ 12:3. ]


After Years of Disease, There's a Wary Joy In Bivalve as the Oyster Season Begins
DR.
HAROLD HASKIN, father of modern oyster studies, co-discoverer of the MSX oyster parasite and the name behind the Haskin Shellfish Research Laboratory, reached into a freshly dredged sample of Delaware Bay bluepoints and selected a fat specimen four inches across.
He pulled an old iron oyster knife from his pocket, jammed the flat end into the shell's hinge and twisted to reveal a mass of healthy, yellowy-pink flesh that nearly overflowed its generous container.
"Very nice," said Dr.
Haskin, a retired Rutgers zoology professor, aboard an oyster boat making a test run out of the oysterishly named port of Bivalve.
One at a time, he lifted the four layers of delicately frilled gills, and slicing a membrane to show a pair of full, meaty lips.
"They really are beautiful animals."


A Look at What Separates Winners from Losers
TAKE a tiny fund without much of a track record, give it a penchant for investing in teeny companies and mix in a hearty helping of technology stocks.
That was the recipe for successful fund investing in the first quarter.
There were, of course, some exceptions.
Robertson Stephens Value and Growth actually has about $330 million in assets (though $200 million of that flooded in during the quarter), while many of the winners barely make this newspaper's $30 million cutoff.


SUIT RAGE
I think Tierney, along with many other commuters, is confusing claustrophobia with plain old impatience.
I have had the job of investigating people who have been struck by trains.
He could have lost a limb.
If he wants to know the meaning of the word empowered, let him ask people in wheelchairs.
They would define it as simply being able to stand again.
DETECTIVE WILLIAM P. BURKE New York


A QUESTION FOR: Bill Bryson
Q: So?
How're we doin', language-wise?
A: I was astonished by the inarticulateness of some of the participants in the O. J. Simpson trial.
There was so much hemming and hawing and shuffling of pieces of paper.
And we get N.F.L. football on TV in England, and with the noble exception of Frank Gifford, I think most of the commentators can hardly put together two sentences without having to rest for a while.
But people are always complaining that the language is going to hell in a bucket and standards are declining.
This is a longstanding belief in almost every society.
And in America in the 1870's, Princeton University, for instance, was so concerned about the lack of spelling and good writing among incoming freshman that they actually held remedial writing courses.
And this was the picked crop of students.


A Film About Lesbians, and Don't Hold The Humor
MIRRORING SOCIETY'S attitudes, the film industry has long shunned lesbians, rarely making movies about them, much less movies from their point of view.
But that seemed to change last year when "Go Fish," by and about lesbians, was a modest hit.
This year two more films about lesbians are opening, and another has been a surprise hit in France.
"Bar Girls," which opened here on Friday, began life over two years ago, when the director, Marita Giovanni, was teaching an acting class at the Celebration Theater in Los Angeles.
There, one of her students, Liza D'Agostino, asked her to read a friend's first play.
That play, Lauran Hoffman's lesbian comedy "Bar Girls," became the basis for the new film, which is from Orion Classics.


The Many Hats of David Cone
If you are a major leaguer and you want to be traded, there are usually four good triggers to pull: Buy a house, send out your laundry, change your name to Roberto Kelly or become a union activist.
Now, David Cone, the pitcher, can't be confused with Kelly, the All-Star center fielder who has been traded by the Yankees, Reds and Braves in the last three years.
But the other categories?


AN ABORTIONIST'S CREDO
After reading Karlin's defense of her actions as an abortionist, I can now understand how one can rationalize such an abominable choice of employment.
To refer to herself as the "local abortion provider" and to refer to the abortions that she performs as "nurturing, preventive care" probably make it a lot easier for her to live with herself.
JOSEPHINE COAKLEY Cranford, N.J.


In Praise of Barrenwort (or Epimedium, for the Squeamish)
TO be goofy about a particular plant is, well, goofy.
But gardeners are allowed certain enthusiasms.
Take, for example, Epimedium.
Few gardeners know this plant by its common name, barrenwort, and that probably is a good thing.
The plant is far from barren and could be considered the perfect ground cover.
The reasons for extolling this plant are many, but probably its most praiseworthy quality is that it is easy to grow.
Epimedium makes few demands on those who set it out, literally growing on its own and in the shade, too.
For landscape designers especially, it is one of the most useful groundcovers around.


Everett Is Deeper in the Doghouse for Snapping at Segui
Dallas Green could not believe what he was hearing.
It was the middle of a simple outfield drill this morning at the Mets' spring training complex, and Carl Everett, his new center field prospect, was cursing out David Segui, a veteran player.
Everett apparently felt that Segui, in left field, was not running hard enough for fly balls that fell between left and center.
He accused Segui of not working hard.
He complained about how much running he had to do to get to the balls.
He said some things -- in a shout that could be heard clear across the field in the bleachers -- that are too impolite to print.


Clinton Says He May Veto Welfare Bill
President Clinton today defended affirmative action and attacked the House Republicans' welfare plan, threatening a veto unless it is changed to provide more job training and education.
At the same time, Mr.
Clinton re-affirmed his commitment both to reviewing programs that give preferences to women and minorities and to an overhaul of the welfare system.
In a speech to the California Democratic Party convention here, and in his weekly radio address, he continued the effort he began on Friday to use Congress's recess as an opportunity to sketch out lines of compromise and confrontation with Republicans in the battles to come.


Canada Says It Will Punish War Criminals
The Canadian authorities announced a new effort in January to deal with Nazi war criminals and started proceedings to deport a retired auto mechanic named Erichs Tobiass for collaborating with Nazis in his native Latvia.
But Canadian Jewish groups, whose members have long felt that Canada was not addressing the issue adequately, say the Government is still dragging its heels.
Canada's Justice Department and Immigration Ministry announced legal proceedings to deport four people on grounds that they misrepresented their World War II activities when they immigrated to Canada.
It said it would bring charges by the end of March and then pursue eight other cases, but proceedings have begun only against Mr.
Tobiass.


A Keep of Japanese Tradition
TOHOKU, one of Japan's most charming rural regions, rarely ends up on the itineraries of visitors from overseas.
At the northern tip of the island of Honshu, far from Kyoto and Tokyo, it has developed its own traditions, which have proved unusually resistant to the pressures of homogenization and Westernization in modern Japan.
One of my favorite places in Tohoku is Morioka, a city of 260,000 filled with craft shops and quaint streets, wonderful museums and excellent restaurants.
Morioka is an old castle town, meaning that in the feudal period before the restoration of the Meiji Emperor in 1868 it served as the seat of a great lord, or diamyo.
Morioka's diamyo headed the Nambu clan, whose ancestors began construction of their castle on the present site of Morioka in 1597.


[ APPEARANCES ] ; FEEL THE BURN
TEN MINUTES AFTER MEETING CAROLE Maggio for the very first time, I was lying supine on the bed in her hotel room while she sat in a chair by my head chanting "pump, pump, pump." She's from Los Angeles and doesn't stand on ceremony.
Besides, she has a mission.
She wants to persuade people to use exercise instead of surgery to help their aging faces look younger, and she has written a book to show them how -- "Facercise," due out this month from Berkley Publishing.
When I walked in the door, Maggio destroyed any resistance I might have had by taking two Polaroids, front and profile.
I was not allowed to smile, duck my head or arrange my hands across my chin -- usual ploys when confronted by a camera.
As a result, it was all out there: the incipient dewlaps, the crooked mouth, the crevasses some call smile lines.
I was appalled.
Most people are, Maggio said. (She's had women return the photos, believing they'd been given the wrong one, and Maggio has had to point out that the "stranger" in the picture was wearing the exact same blouse.) Your own aging face is a terrible thing to confront.
If Maggio said she had exercises that would give me wider eyes, higher cheeks, a plumper mouth and a firmer chin, I was willing to suspend disbelief.


A Precocious Sitcom Freshman
YEARS BEFORE THEY submit their first script, most aspiring television-sitcom writers are already steeped in the genre.
Thousands of hours of television watching has burned hundreds of plot lines and characters into their brains.
They are fluent in the language of sight gags and snappy comebacks, teasers and tag lines, sly topical references and quick moral lessons.
And so, such aspirants may think themselves well qualified to write and even produce their own half-hour comedies -- until they meet Paul Simms.
Mr.
Simms is the writer, creator and executive producer of "News Radio," the new NBC sitcom that had its premiere in March and has been extended by the network for at least six more episodes on Tuesday nights at 8:30.
A tall, thin graduate of Harvard, he is an American who was raised in third-world countries.
Deprived of early exposure to "I Love Lucy," "The Brady Bunch" -- indeed to most of the sitcom canon -- Mr.
Simms seems to have had to depend for inspiration primarily on the real world, including his own quasi-immigrant experiences.


Romy Martin and Jeffrey M. Jagid
Romy Martin and Jeffrey Mark Jagid, associates at New York law firms, were married last evening at the Park Avenue Synagogue in New York.
Rabbi David H. Lincoln performed the ceremony.
Mrs.
Jagid, 26, works for Hughes Hubbard &amp; Reed.
She graduated magna cum laude from Tufts University and received her law degree from New York University.
She is the daughter of Dr.
Barry H. Martin of West Orange, N.J., and Freya Chernin of Livingston, N.J., and is the stepdaughter of Samuel Chernin.
The bride's father is a radiologist at Clara Maass Medical Center and at the Progressive Imaging Center, both in Belleville, N.J.


Republicans' Progress Fails To Impress Perot's Faithful
Their political anger assuaged little by the Republican Party's Contract With America, the hard-core followers of Ross Perot are holding hundreds of community meetings around the country to explore the possibility of forming a third party for the 1996 elections.
No consensus has yet emerged from the gatherings, which began several months ago and will conclude here in Dallas in August with a nationwide convention at the headquarters of the Perot organization, United We Stand America.


Annie Zamoiski and Steven Yanovsky
WHILE many people in New York avoid, mistrust or simply never see their neighbors, Annie Zamoiski, 40, has almost single-handedly turned her Greenwich Village apartment building into a place where residents know their neighbors' names, love problems and preferences in movie rentals, and where they sometimes even forget to lock their doors.
Ms.
Zamoiski, a freelance computer graphics designer, talks to everyone in the hallways and elevators of the converted warehouse; regularly drops in on neighbors, usually with a bottle of wine, and is always up to date on who's having a baby or moving out or auditioning for a part in a movie or in need of home cooking.


Adding a Canadian Colt To Triple Crown Picture
At the Eastern end of the road to Kentucky, the two archrivals, Thunder Gulch and Suave Prospect, were working up to their third confrontation next Saturday in the Blue Grass Stakes at Keeneland in Kentucky.
But they may be upstaged by last year's Canadian juvenile champion, Talkin Man, who became one of the hottest horses on the Triple Crown trail when he won the Gotham Stakes by seven lengths.
Talkin Man, who made his 1995 debut two weeks ago, will race at Aqueduct again in the Wood Memorial next Saturday while Thunder Gulch and Suave Prospect duke it out in Kentucky.
Then all three colts figure to show up for the Kentucky Derby three weeks later, where they will be joined by Afternoon Deelites and Timber Country, the Western stars who held their own shootout yesterday in the Santa Anita Derby.


April 2-8: Golf in Augusta, Ga.; The Teen-Age Whiz At the Masters
A 19-year-old amateur, Eldrick (Tiger) Woods, made his debut in the Masters last week at Augusta National Golf Club, and the grand auld game of golf has never seen anything quite like him.
It is not merely the abundance of talent that this Stanford University freshman brings to the sport that sets him apart.
Many have had that.
That Woods is the child of a black father and Thai mother is an element.
But he is a prodigy who seems to have a grasp of every element necessary for success in a brutally competitive game.


Financial Fear And Retirement
To the Editor:
You provide a variety of pictures of those who are looking forward to retirement but have some questions about paying for it.
The last paragraph of the article, about a man who "worked until he got sick a month before died" at 75, says it all.


Big Race, Big Moment Becomes Big Nothing
In a power play that was tantamount to a Hollywood movie deal, the America's Cup defenders took it upon themselves last Tuesday to rewrite the outcome of racing to fit personal interests.
Sport -- as a contest decided on merit -- ended up taking second billing, and yacht racing gave itself a black eye.
Dennis Conner's Stars &amp; Stripes and Bill Koch's Mighty Mary were scheduled in a sailoff to decide which boat would become the second qualifier for the Citizen Cup defenders finals.
But less than two hours before the start of the race, syndicate heads agreed instead to give all three teams a place in the finals.
By killing the sudden-death playoff, negotiators upstaged the most important match of the trials so far.


April 2-8: Another Spy in the Sky; Israel Launches a Satellite To Monitor Its Neighbors
For intelligence on hostile neighbors, Israel is not willing to depend solely on help from its powerful ally, the United States.
Israeli officials feel they were burned during the 1991 Persian Gulf war, when they complained that Washington had not shared all that it knew about the Scud missiles Iraq was firing at Israel.
That impelled them to do high-tech snooping on their own.
Last week, Israel launched what defense experts call the country's first spy satellite, Ofek-3.
Circling the globe every 90 minutes, it is supposed to fly over Israeli enemies like Syria, Iraq and Iran, transmitting photographs and data about what is going on below.


More Than Meets The Eye
To the Editor:
As much as I appreciate the acknowledgment by Roberta Smith of my influence on the University of California, Berkeley, show "In a Different Light"  [ "Void, Self, Drag, Utopia (And 5 Other Gay Themes)" March 26 ] , I would like to respond to one point.


U.S.O.C. Experts Call Drug Testing a Failure
Medical experts from the United States Olympic Committee today called drug-testing procedures a failure in this country and called for increased out-of-competition tests that would give athletes little or no notice.
The U.S.O.C. has conducted about 1,400 out-of-competition drug tests since 1992, said Dr.
Wade Exum, director of the Olympic committee's drug-control program.
Only one athlete has tested positive, Exum said, which made him question the effectiveness of catching cheaters.


Rachel Dean, Brian Matthews
Rachel Dean, a daughter of Morris and Beryl Dean of Bryn Mawr, Pa., and Brian Matthews, a son of George and Mary Matthews of North Hills, L.I., were married yesterday in Philadelphia.
Judge Edward Becker of the United States Court of Appeals for the Third Circuit in Philadelphia, officiated at the Ritz-Carlton Hotel.
Mrs.
Matthews, 28, is an associate at HSBC Securities, an investment management company in New York.
She graduated from Columbia University and is studying for an M.B.A. at New York University.
Her father is a senior partner in Blank, Rome, Comisky &amp; McCauley, a law firm in Philadelphia.
Her mother is the director of career planning at the Philadelphia Bar Association.


Spring Fare
FRONTIERE * (212) 387-0898; 199 Prince Street, near MacDougal; $$; all major credit cards


'If You Can't Spell You Look Stupid'
MARIA ABBATE of East Williston grew up in a world of "i before e except after c." Spelling was learned by memorizing rules, and she did.
But concerned that her daughter isn't, she traveled to Bethpage to learn the rules of spelling one more time.
In a small classroom decorated by the letters of the alphabet and their sounds, Mrs.
Abbate, eight other mothers, a father and one grandmother sat reciting the "sss" that the letter S makes.
"Now write it in the air as you say it," the instructor, Emily Goldberg, told them.


Property Reassessment Plan Put Forth
MENTION "reassessment" and elected officials run for cover.
It doesn't take a political insider to know that people whose taxes are raised tend to express their displeasure in the voting booth.
But few who are familiar with the county's system of property-tax assessments would argue that it is fair.
And it is localities -- along with those county residents shouldering an unfair portion of taxes -- who are paying the price.
The inequity in how houses are valued in Westchester is costing school districts and municipalities millions of dollars as corporations and individual citizens successfully challenge their tax assessments and receive refunds.


You Cannot Play This or Wear That
For years, schools have cracked down on such obvious hazards as guns, knives and cigarettes.
But prohibitions imposed recently by school districts in Wormleysburg, Pa., Windham, N.H., and Spokane, Wash., on a game called Pogs elevate that strategy - if you can't beat 'em, ban 'em - to another dimension.
Pogs is named for a Hawaiian soft drink and is played with small discs.
It is also winner-take-all, which means that players who lose all their discs often are sore.
Fights ensued.
Bans followed.


Strike's Meaning
To the Sports Editor:
Don't get me wrong, I'm all for a free market; I'm part of this system myself, too.
However, if I treated my clients or anyone who pays my salary in the same disrespectful manner in which the players treated their fans throughout the strike, I would be fired.


In Paris, Personal View Of 20th-Century Artists
Dina Vierny, the director of the new Musee Maillol, which opened last month in Paris, was a model for Matisse, Bonnard, Dufy and Maillol.
Over the years she has collected many works by those for whom she posed and their contemporaries.
The 27-room museum, which offers a glimpse of her personal collection of 20th-century art, is housed in an 18th-century hotel particulier in the seventh arrondissement.
Vierny, a native of Russia, met Maillol in 1934 in Paris at the age of 15.
Over the next 10 years she posed for sculpture, painting, drawing, tapestry, ceramics and engravings until Maillol's death in 1944.
Maillol is most popularly known for his sculptures of her that are in the Jardins de Tuileries.


The World; Europe's Leaders See Green
AT the United Nations conference on climate change last week, which called for a new accord to limit emissions of greenhouse gases, the debates revealed one striking difference between the northern European countries and the United States.
Because the European countries are so much more thickly settled than the United States, there is a much higher consciousness here of the urgency of environmental problems and of the need for joint action to confront them.
The political success of Green parties has awakened other parties, even some of the most conservative, to the importance that voters attach to environmental issues.
And politicians find it easier to denounce environmental criminals in a part of the world where many of the criminals have been Communist regimes rather than powerful corporations.


Smaller Than We Can Think
NANO The Emerging Science of Nanotechnology: Remaking the World -- Molecule by Molecule.
By Ed Regis.
Illustrated. 325 pp.
Boston:  Little, Brown &amp; Company. $23.95.


East Village Gothic Horror Show: The Two Sides of an Unneighborly Tale
PEOPLE who give up on the polite or even the bellowing approach to neighbor problems can try the courts for redress.
Since 1981, the court system in the city has offered mediation services, free of charge, to warring neighbors and others who file criminal complaints against each other that don't require a judge and jury.


Sports of the Times; Masters Moments You Never See
INSTEAD of turning off Gary McCord's television microphone, the Masters' green coats should cancel their television blackout of Augusta National's front nine.
Minutes after Curtis Strange's seven-under-par 65 would lift the two-time United States Open champion within two strokes of the co-leaders, Ben Crenshaw and Brian Henninger, going into today's final round, CBS began its third-round coverage.
It showed taped highlights of Strange's round, but it never showed any videotape of Jack Nicklaus's second eagle of this Masters at the 435-yard fifth hole.


Beach Boys Redux and Virtual Elvis
Bally's Park Place
MAIN BALLROOM Ed Hopson, NABF junior lightweight champion, vs.
Moises Pedroza.
April 22 at 4:30.
Tickets: $25. (609) 340-2709 or Ticketmaster, (800) 736-1420.
Boardwalk and Park Place.
COMING UP The Temptations, May 5-7, and Sheena Easton,  July 6-9.
PARK CABARET "Legends in Concert," featuring impersonations of Tom Jones, Whitney Houston, Elvis Presley and others.
Sunday through Thursday, 7:30 and 10 P.M.
Saturday, 8 and 10:30 P.M.
Tickets: $20.
Caesars Atlantic City
CIRCUS MAXIMUS SHOWROOM Daryl Hall and John Oates.
Friday at 10 P.M., Saturday at 9 P.M. and Sunday at 8 P.M.
Tickets: $30.
Ticketmaster, (800) 736-1420. 2100 Pacific Avenue.
For information, call (800) 677-7469.
COMING UP Don Rickles, April 21-23 and Jimmy Roselli, April 28-30.
Claridge Hotel
PALACE THEATER Ann Jillian, actress and singer.
April 21 at 10 P.M., April 22 at 8 and 11 P.M. and April 23 at 7 P.M.
Tickets: $25 plus a one-drink minimum.
Ticketmaster, (800) 736-1420.
Boardwalk and Park Place.
The Grand
CAMBRIDGE BALLROOM Bill Cosby.
May 5 at 10 P.M. and May 6 at 8 and 11 P.M.
Tickets: $35 and $50.
Ticketmaster, (800) 736-1420.
Boston at Pacific Avenue.
For information, call (609) 340-7200.
COMING UP Frankie Valli and the Four Seasons, May 26-28.
Harrah's Hotel Casino
BROADWAY-BY-THE-BAY "Spring Showcase of the Stars," Anthony Newley and the Michael Natale Ochestra.
Today, 7 and 10 P.M.
Tickets: $20. (800) 242-7724. 777 Harrah's Boulevard and Huron Avenue.
COMING UP Diahann Carroll,  April 18-23.
Merv Griffin's Resorts Casino Hotel
SUPERSTAR THEATER The Beach Boys.
Today. 8 P.M.
Tickets: $40.
Vietnamese Magic Show, Saturday at 8 P.M. and next Sunday at 6:30 P.M.
Tickets: $35, $50 and $75.
Resorts box office, (609) 340-6830, or Ticketmaster, (800) 736-1420. 1133 Boardwalk.
COMING UP Italian Show, May 20 and 21; Rosie O'Donnell, May 26-29.
Sands Hotel and Casino
COPA ROOM "The Escapade," a music revue.
Sunday through Thursday, 3:30 and 7:30 P.M., and Saturday 7 and 10 P.M.
Tickets: $15.
Sands box office (609) 441-4137 or Ticketmaster, (800) 736-1420.
Indiana Avenue and Brighton Park. (800) 257-8580.
Showboat Hotel Casino
MARDI GRAS SHOWROOM "The Basin Street Follies" featuring "Disorderly Conduct," a husband and wife slapstick team.
Through April 29.
Monday through Saturday at 8 and 10:30 P.M.
Tickets: $10.
Ticketmaster, (800) 736-1420.
Delaware and Pacific. (609) 343-4000.
Tropworld
SHOWROOM No shows scheduled until May.
COMING UP Johnny Mathis, May 18-21.
Boardwalk and Brighton Avenue. (800) 257-6227.
Trump's Castle Casino Resort
CRYSTAL BALLROOM Dick Fox's 40th Anniversary of Rock 'n' Roll.
April 21 at 10 P.M., April 22 at 8 and 11 P.M. and April 23 at 9 P.M.
Tickets: $20 plus one drink minimum.
Ticketmaster, (800) 736-1420.
Huron Avenue and Brigantine Boulevard.
COMING UP The Four Tops,  May 26-28.
KING'S COURT SHOWROOM "Unforgettables," a tribute to late and great stars, through June 4.
Featuring Randy Allen as Bette Davis.
Monday through Thursday at 3 and 7:30 P.M.; Saturday at 7:30 and 10:30 P.M. and Sunday at 8:30 P.M.
Tickets: $12.50, weekdays; $15, Saturdays and holidays.
Both require a one drink mimimum.
Ticketmaster, (800) 736-1420.
Trump Plaza
PLAZA SHOWROOM Vic Damone.
Today. 8 P.M.
Tickets: $25 and $30.
Boardwalk at Mississippi Avenue. (800) 759-8786.
Trump Taj Mahal
CASBAH Dean Scott, singer.
Through April 20.
Saturday through Thursday at 7:30 and 10:30 P.M.
Tickets: $12.50, Sunday through Thursday; $15 Saturday.
Ticketmaster, (800) 736-1420. 1000 Boardwalk at Virginia Avenue.
For information, call (609) 449-1000.
COMING UP "Das Ist Die Liebe," a German operetta with Marika Oszald.
April 22 at 8 P.M.
"Concerto Italiano" with Riccardo Cocciante, Antonio and Marchello, Rosita Celentano and Gigi Finizio.
April 22 at 8:30 P.M.


SUIT RAGE
During my years at New York City Transit, I have heard some astounding stories of foolhardy behavior but nothing matches John Tierney's jumping off a subway car and walking on live track to a nearby station so that he could keep a business appointment (The Big City: "Suit Rage," March 19).
He is lucky that he didn't get arrested or killed.
JACK S. LUSK New York


Kimberly H. Tilley, Peter L. Scher
Kimberly Helen Tilley, the director of scheduling for Vice President Al Gore, was married yesterday to Peter Lawrence Scher, the chief of staff for Mickey Kantor, the United States Trade Representative.
Both are based in Washington.
Cantor David Shneyer performed the ceremony at the Lafayette Center in Washington.
The Rev.
Michael Kelley, a Roman Catholic priest, took part in the service.
Ms.
Tilley, 35, a former aide to Hillary Rodham Clinton, was from 1984 to 1992 a senior legislative assistant to Senator Paul Simon, Democrat of Illinois.
The bride, who graduated from the University of Tulsa, is a daughter of James B. Tilley of Valparaiso, Ind., and the late Joeanne Tilley.
Mr.
Tilley retired as the director of corporate systems at Consolidated Foods in Chicago.


Words of Solace From Yorktown High Students
FOR most high school students, homework must usually be done before pursuing sports, other extracurricular activities or a social life.
But for the students in Susan Ross's 11th-grade English class at Yorktown High School here, a recent assignment took on a compelling life of its own.
As part of the students' reading of J. D. Salinger's "Catcher in the Rye," the 20 members of the class wrote poems based on one character's futile struggle against leukemia.


Corrections
A subheading yesterday about a guilty plea in a New York State Police evidence-tampering scandal described the charges incorrectly in some editions.
Patrick O'Hara pleaded guilty to perjury and evidence tampering; he did not admit fabricating evidence.


Strike's Meaning
To the Sports Editor:
Don't get me wrong, I'm all for a free market; I'm part of this system myself, too.
However, if I treated my clients or anyone who pays my salary in the same disrespectful manner in which the players treated their fans throughout the strike, I would be fired.


Readying an Auction of Heavy Equipment
DOWN by the river, in the shadow of the Tappan Zee Bridge, acres of rubber tire loaders, crawler tractors, dump and pickup trucks, hydraulic excavators, truck trailers, crawler loaders, cranes and truck cranes, end dump trucks and even wheelbarrows and hammers are going on the block.
The huge inventory of construction equipment has been assembled for the region's largest yearly construction equipment auction on April 22 in Tarrytown on a 12-acre Hudson River site just north of the Tappan Zee Bridge.
"People in the industry wait all year for this event," said Ross J. Pepe.
"We're expecting more than 2,000 contractors and equipment users from as far away as South America to show up."


Changes Come to Long Hill Township, Starting With the Name
Bob Dorsi has lived all his 73 years in Long Hill Township, in Morris County; 50 years ago next year, he founded the Dorsi Deli and Pharmacy, and it has become a Long Hill landmark and clearinghouse for local gossip.
Now that his sons, Robert Jr. and Tom, are running the business, Mr.
Dorsi had time to answer some questions about his hometown.
Q.  So what's Long Hill like?
A.
We've got a little of everything.
We have wooded areas.
We've got the Passaic River, and we've got the Great Swamp, which runs into Long Hill and Chatham and Madison.
People are always running and bicycle riding, especially in the summer, when a lot of people come from the city and get off at the train station with their packs.
Before, we had Italian and Polish and Armenian people, mostly.
Now, it's just mixed.
We're just getting better people all the time -- better educated, more money.
We don't have anyone here who's that famous.
Leo the Lion, the MGM symbol, was pretty heavy here about a year ago.
People came from all over to see where he was buried.
Now it's died out; I heard the owners took the headstone away because they want to sell the property.
Q.  What are people in Long Hill talking about these days?
A.
A few years ago, the new people didn't like the name Passaic Township, which was what Long Hill was called for a long time.
So there was a vote, and people changed the name to Long Hill.
Long Hill sounds a little richer, like Short Hills.
People used to get us confused with Passaic, over there near Clifton.
The old people didn't like this when the name changed; they never said Passaic Township, they just said Millington, Stirling, Gillette, Meyersville or Homestead Park -- those are the villages that are part of Long Hill.
But now you never hear anything about Passaic.
People say either Long Hill or Stirling or Gillette.
Property is worth a lot of money here, and people are worried about all the stores coming in now, like T.J.
Maxx and Dunkin' Donuts and McDonald's.
All the land is just about saturated.
They're building a new development now -- Stirling Manor, I think it's called.
They're going to build about 60 homes on the hill, and the cheapest you can get is $375,000.
Q.  Has the town changed?
A.
Years ago, you knew everyone by their first name, their last name, where they lived.
Now you don't know.
You do meet a lot of nice people; we've got a lot of lawyers, dentists and doctors and F.B.I. people.
You see almost the same people every day, and you try to talk to them a little.
We have the lottery here at the store; that brings in a lot of people.
It's just that everybody's in a hurry.
TV and the malls have changed a lot of people.
These new people have got a landscaper and a gardener; they sleep late on Sunday, take the kids to the mall, stay all day.
It isn't like when families got up early, went together to get a bun or rolls, got the morning paper, went back home and read it at home.
We open at 6:30 every day.
The early birds are all old-timers coming in for coffee, doughnuts and rolls.
We try to satisfy everybody; that's what kept me here so long.
I want to retire, but my sons always need help.
It's O.K.; I've got to do something.
DAVID W. CHEN


Baseball Hired Temporary Replacements
To the Editor:
You made a serious error in your April 4 news analysis of the replacement worker issue in the Major League Baseball players' strike.


Maestro of the Off-Key Guitars
SITTING IN HIS CRAMPED SoHo office surrounded by bookshelves, sipping Jim Beam and chain-smoking, Glenn Branca fits the 19th-century notion of tortured genius perfectly.
His eyes are puffy, his face is unshaven; his dark jacket is frayed, his grown-out pompadour is mussed and graying.
Although he looks like Fagin, king of the beggars, Mr.
Branca is increasingly finding himself cast in a more contemporary role -- his protests notwithstanding -- as one of alternative rock's living legends.
"Well, at this point that's kind of absurd," he says in his harsh, nasal voice.
"I certainly don't want people running to the record store and buying my records thinking they're going to be hearing some kind of grunge music."


Anniston Journal; From Trust in the Army To a Sense of Betrayal
The partnership between this city and the nation's military was based on need, and trust.
The Army needed a dirty job done.
People here needed work -- even if it meant letting the Army hide a weapon so deadly, so morally repugnant, that it was never used.
For almost 40 years, this prototypical Army town has given safe haven to a stockpile of nerve gas so potent that just a speck on the skin or in the air will kill.
In return, the military propped up the local economy with two military installations, a godsend for people who still remembered the tug of the cotton sack.


Appeal of the Shade-Loving Barrenwort
TO be goofy about a particular plant is, well, goofy.
But gardeners are allowed certain enthusiasms.
Take, for example, Epimedium.
Few gardeners know this plant by its common name, barrenwort, and that probably is a good thing.
The plant is far from barren and could be considered the perfect ground cover.
The reasons for extolling this plant are many, but probably its most praiseworthy quality is that it is easy to grow.
Epimedium makes few demands on those who set it out, literally growing on its own and in the shade, too.
For landscape designers especially, it is one of the most useful groundcovers around.


And Music Shall Help Set Him Free
It's no wonder that Bob Cohen looked haggard after racing through his schedule on a recent weekend.
First, there had been a Sabbath service on Friday night at a synagogue in Kingston, where he played the organ.
The next afternoon, he played 50 miles away at a Roman Catholic church in Castleton-on-Hudson.
On Sunday, he played the organ again at two more Masses before rushing off to Albany for a Pentecostal service.
And then, Monday evening, he was on stage at the Hudson Middle School, rehearsing his role as Tevye in a community production of "Fiddler on the Roof."


Destination: Spring; 5 Restless Writers Head Outside And Report Back On What They Found There
Whatever the calendar says, spring really begins with the first irresistible urge to head outside.
Our senses quickened more by instinct than the outward signposts of the season, we shed the deadness of winter and we get going.
Barely greening trails, muddy as often as not, are blazed anew by the first hikers of the year.
Roads and pathways fill with runners and cyclists sharpening their skills for a long race or rally, or just airing out their lungs at long last.
Shore towns, shut down tight just yesterday, begin to primp for a summer that's still months away.
At nurseries and garden stores, long lines form at cash registers as suburban farmers dream of harvesting the perfect tomato.
Weekday road warriors get into their cars, roll down the windows, hopefully, and just drive, heading nowhere but away.


Dr. Alton Meister Is Dead at 72; Research Advanced AIDS Fight
Alton Meister, a biochemist whose research became part of the battle against AIDS and other diseases, died on Thursday at the Mediplex rehabilitation center in Stamford, Conn.
He was 72.
His wife said the cause was the combined complications of a stroke he suffered last year in New Zealand and infections he picked up during interim treatment at New York Hospital, where her husband had been chief biochemist for many years.


The Cop In Little India
THREE years ago, Ravi Malhotra was a junior account executive at an advertising agency in Manhattan, making good money, meeting the expectations of his striving immigrant parents, who wanted him to have a respectable job, a desk job.
That was another life.
You can now find him on many days in a blue police uniform strolling two square blocks of Jackson Heights, Queens, picking his way through crowded streets packed with women dressed in Eastern garments and men wearing Sikh turbans in an atmosphere thick with the sound of plucky Indian music and the aromas of exotic dishes like pappadams and chicken tikka.


Just Don't Call Him a Greenskeeper
IF spring is truly a season of rebirth and hope, nowhere are those gifts more welcome than in the realm of golf, whose practitioners need all the optimism they can get.
Now, after months of gray and drizzle, golf courses are coming to life again.
There will be time enough later, in the dog days of summer and the stingy daylight of fall, to be called to account for the reckless promises of spring (I will slow down my swing, I will have fewer four-putt greens, I will break 100 every round), but now is the season for happy anticipation.


ALSO INSIDE
MAKING IT WORK 3 Officer Ravi Malhotra fights car thieves, shoplifters and prejudice in Jackson Heights.
NEW YORKERS &amp; CO. 4 Richard Brown, confidante to the stars, ends a two-decade run at the New School.
MOVIE CLOCK 14 What's showing locally, today through Thursday.
PLAYING IN THE NEIGHBORHOOD 15 'The Sweet Side' of young fathers; a film retrospective for a Yugoslavian muse.
GOOD EATING 16 SoHo and beyond: the expansive Barolo; stylish Cascabel; fine steak at the Cub Room.
SOAPBOX 17 An appreciation for public television.
And letters.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League  BALTIMORE ORIOLES -- Agreed to terms with Kevin Brown, Doug Jones and Jesse Orosco, pitchers, on one-year contracts.
Placed Mark Eichhorn, pitcher, on the 15-day disabled list.
BOSTON RED SOX -- Agreed to terms with Mike Macfarlane, catcher, on a one-year contract, and Mike Hartley, pitcher, on a minor-league contract.
Traded Scott Cooper, third baseman; Cory Bailey, pitcher; and a player to be named to St.
Louis for Rheal Cormier, pitcher, and Mark Whiten, outfielder.
CALIFORNIA ANGELS -- Agreed to terms with Bob Patterson, pitcher, and Rene Gonzales, infielder, on minor-league contracts.
CHICAGO WHITE SOX -- Agreed to terms with Jim Abbott, pitcher, and Mike Devereaux, outfielder, on one-year contracts.
CLEVELAND INDIANS -- Agreed to terms with Orel Hershiser, pitcher, on a one-year contract.
DETROIT TIGERS -- Agreed to terms with Alan Trammell, shortstop, on a one-year contract.
KANSAS CITY ROYALS -- Agreed to terms with Tom Browning, pitcher, on a one-year contract and Jose DeJesus, pitcher, on a minor-league contract.
NEW YORK YANKEES -- Agreed to terms with Dion James, outfielder, on a one-year contract.
OAKLAND ATHLETICS -- Agreed to terms with Dave Stewart, pitcher, on a one-year contract, and Rick Honeycutt, pitcher, on a minor-league contract.
SEATTLE MARINERS -- Designated Chris Howard, catcher, for assignment.
TEXAS RANGERS -- Agreed to terms with Bob Tewksbury, pitcher, on a one-year contract.
National League  CINCINNATI REDS -- Agreed to terms with Mike Jackson, pitcher, on a one-year contract.
COLORADO ROCKIES -- Agreed to terms with Larry Walker, outfielder, on a four-year contract, and Bill Swift, pitcher, on a three-year contract.
FLORIDA MARLINS -- Agreed to terms with John Burkett, pitcher, on a two-year contract and Bobby Witt, pitcher, and Andre Dawson, outfielder, on one-year contracts.
NEW YORK METS -- Agreed to terms Robert Person and Hector Ramirez, pitchers, and Omar Garcia, first baseman, on one-year contracts.
PITTSBURGH PIRATES -- Designated Roberto Ramirez, pitcher, for assignment.
ST.
LOUIS CARDINALS -- Agreed to terms with Bernard Gilkey, outfielder, on a one-year contract.
SAN FRANCISCO GIANTS -- Agreed to terms with Mark Leiter and Terry Mulholland, pitchers, on one-year contracts.
Mid-America League  LAFAYETTE LEOPARDS -- Signed Jason Smith, pitcher.
Basketball National Basketball Association  ORLANDO MAGIC -- Signed Darrell Armstrong, guard, for the remainder of the season.
Football  Canadian Football League  SAN ANTONIO TEXANS -- Re-signed Hurlie Brown, linebacker, and Mark Stock, wide receiver.


MY MOTHER IS SPEAKING FROM THE DESERT
Gordon left me with many thoughts.
As a daughter of parents in their 70's and a mother of a daughter in her late teens, I ask myself what is going to happen to them?
Will they need to go into a nursing home?
I hope not.
My daughter and I laugh about what she will do with me when I start "speaking from the desert." She says she'll put me in the "home" with a VCR and all my videotapes of "The Mary Tyler Moore Show." There isn't one episode that doesn't make me laugh out loud.
If laughter was the answer to keeping out of a nursing home, I would watch 10 episodes every day.


Anne Margiloff, Keith A. Wargo
Anne Margiloff, the daughter of Freda Margiloff of Armonk, N.Y., and Irwin Margiloff of Duarte, Calif., was married yesterday at Trinity Episcopal Church in Boston to Keith Andrew Wargo, the son of Heather Wargo of Brevard, N.C., and Joseph Wargo of Parsippany, N.J.
The Rev.
Dean Wolf officiated.
The Rev.
Richard McGowan, a Roman Catholic priest, participated.


Dining Without Alcohol
THE Pepper'd Owl Cafe is more than an unusual name for a restaurant.
It is a one-of-a-kind operation.
The new restaurant, supper club and coffee bar at 345 Main Street in Huntington (673-7328) does not always follow the herd.
For instance, knowledgeable restaurateurs nearly always agree that the considerable profits generated from the sale of alcoholic beverages are necessary to achieve financial success.
But the Pepper'd Owl will not serve them.
It will instead offer coffees, teas, juices, waters and nonalcoholic wines and beers.


Italian as It Used to Be, and Prices to Match
WITH the flurry of new Tuscan and other northern Italian restaurants that have opened over the last two to three years, it is rather endearing to come upon the sort of Italian fare and surroundings we remember from childhood.
Ristorante Faustini in East Haven, though it advertises "delicate northern Italian cuisine," serves with the most assurance dishes with strong echoes of the past.
Even the prices seem to be of an earlier era; note the early bird menu available before 6:30 P.M. on week nights, with 23 entrees available for $9.95, soup and salad included.


Tuning In To The Bigger Picture
Televisions are getting bigger, better, even cheaper -- but especially bigger.
In fact, with the increasing popularity of the home theater, big-screen televisions are becoming the new status symbol, replacing the car as an indication of one's success.
Think of the new big screens as the hearth of the 90's.
In Las Vegas, builders have even offered home buyers the choice of installing either a fireplace or a built-in rear-projection television system in the living room wall.
Because of recent technological advances, and a growing number of models to choose from, purchasing a television today is a complex affair.
Consumers must consider the merits of direct-view versus rear-projection sets, whether there is room for the set and, of course, if they can afford it.


Labor Battle Erupts at 2d Ave. Deli
Since it opened 41 years ago, the Second Avenue Kosher Delicatessen Restaurant on 10th Street has been famous for its hearty meals: chicken fricassee stewed with necks and giblets; cholent so thick that it clings to the spoon.
But on April 1, the restaurant known as the Second Avenue Deli became a labor battleground, with pickets out front.
Since then, six or seven of the restaurant's union employees have gathered on some evenings to pass out fliers and urge a boycott, hoping to cut into the lucrative Passover business.


Glitterati


Melissa Kaish, Jonathan Dorfman
Melissa Kaish, a marketing executive, was married last evening to Jonathan L. Dorfman, the executive director in London for Morgan Stanley International.
Rabbi Peter J. Rubinstein officiated at the Central Synagogue in New York.
Ms.
Kaish, 33, is keeping her name.
Until recently she was the European marketing manager in Paris for the Sara Lee Corporation, the consumer products company.
The bride graduated cum laude from Dartmouth College and received an M.B.A. from Columbia University.


A Familiar Shingle Returns to Irvington
THE no-frills atmosphere at Benny's Landmark will make some diners smile and others frown, and it is unlikely that this 50-year-old restaurant has seen or will see better days.
Inherent in its personality are painted rough pine walls, enforced familiarity among diners at closely spaced tables, uncomfortable stacking chairs, smoke leaching in from the bar and a mix of nautical paraphernalia with the incongruous, for example the clock superimposed on a figure of Elvis Presley kicking out a leg with every tick.
At best the restaurant is colorful.
The folks that jam into Benny's are there for reasons other than the atmosphere.
They come for the fresh, moderately priced food -- seafood in particular -- simple preparations cooked with care.
Closed for the last year after a period of malaise, Benny's has reopened under new management and recovered the spark that once made this dining spot so very popular.


Artistic License?
To the Editor:
As a longtime fan of Clint Eastwood, I was startled by Maureen Dowd's observation in "Go Ahead, Make Him Cry"  [ March 26 ]  that he "languidly moved his Modigliani legs." Call me sexist, but the phrase Modigliani legs conjures up a reclining female nude.
Giacometti legs might be more like it -- taut, bronze and sculptured.
KEVIN MCCLOSKEY  Kutztown, Pa.


Krasdale Celebrates Gans Still Lifes
INFREQUENT though our contacts were, I count myself among those who regret the untimely passing of Harriet Gans.
I recall her as a tall, youthful-looking woman with a sense of humor, which she expressed subtly in her photographs.
An example is the shot of a banana loitering casually on a windowsill, which is one of 14 color still lifes representing the photographer in the group show now at the Krasdale Gallery here.


Driving a Taxi, Difficult in Best of Times, Gets Tougher
At the lunch counters that line Lexington Avenue's curry corridor, Pakistani and Indian cabbies gather every day to eat, work the kinks out of their legs and backs and talk shop.
These days, much of the talk is about money, and it is not pleasant.
"I'm living day to day like an animal in the jungle," Choudry Hussain, 37, said one recent afternoon as he sat down to a steaming plate of lamb, lentils and basmati rice at Chatkhara restaurant, between 27th and 28th Streets.
"It's work, food and sleep; nothing more. The way it's going, I might be better off back home in Pakistan."


Joseph W. Tansey, Ex-Journalist, 87
Joseph W. Tansey, a journalist who spent 30 years at The New York Times before retiring as assistant national news editor in 1978, died yesterday near his home in Dallas.
He was 87.
A son, James, said Mr. Tansey had suffered a heart attack while taking a walk.


Dogs Loosed Among the Books To Sniff for Bombs at Rutgers
Bomb-sniffing dogs roamed among the stacks in the main undergraduate libraries at Rutgers University today, searching for explosive devices like the two found earlier this week.
The four dogs did not discover anything suspicious.
Security guards also searched all backpacks and satchels brought into the buildings.


Liberte, Egalite, Fraternite? 2 Out of 3 for These Directors
THE FRENCH MOVIE INDUSTRY has good reason for feeling the blues.
For all the intravenous feeding it receives from the French treasury, for all its claims to be Europe's last surviving movie industry, fewer French went to see its films (and more went to see American ones) last year than ever before.
Clearly, living off its past no longer suffices.
Francois Truffaut, Jean-Luc Godard, Eric Rohmer and other directors who created the New Wave 35 years ago mean little to today's audiences.
And no fresh wave of talent has taken their place.
Yet one French film has unexpectedly brought some cheer this year.
For most of March, "Gazon Maudit," or "Bushwhacked," was No. 1 at the box office, beating out such American rivals as "Disclosure," "Stargate" and "Immortal Beloved." It is a comedy about a love triangle (ah, another French love triangle), albeit this time between a man, a heterosexual woman and a lesbian.
What makes the film noteworthy is that it was written by and directed by a woman.
So is it women that French cinema has been waiting for?


Assault Weapon Ban
To the Editor:
I was interested in the testimony before Congress by the woman who frightened off a burglar and "saved the lives of her children" with an assault weapon (news article, April 1).
She had only to "chamber a round" because upon hearing the noise of that action, the fellow "uttered an expletive and fled." This dramatic account was offered in support of rescinding the ban on citizen ownership of these machines designed for mass slaughter.


On Cue in Paris
Any good pool hall isn't complete without cigar smoke in the air, even if it's in surroundings that represent turn-of-the-century Paris at its most stylish.
At the 323-room Hotel Concorde St.-Lazare in Paris, the snooker takes place in a room designed in 1889 by the Gustav Eiffel School.
The hotel, which is in the eighth arrondissement, offers guaranteed dollar rates starting at $200 a night through June.
The billiards room, with its high mirrored ceiling, has 10 new tables with a choice of snooker, pool or billiards for $10 to $16 an hour, at 5 francs to the dollar; nonguests are welcome, too.
Liqueurs and Cuban cigars cost $10 to $30 each.
Call (33 1) 40.08.44.44 or (800) 888-4747.


Swapping Meaningful Tales
THE words "tell me a story" may be as old as childhood itself, but there was only one child in the group waiting to be mesmerized recently at the Rye Free Reading Room here.
The occasion was the monthly meeting of the Rye Storytellers Guild, whose members have contributed to the growing popularity of the medium in the county.
The meetings provide a chance for the storytellers to practice their narratives as well as to hear unusual stories or meet a guest artist.
This meeting was billed as a "story swap," where members were invited to tell a story with personal meaning.
Drawn from folklore and personal experience, all good stories have a gem of meaning, the guild members said: it is the teller's task to make the gem glow.


Shipp Passes Skeptics on the Long Road Back
On a balmy afternoon last Wednesday, Tchaka Shipp strolled five blocks from his home in South Jamaica, Queens, to shoot some hoops.
Wearing a Michael Jordan T-shirt and a Chicago White Sox cap flipped backward, Shipp fluidly dunked on a netless rim.
His 6-foot-8-inch frame attracted the attention of several teen-agers on the tree-lined, asphalt court.
"Who are you?" one of them asked.
Shipp summed up his basketball resume: In 1991, he helped win the city championship while a star at Lincoln High School in Brooklyn.
From 1992 to 1994, he played for Seton Hall before transferring to the University of California in Irvine.


Permits Needed For a Renovation
To the Editor:
I write regarding the Q. &amp; A. column on March 12.
In reply to the first query regarding required permits for building renovations, it might additionally be pointed out to Frank Johnson that landmarked properties -- or properties within a designated historic district -- may also require a permit (a certificate of appropriateness, or a certificate of no effect) from the Landmarks Preservation Commission.
DAVID L. WAGNER  The writer is an associate with the Manhattan law firm of Sive, Paget &amp; Riesel.


The Working Reader
WHEN A WORKing writer tries out an unfamiliar word, a working reader feels the need to notice, and to do something about understanding it.
If the writer is merely showing off erudition, or if he challenges the reader too often, he will lose his audience in a hurry; no reader is obligated to decipher a code.
But on the two-way street of communication, a happy symbiosis is achieved when a writer tosses up an offbeat usage or a puzzling word and the working reader figures it out and savors it.
Recently I was reading, and disagreeing, with a New York Times editorial about standards for teaching history being promulgated by a panel of historians at the behest of the National Endowment for the Humanities.


CHILDREN'S BOOKS
DELIVER US FROM EVIE  By M. E. Kerr. 177 pp.
New York: HarperCollins Publishers. $15. (Ages 12 and up)


The World; Guatemala's War: Ideology Is the Latest Excuse
TWO centuries before the modern-day massacres of Mayan Indians by the Guatemalan army, King Charles III of Spain was troubled by the massacres with which his soldiers had smothered the Mayan revolts of 1760 and 1764.
So he dispatched a special church envoy to Guatemala to find a way to bring peace to his turbulent colony of vast sugar and indigo plantations.
But the emissary, Archbishop Pedro Cortes y Larraza, found only an enduring resistance by the Mayas to their virtual slavery, and he wrote back that these "wretched people" have "an aversion and absolute hate for anything Spanish."


Real Justice
To the Sports Editor:
Let the exhibition games begin, said Judge Sonia Sotomayor on March 31.
She didn't use those exact words but that is what she meant by her slap-on-the-wrist injunction.
She has now given permission to Bud Selig and Donald Fehr to posture for another five months (at full prices for tickets and full salaries) until Fehr pulls his serfs off the field again -- one minute before the playoffs begin.


FUNDS WATCH
Pay Now Or Pay Later?
Like it or not, deferred sales charges on funds are here to stay.
These fees are levied when investors sell their shares, instead of at the time of purchase.


The Artistry of the Newars
FOR many travelers, Katmandu is just a staging place for expeditions, the town they go through to get to the Himalayas.
Trek organizers typically set aside a day for shopping and a standard half-day tour that whisks through some of the notable religious sites.
Impressive as these are, they give scarcely a glimpse of the real architectural and artistic glories of the Katmandu Valley, which are the legacy of its indigenous inhabitants, the Newars.
Until conquered by the Gorkhas, who unified Nepal in 1768-69, the three cities of the Katmandu Valley -- Katmandu, Patan and Bhaktapur -- were separate Newar kingdoms.
Their artists and craftsmen, whose skill was noted by visitors as early as the seventh century, left their stamp on the art of Tibet and China.


A Knife to Fool the Cossacks
David Mamet's PASSOVER (St. Martin's, $14.95) is not a classic retelling of the biblical story in which the Jews of Egypt are freed from slavery.
It is instead a particular family's story, an account of how one clever woman, long ago in a Polish shtetl, managed to save her household.
Like all of Mr.
Mamet's work, this dark little tale is laced with foreboding and imminent violence.
It is also rife with trademark Mametian dialogue; the aborted, unfinished sentences have an edgy, staccato rhythm that creates an undercurrent of tension.
The setting is one of pure domesticity: an older woman and her granddaughter are in the kitchen preparing food for the seder table.
They are making haroset, the mix of apples, raisins, honey, walnuts and wine that symbolizes the mortar used to bind the bricks of ancient Egypt.
As the young girl cuts up the apples and chops the nuts, bits and pieces of family lore are revealed.
The grandmother has been in the Israeli Army; the samovar brought over from the old country, which an aunt had made into a lamp, has disappeared; but great-great-great grandmother Clara's candlesticks have been saved.
Inevitably, since this is a Mamet story, attention is focused on the knife the girl is wielding.
And a large, glittering chef's knife figures ominously in many of Michael McCurdy's beautifully rendered drawings.
The young girl asks if this was the knife Clara had used, so many years earlier, to thwart death.
Her grandmother then tells how Clara, during a pogrom at Passover, created a scene of bloody devastation that fooled the enemy.
The rampaging Cossacks miraculously passed over Clara's house; her family survived to tell the tale.
The story echoes back to the Jews of ancient Egypt, who marked their homes with blood, avoiding the Angel of Death.
But it is also a modern-day parable of survival, a Passover story that in only a few dozen riveting pages showcases Mr.
Mamet's fascination with lies, duplicity and a reality that is not quite what it seems.
LORE DICKSTEIN


Spiffy New Home for Library
Forty years after it was born on the ground floor of a housing project in East New York, the Cypress Hills Branch of the Brooklyn Public Library is moving out of the projects and into a new building of its own.
The new branch, which will open on Thursday four blocks away at 1197 Sutter Avenue, will have 10,000 books added to its old collection of 16,000, an expanded section of African-American literature and history, eight new computers with CD-Rom drives, and an airy atrium.


Inspiration
Eleven designers and architects reveal what has caught their eye and influenced their work recently.
"Walter von Nessen's Art Deco lamp: It's sexy, has a nice movement. I love the aluminum material. It inspired me to create my own line of aluminum accessories." -- Courtney Sloane


MY MOTHER IS SPEAKING FROM THE DESERT
Who but Mary Gordon could so effectively describe the ripping out of one's mother; the ripping out of the child who once related to that mother.
Shreds, of course, remain. ("Her power over my life is enormous.") We are privileged to witness a painfully lyrical gem by a daughter-writer refusing flight from a raw amalgam of feelings.
MILTON KORNRICH Coram, L.I.


Scuffed Ball
To the Sports Editor:
Dave Anderson is correct in pointing out that a season of only 144 games would be "smudged" ("Smudge Already on Baseball," The Times, April 2).
The solution to that problem would be to bring back the seldom-played doubleheader.


Giving Voice


A Night for the Opera
The New York City Opera benefited from a dinner and two auctions at Lincoln Center, April 5.


BEHIND THE WHEEL/Hyundai Accent; Immigrant With an Education
ONE of my pet peeves, one that I have muttered about in my beard until I am gray in the face, is the taste that car makers have for alphabet soup.
The auto executives even admit privately that their nomenclature -- offering J30's, MX-6's, C280's, etc. -- creates confusion within their own offices.
But regular names have their problems as well.
My wife has insisted for years that we will never buy a Mitsubishi because it is too hard to say.
And you hear some strange pronunciations of Toyota's Paseo.
But the name that seems to confuse more Americans than any other is Hyundai.


BANK REGULATORS TAKING CLOSE LOOK AT LENDING RISKS
Increasingly concerned that American banks are taking more risks, top regulators are moving to rein in aggressive competition among banks seeking to make business and consumer loans.
The Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, a Treasury Department agency that oversees the nation's 3,400 federally chartered banks, announced today that its most experienced credit analysts would form a committee to double-check whether the nation's large banks are taking excessive risks.
The committee will work with the agency's bank examiners, who already conduct periodic reviews of banks' business practices.


Unappetizing
To the Editor:
Thomas Jefferson, a widower who had vowed never to remarry, would hardly shock anyone then or now had he occasionally bedded someone.
His political opponents hoped to damage his career with the Sally Hemings story because Hemings was black.
It's discouraging to see people today enthusiastically accepting a story begun by bigots simply because it satisfies an appetite for sex.
AL HORMEL  Weston, Conn.


Reviewing the Record
As Congress recesses and the legislative race through the G.O.P agenda pauses, Federal lawmakers and others reflect on the activity of the first 100 days.
Page 22.


Neighbor Finds This Shul More Noisy Than Quaint
To The Editor:
I am responding to to your March 26 article on the Carlebach Shul on West 79th Street.
Believe me, if your walls were attached to their temple, you wouldn't find them so quaint.
They make a terrible amount of noise, day and night.
My walls shake.
They start having parties at 10:30 or 11 P.M. and continue until 2 or 3 A.M.
Most of time they use a loudspeaker and dance and sing.


Indianapolis Signs Place-Kicker Cofer
Place-kicker MIKE COFER is returning to the National Football League after a one-year absence.
Cofer, who has scored 681 points in seven N.F.L. seasons, signed on Friday with the Indianapolis Colts.
The free agent's most productive season was 1989, when he led the N.F.L. with 136 points, setting franchise records for the Super Bowl champion San Francisco 49ers for consecutive field-goal attempts converted (17) and field goals in a season (29).


Imagine All the Troubles You Don't Have
To the Editor:
Sherwin B. Nuland's review of my book "In Love With Daylight" (March 5) was such an agreeable piece of work that I hesitate to disturb it.
But there's a serious misreading of intent toward the end that maybe can be fixed without too much bloodshed.


Undermining a Bomb-Trial Witness
The way prosecutors first told it in Federal District Court in Manhattan, Siddig Ibrahim Siddig Ali, a Sudanese immigrant, was a leading plotter of a war of urban terrorism against the United States -- a sort of operations chief in what the Government says was a conspiracy to blow up important buildings and transportation links in New York.
And in February, shortly after the trial of Mr.
Siddig Ali and 11 other men charged in the case began, Mr.
Siddig Ali told the prosecutors they were right.
He pleaded guilty and signed an agreement to cooperate with them, striking a major blow at his co-defendants, the most prominent of whom is Sheik Omar Abdel Rahman, the Muslim cleric.


Navratilova and Graf a Wimbledon Team
MARTINA NAVRATILOVA and STEFFI GRAF, who faced each other on Center Court in three consecutive Wimbledon finals in the 1980's, will team up to play doubles at Wimbledon this year, a spokeswoman for the International Management Group said yesterday.
LINDA DOZORETZ said the 38-year-old Navratilova was excited by the prospect of returning to Wimbledon with Graf, who will regain her No. 1 ranking tomorrow.
The two players met in the Wimbledon singles final in 1987, 1988 and 1989 with Navratilova winning the first and Graf the next two.


In Monteverdi's Madrigals, Records Are the Real Thing
WE TEND TO THINK OF recordings as second-best to "the real thing," the live performance.
Yet paradoxically, in the realm of early music, the realm most remote from our technological lives, recordings may actually be our best way to re-enter the circle of communication -- embracing composer, performers and listeners -- that existed when the music was new.
We can test this theory in the work of two ensembles, one well tried, the other a relative newcomer.
Both the London-based Consort of Musicke, led for more than 25 years by Anthony Rooley, and the Rome-based Concerto Italiano, started in 1984 by Rinaldo Alessandrini, bridge the footlights in CD realizations of madrigals by Claudio Monteverdi.


New &amp; Noteworthy Paperbacks
MAKE ME WORK By Ralph Lombreglia.
Penguin, $9.95.
Working is exactly what the protagonists of these stories don't like to do.
Usually male, they are emotional refugees from the 1960's, longing for an innocence they never had.
The book's nine tales, often delving into these men's relationships with women, "are both funny and profound," Louis B. Jones said here last year.


Smith Receives a Vote of Confidence (Uh-Oh)
Just in case anyone is wondering, Neil Smith is welcome to return next season as president and general manager of the Rangers.
"Absolutely," said Dave Checketts, Smith's boss and president of Madison Square Garden.
"It's not a question with me."


Broken Promises
BAGHERIA By Dacia Maraini.
Translated by Dick Kitto and Elspeth Spottiswood. 119 pp.
Chester Springs, Pa.: Peter Owen/Dufour Editions. $30.


Journal; Our Cheating Heart
Since no one in show business has risen to the defense of poor Andrew Lloyd Webber, please allow me to do so.
When Mr.
Lloyd Webber's company lied about how much money "Sunset Boulevard" was making on Broadway during Glenn Close's recent vacation -- inflating the weekly figure by $155,000 -- it was engaging in a well-known show-biz practice near and dear to any student of P. T. Barnum: humbug.


Residential Resales
In the following reports, the "listed at" price is the asking price when negotiations began that ended in the sale.
Time on market is from most recent listing to contract.
MANHATTAN
GREENWICH VILLAGE  $415,000
29 East 10th Street  2,000-sq.-ft. open-loft penthouse condo; 13-ft. ceilings, skylights, 4 exposures, 2,000-sq.-ft. of private roof space; common charge $712; taxes $8,400, listed at $450,000, 56 weeks on market (Broker: M.P.R. Group)  SOHO  $1.15 million
565 Broadway (Prince St.)  5,000-sq.-ft. co-op in a loft building; elevator, 1 1/2 baths, eat-in kitchen; maintenance $3,000, 60% tax-deductible, listed at $1.3 million, 2 weeks on market (Broker: Corcoran Group)  WEST SIDE  $638,000
150 Central Park South
(Hampshire House)  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 2,000-sq.-ft. prewar co-op; 24-hr. doormen, concierge, glass-enclosed terrace, Central Park view; maintenance $1,891, 50% tax-deductible, listed at $699,000, 30 weeks on market (Brokers: Corcoran Group; Feathered Nest)  WEST VILLAGE  $325,000
165 Perry Street  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,600-sq.-ft. co-op in a loft building; elevator, dining area, 12-ft. ceilings, 2 exposures; maintenance $909, 50% tax-deductible, listed at $350,000, 35 weeks on market (Brokers: Patton-Young Properties; Debra Kameros Co.)  BRONX
RIVERDALE  $43,000
4445 Post Road  1-bedroom, 1-bath, 750-sq.-ft. co-op in a prewar Art Deco building; dining foyer, renovated eat-in kitchen, h/w floors; maintenance $424, 58% tax-deductible, listed at $53,000, 3 1/4 years on market (Broker: ERA/Susan Goldy &amp; Co.)  BROOKLYN
DITMAS PARK  $265,000
555 East 17th Street  7-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, 90-year-old, detached wood-frame house; double parlor, dining room, fireplace, family room in basement, 1-car garage, in historic district; taxes $1,862, listed at $295,000, 13 weeks on market (Broker: J. Shayovitz)  PARK SLOPE  $349,000
902 President Street  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 1,800-sq.-ft. co-op in a brownstone; double parlor, dining room, parquet floors, private garden; maintenance $765, 45% tax-deductible, listed at $385,000, 12 weeks on market (Broker: F.J. Kazeroid Group)  PROSPECT PARK SOUTH  $250,000
95 Argyle Road  2-family, 88-year-old, wood-frame house; 5 bedrooms, 3 baths, dining room in primary duplex unit; 2 bedrooms, 2 baths in simplex; fireplace, eat-in kitchen in each; original oak detail, rear balcony, stained-glass windows, 2-car garage; taxes $2,120, listed at $295,000, 1 year on market (Brokers: Mary Kay Gallagher; Brooklyn Properties of 7th Avenue)  QUEENS
FOREST HILLS  $388,000
71-48 Ingram Street  4-bedroom, 2-bath brick and fieldstone contemporary; dining room, renovated kitchen, fireplace, finished basement, 1-car garage; taxes $3,600, listed at $439,000, 6 weeks on market (Broker: Sarah Jones)  FOREST HILLS GARDENS  $70,000
6 Burns Street  (Tennis View)  1-bedroom, 1-bath, 650-sq.-ft. co-op in a prewar building; elevator, renovated kitchen and bath with Jacuzzi; maintenance $348, includes electricity, 48% tax-deductible (Broker: Don Goldman)  STATEN ISLAND
GREAT KILLS  $299,900
282 Mayberry Avenue  2-family, detached, newly constructed house; 3 bedrooms, 3 1/2 baths, dining room, eat-in kitchen in primary unit; 1 bedroom, 1 bath in other; 2-car garage; taxes $700 abated, listed at $299,900, 48 weeks on market (Broker: Linda Nasta)  NEW DORP  $167,000
48 Behan Court  2-family, 3-year-old, semi-attached wood-frame house; 3 bedrooms, 1 1/2 baths, dining room, eat-in kitchen in primary unit; 1 bedroom, 1 bath in other; 1-car garage, 25- by 112-ft. lot; taxes $1,373, listed at $160,000, 14 weeks on market (Broker: Salmon)  WESTCHESTER
PELHAM  $500,000
526 Highbrook Avenue  7-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, 75-year-old colonial; dining room, eat-in kitchen, sun porch, den; taxes $13,934, listed at $575,000, 27 weeks on market (Broker: C.S. McClellan &amp; Co.)  POUND RIDGE  $750,000
South Bedford Road  4-bedroom, 3-bath, 115-year-old colonial; guest cottage, front parlor, 2 fireplaces, dining room, eat-in kitchen, 6 acres; taxes $14,764, listed at $849,000, 3 years on market (Broker: Houlihan/Lawrence)  SCARSDALE  $408,500
22 Farragut Road  3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 43-year-old colonial; den, fireplace, eat-in kitchen, 2-car garage; taxes $10,926, listed at $445,000, 3 1/2 months on market (Broker: Julia B. Fee)  WHITE PLAINS  $248,000
88 Valley Road  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 62-year-old Tudor; brick fireplace, den, pantry, dining room; taxes $2,990, listed at $249,900, 15 weeks on market (Brokers: The Prudential Rita Cohen; N.R. Bowdish)
CONNECTICUT
DARIEN  $853,500
40 Shields Road  4-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, 5-year-old colonial; den, family room, solarium, 2 fireplaces, 2-car garage, .5-acre lot; taxes $7,421, listed at $919,000, 48 weeks on market (Brokers: Kelly Associates; William Pitt)  GREENWICH  $640,000
554 Riversville Road  4-bedroom, 3-bath ranch; dining area, family room, den, 2-car garage, 4 acres lot; taxes $6,721, listed at $665,000, 20 weeks on market (Brokers: Coldwell Banker/Schlott; Wolfe &amp; Mehman)  NEW CANAAN  $2.35 million
99 Huckleberry Hill Road  4-bedroom, 4 1/2-bath, 11-year-old waterfront Palladium villa; guest house, pool, poolhouse with kitchen and bath, 8.38 acres; taxes $21,019, listed at $2.995 million, 29 weeks on the market (Brokers: Coldwell Banker/Schlott)  STAMFORD  $759,000
101 Dogwood Lane  4-bedroom, 2 full- and 2 half-bath new wood-frame colonial; granite countertop in kitchen; marble master bath with whirlpool, 2 fireplaces, 2-car garage, 1 acre; taxes $7,000, listed at $779,000, 20 weeks on market (Broker: William Pitt)  LONG ISLAND
EAST MEADOW  $150,000
655 Bellmore Avenue  3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 30-year-old split level; eat-in kitchen, den, finished basement with bar, 1-car attached garage, patio; taxes $5,500, listed at $189,000, 39 weeks on market (Broker: Coldwell Banker Sammis)  FARMINGDALE  $160,000
200 Oakview Avenue  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 43-year-old Cape Cod; dining room, eat-in kitchen, basement, 1-car attached garage; taxes $4,700, listed at $174,990, 15 weeks on market (Broker: A-1 Realty, Network of Homes)  GREAT NECK ESTATES  $520,000
13 Vista Drive  3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 40-year-old brick contemporary; new eat-in kitchen, finished basement, 2-car garage, walk to water; taxes $9,000, listed at $599,000, 45 weeks on market (Broker: Great Neck Realty, Better Homes and Gardens)  NORTHPORT  $165,000
107 Waterside Avenue  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 33-year-old high ranch; dining room, family room, fireplace, 1-car garage; taxes $3,600, listed at $174,900, 4 weeks on market (Brokers: Prudential Long Island; Coldwell Banker Sammis)  NEW JERSEY
FAIR LAWN  $162,000
3-31 Cyril Avenue  4-bedroom, 1-bath, 5-year-old brick Cape Cod; finished basement, 1-car garage, front porch; taxes $3,655, listed at $165,900, 7 weeks on market (Brokers: T.B Mabey; Nat Sprechman)  FREEHOLD  $180,500
81 Lafayette Avenue  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 16-year-old ranch; full basement, brick fireplace, in-ground pool; taxes $3,522, listed at $189,900, 4 weeks on market (Broker: Weichert)  MERCERVILLE  $150,000
45 Norcross Circle  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 45-year-old Cape Cod; 1-car garage, c/a, h/w floors, enclosed breezeway; taxes $3,576, listed at $154,888, 9 weeks on market (Broker: Richard A. Weidel)  PARAMUS  $168,000
540 Edmund Terrace  2-bedroom, 1-bath, 50-year-old ranch; eat-in-kitchen, 2-car garage, enclosed porch; taxes $2,540, listed at $179,900, 3 weeks on market (Brokers: Prudential Higgins; Coldwell Banker/Schlott)


Fleeting Homage To an Architect Who Only Dreams
MARTIN FINIO AND KEVIN Fischer, two graduates of the architecture school at Cooper Union in New York, have completed a five-year labor of love: a full-scale realization of a design by John Hejduk, the school's dean.
But the fruit of their labor will be around for only a fraction of the time it took to produce it.
"The Conciliator," a 19-foot-tall, dark gray tower based on one of Hejduk's drawings, will be dismantled in early June.
Installed on a traffic island on Fifth Avenue at 23d Street, across from the Flatiron Building, the structure is a puzzling, enigmatic object, looking something like an unattended information booth.
And without someone on hand to explain things, the design may baffle those not familiar with Hejduk's (pronounced HAY-duck) work, and perhaps a few who are.
But it isn't often that this revered teacher ventures forth from academe.
Indeed, without the persistence of the two young architects Finio and Fischer (who raised both the structure and the money to pay for it), this project would not have seen the light of day.
Their persistence is a tribute to Hejduk's legendary power to inspire students.
Yet the project itself barely hints at the reasons for it.
Those hints are worth following, however, if only to understand Hejduk's influence on the next generation.


Laura Rankin And Scott Gewirtz
Laura Rankin, a daughter of Jean Rankin of Denville, N.J., and the late Owen Kevin Rankin, was married last evening to Scott Aaron Gewirtz, a son of Janice and Dr.
George Gewirtz of Mountain Lakes, N.J.
Justice Joseph Kevin McKay of the Second Judicial District of the State Supreme Court in Brooklyn performed the ceremony at the Puck Building in Manhattan.
Mrs.
Gewirtz, 24, and her husband, 29, work at Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company, the New York investment bank, where she is an analyst on the securities lending desk and he is an associate on the Government securities desk.
The bride graduated from the University of Michigan.
Her mother is the office manager at a dermatology practice in Parsippany, N.J.


POSTINGS: A Panel Looks Ahead, an Exhibition Looks Back; Events to Honor Landmarks Law
Preservation-minded panelists from city, state and national groups will be marking the 30th anniversary of the New York City Landmarks Law by pondering the years to come in an hour-and-a-half discussion this week, "Trust Some Things Over 30: The Future of the New York Landmarks Law."
The discussion is to be held on Tuesday at 6 P.M. at the Great Hall of Cooper Union, 7 East 7th Street, at Third Avenue.
It is being sponsored by the New York Landmarks Preservation Foundation and The Cooper Union for the Advancement of Science &amp; Art.


2 for the Rough Road
In his efforts to wrench savings from the Board of Education, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani has picked another battle fraught with political risk: breaking the lifetime job guarantees of New York City's school bus drivers.
And this time, he has persuaded the Schools Chancellor, Ramon C. Cortines, to go along, if grudgingly.
The Mayor has pushed Mr.
Cortines to open up some of the school bus contracts to competitive bidding and in doing so, eliminate union provisions that he says have made the city's school busing costs the highest in the nation.
Together, Mr.
Giuliani and the Chancellor are moving forward, despite threats from the drivers that they will strike, as they did for three months in 1979.


INSIDE
Tough and Getting Tougher
Driving a yellow cab in New York, a tough way to make a living, has grown tougher.
Business is stagnant, even as a flood of immigrants compete to drive for little pay.
Page 41.
A Twist on Private Schooling
A Pennsylvania school district dealt with its financial problems by laying off teachers and hiring a private company to run a school.
Page 16.
High Society Upstaged
Socialites are fading from the collective consciousness as they pursue careers and the public focuses on models and actresses.
Page 51.


Clouds Over Disneyland
ONE year ago the Walt Disney Company was the most stable studio in town, piling up profits from animated hits like "Beauty and the Beast," successful television shows like "Home Improvement," and syndicated programs ranging from "Golden Girls" to "Live with Regis and Kathie Lee."
Today, the profits are still flowing but the stability seems a blurred memory.
Of the four men who brashly took over the crumbling studios in Burbank in 1984, only one, Michael D. Eisner, chairman of the Disney empire, remains.
Frank G. Wells, the president of the company, and Mr.
Eisner's closest associate, died in a helicopter crash last April.
Jeffrey Katzenberg, the studio chairman who oversaw movies for a decade, quit in a rage six months ago after Mr.
Eisner bypassed him for a promotion.
And Richard H. Frank, the studio's president and the man who was in charge of television, resigned three weeks ago after intense disagreements with Mr.
Eisner.


Ideas &amp; Trends; What Shiny Toys Money Can Buy!
WHEN Edgar Bronfman Jr., the president and chief executive of Seagram's, announced that he is negotiating to buy 80 percent of MCA from its disillusioned Japanese owner, he was making his bid for a playgound.
By acquiring MCA, Mr.
Bronfman would get theme parks, a record company and Universal Pictures.
It sounds like fun, but remember: he would also inherit "Waterworld," a new movie with Kevin Costner as a fishy creature with fins and gills.
At a cost of $150 million, it's the riskiest movie ever.
There must be easier ways to make money.
But those ways don't provide the glamor, power and excitement that cling to the entertainment business.
Today that business has come full circle, back to an era when entrepreneurs were the true industry stars.
Thanks to last week's deal with Matsushita Electrical Industrial Company, Mr.
Bronfman, who has dabbled in film production and is well connected in Hollywood, would finally enteran inner sanctum of movie moguls dating back to the 1920's.


One-Dose Typhoid Shot Is Approved by U.S.
A new vaccine recently approved by the Food and Drug Administration is the first one-dose vaccine against typhoid fever.
It is approved for children as young as 2.
Other typhoid fever vaccines require either multiple oral doses or multiple injections.
The new single-injection vaccine, called Typhim Vi, is made by a French company, Pasteur Merieux Serums &amp; Vaccins, and distributed in the United States by Connaught Laboratories.
The vaccine became available to the public in February.


RESULTS PLUS
BASKETBALL  Another Loss for Magic  Dana Barros had 25 points, 15 assists and a career-high 10 rebounds as Philadelphia handed visiting Orlando its second straight loss, 109-99, last night.
The rookie Derrick Alston had a career-high 22 points for Philadelphia, while Shawn Bradley had 19 points and 6 blocks.
The 76ers, who have the second-worst record in the Eastern Conference, had lost eight in a row to the Magic, who have the second-best record in the National Basketball Association.
Horace Grant had 25 points and 14 rebounds for Orlando, while Shaquille O'Neal had 23 points and 12 rebounds.
The Magic, which played without the starters Anfernee Hardaway and Nick Anderson, have lost 13 of their last 16 road games. (AP) HOCKEY
Flyers Beat Capitals  Eric Lindros's 23d goal broke a 1-1 tie early in the third period as the visiting Philadelphia Flyers beat Washington, 3-1, snapping the Capitals' four-game winning streak.
The victory evened Philadelphia's road record at 8-8-3. (AP) CANADIENS 2, PENGUINS 1: Defenseman Lyle Odelein and the newly arrived center Pierre Turgeon scored first-period goals as Montreal continued its home-ice domination of visiting Pittsburgh.
The Penguins have lost their last 11 games at the Forum. (AP) BRUINS 5 LIGHTNING 1: Jozef Stumpel and Steve Heinze each scored twice as Boston beat visiting Tampa Bay.
The victory was the Bruins' first in four games. (AP) MAPLE LEAFS 4, JETS 3: The newcomer Benoit Hogue had a goal and an assist as Toronto Maple beat visiting Winnipeg, earning its first victory in four games. (AP) TENNIS  Martinez Plays Sabatini  Top-seeded Conchita Martinez and No. 2 Gabriela Sabatini posted straight-set semifinal victories yesterday and will meet for the Bausch &amp; Lomb championship today on Amelia Island, Fla.
Martinez needed only 83 minutes to defeat No. 3 Magdalena Maleeva of Bulgaria, 6-2, 6-3, while Sabatini defeated No. 8 Sabine Hack of Germany, 6-3, 6-2, in 87 minutes.
The final will be the 14th meeting between the fourth-ranked Martinez and the seventh-ranked Sabatini, who leads the series by 9-4.
Martinez used a powerful ground game to overwhelm Maleeva for the second straight week, having beaten her in last weekend's final at Hilton Head Island, S.C. (AP) MUSTER BEATS SANCHEZ: Third-seeded Thomas Muster of Austria ousted Emilio Sanchez of Spain, 6-2, 6-4, yesterday and will play Spain's Alberto Costa for the title in the Estoril Open in Lisbon.
Costa, who is unseeded, trounced Fabrice Santoro of France, 6-1, 6-0, in the other semifinal in the tournament. (AP) HORSE RACING  Grand National Winner  Royal Athlete, a 40-1 shot, pulled away from Master Oats, the favored Gold Cup winner, three fences from the end yesterday to win the Grand National, the world's most grueling steeplechase, in Liverpool, England.
The 12-year-old chestnut gelding, ridden by Jason Titley, won the 4 1/2-mile race by seven lengths.
Party Politics, the 1992 winner, was second and the 100-1 shot Over the Deel was another six lengths back.
Master Oats, bidding to become for the first Gold Cup winner since 1934 to win the National in the same season, wound up seventh.
Royal Athlete's victory was a second in the race for the trainer Jenny Pitman, who had five other horses in the race. (AP) TRACK  Lewis Upset in Dash  Maurice Greene, a virtual unknown from Kansas City, Kan., won the Texas Relays' 100-meter dash yesterday in a stunning upset of Carl Lewis, the two-time Olympic 100-meter gold medalist.
In a wind-aided 9.88 seconds, Greene edged Raymond Stewart, who ran 9.89, with Lewis third in 9.94 in Austin.
"Everybody thought Carl would win the race, but I knew I was just as capable," said the 20-year-old Green, who was sixth in the Mobil/USA indoor championships and finished fourth in the world indoor championships last month.
Twenty minutes earlier, Lewis, who like almost everyone had to ask who Greene was, had anchored the Santa Monica Track Club to the year's fastest time in the 400-meter relay, 38.43.
BROOKLYN TEAM WINS: Boys and Girls High School of Brooklyn won four varsity events and took the boys' team title in the sixth annual Kings Relays at Downing Stadium on Randalls Island.
The Kangaroos tallied 61 points with Fordham Prep and Mount St.
Michael a distant second with 22 points each.
The boys' victories came in the 400 (44.1 seconds), 800 (1:30.2 seconds), 1,600 (3:23.3) and 3,200 (8:06.7) relays.
South Shore, also of Brooklyn, took the girls' team trophy at 32 points with Jamaica, Queens, second with 26.


In the Philippines, Residents Express Fear After an Attack by Rebels


Versatile Asparagus for Spring Dishes
ASPARAGUS is now available year round, so we have come to take it for granted.
But for me, it is still a food associated with spring.
It is at its peak in April and May when it is plentiful and inexpensive.
Steamed asparagus, dipped in melted butter and eaten by hand, is one of the delights of the season.
But there are many other ways to prepare this versatile vegetable.
It makes a delicious soup: served plain or laced with a dollop of goat cheese or a quenelle made from crab meat or a sprinkling of small shrimp with basil.
It is also good stir-fried with scallops and sesame seeds to go with rice or sauteed with shiitake mushrooms as a sauce for pasta.


After Somalia, U.S. Studies Ways to Improve Relief Operations
The Clinton Administration, on notice from Congress that there will be fewer dollars to spend on international peacekeeping and relief operations, has started a broad review to find ways to improve those operations, officials said this week.
In connection with the review, State Department and Marine Corps officers will hold an ambitious conference over the next six days at Camp Pendleton in California, drawing on a wide range of civilian and military experts from the United States and abroad.


In a Scandal? She's Your Agent
SHERRI SPILLANE, casting agent for pimps, athletes connected to violent crimes and "actors" who are associated with athletes connected to violent crimes, says that her job is really good old-fashioned charity work.
"I help people," she said about the scandalous (or as she prefers to call them, "high-profile, controversial") client list she recently developed at the Ruth Webb talent agency here.
The first was the figure skater Tonya Harding, who was stripped of her national championship for her role in the attack on her rival, Nancy Kerrigan, last year.


Destination: Spring; 5 Restless Writers Head Outside And Report Back On What They Found There
Whatever the calendar says, spring really begins with the first irresistible urge to head outside.
Our senses quickened more by instinct than the outward signposts of the season, we shed the deadness of winter and we get going.
Barely greening trails, muddy as often as not, are blazed anew by the first hikers of the year.
Roads and pathways fill with runners and cyclists sharpening their skills for a long race or rally, or just airing out their lungs at long last.
Shore towns, shut down tight just yesterday, begin to primp for a summer that's still months away.
At nurseries and garden stores, long lines form at cash registers as suburban farmers dream of harvesting the perfect tomato.
Weekday road warriors get into their cars, roll down the windows, hopefully, and just drive, heading nowhere but away.


The New 'New Jersey': Brickbats and Hallelujahs
To the Editor:
Hooray and hallelujah!
The Soapbox page promises the return of opinion columns written by readers.
This was my favorite part of the Sunday paper and what sent me scurrying to my driveway early in the morning.
DOROTHY C. JUDD West Orange


Even Japanese Don't Buy Those Trade Excuses; 'Rush Hour of the Gods'
To the Editor:
Re your April 4 Tokyo Journal: I miss historical perspective on Japanese religious cults like Aum Shinrikyo, suspected in the poison gas attack in the Tokyo subway.
The proliferation of religious sects has been a prominent feature of Japanese life since the 1840's, when "new religions" like the still-thriving Tenri and Konko sects were founded.


Basking in Technology's Glow
EXPERT SOFTWARE INC. sells its low-priced products in Kmart and other discount stores.
But in suggesting a price for the stock that the company will soon sell, its investment bankers seem to have Fifth Avenue in mind.
The small company, based in Coral Gables, Fla., makes cheap software -- the kind people use to plan vacations, write their resumes and rearrange their living rooms.
Last year, Expert Software sold three million such programs, most for under $20.


Destination: Spring; 5 Restless Writers Head Outside And Report Back On What They Found There
Whatever the calendar says, spring really begins with the first irresistible urge to head outside.
Our senses quickened more by instinct than the outward signposts of the season, we shed the deadness of winter and we get going.
Barely greening trails, muddy as often as not, are blazed anew by the first hikers of the year.
Roads and pathways fill with runners and cyclists sharpening their skills for a long race or rally, or just airing out their lungs at long last.
Shore towns, shut down tight just yesterday, begin to primp for a summer that's still months away.
At nurseries and garden stores, long lines form at cash registers as suburban farmers dream of harvesting the perfect tomato.
Weekday road warriors get into their cars, roll down the windows, hopefully, and just drive, heading nowhere but away.


Bronfman Follies: From Oil To Movies
When it comes to investing, luck can be at least as important as brains.
But never conclude that just because someone has been lucky before he will keep being lucky.
Take the Bronfman family of Seagram fame.
Back in 1981, at the very tippy top of the oil market, they had an idea: Let's buy an oil company.
They went after Conoco.


Robert Lubar, 74, Writer and Editor
Robert Lubar, a former managing editor of Fortune and foreign correspondent for Time, died on April 1 at the Breckenridge Center in Willoughby, Ohio.
He was 74.
A longtime resident of Port Washington, L..I., he moved to Whitingham, Vt., when he retired in 1985.
He had suffered from Parkinson's disease for several years, said a son, Nicholas.


D. R. Klinek, G. B. Lansberry
Debra Rachel Klinek, a daughter of Murray and Rhoda Klinek of Rye, N.Y., and Geoffrey Blake Lansberry, a son of R. Scott and Deborah Lansberry, of Hamden, Conn., are to be married today in New Rochelle, N.Y.
Rabbi Jeffrey Segelman is to perform the ceremony at the Greentree Country Club.
The bride and the bridegroom, both 26, graduated from Lehigh University, he cum laude.
She expects to receive a law degree from New York Law School next month.
The bride's father is a certified public accountant in Rye.


Julie Arrayales, Mario A. Pazmino Jr.
Julie A. Arrayales, a daughter of Julieta A. Leroux and the late Arturo Arrayales, was married on Friday to Mario A. Pazmino Jr., a son of Hilda and Mario Pazmino.
The Rev.
Jose R. Aldegunde performed the ceremony at St.
Michael's Roman Catholic Church in Flushing, Queens.
Mrs.
Pazmino, 22, graduated from New York Technical College in Brooklyn and is an assistant manager at E. Gluck, a watch manufacturing company in Long Island City, Queens.
Her father was an economics professor at Universidad Autonoma de Baja California, in Mexicali, Mexico.
Her mother was until recently a bilingual secretary.


Sports of The Times; BAL and SF Make Heart Pump Faster
AM I a stooge?
Am I a shill?
Am I a pushover?
I ask these questions in all sincerity as I find myself contemplating the 1995 baseball schedule with some degree of -- dare I utter the word? -- anticipation.
Hmmm.
Boston's in early.
Good grief.
The Mets are opening with a night game.
Hey.
Ripken in mid-May.
What's this?
No Cubs or Cardinals for the Mets in September?
The whole thing's upside down.


Jo Dee Lundock And Nick Deegan
Patricia Jo Anne Lundock and Michael Nicholas Deegan were married last evening in Hulett, Wyo.
The Rev.
Drew Duncan performed the ceremony at St.
Matthew's Roman Catholic Church.
Mrs.
Deegan, 53, is known as Jo Dee.
She owns Fred's Insulation Company in Gillette, Wyo.
The bride, who was a widow, is a daughter of Ruby Rears Baker of Gillette and the late Harvey G. Baker.


Ms. Postel, Mr. Etheredge
Suzan Lynn Postel, the daughter of Diana and Dr.
Allen Postel of Katonah, N.Y., was married at her parents' home yesterday to Randall Etheredge, a son of Nancy and Gilbert Etheredge of Spring Lake, N.J.
Warren Etheredge, the bridegroom's brother and a minister of the World Christianship Ministries, performed the ceremony.
The bride is an actress and singer who has appeared in the touring production of "The King and I" with the late Rudolph Nureyev.
Her father is a professor of surgery at New York University and is the medical director of both Goldwater Memorial Hospital in New York and the New York County Health Services Review Organization.
Her mother is a painter.


From a Day Of Gentler Dispositions
AMONG THOSE OLD ENOUGH TO HAVE listened to the radio in the summer of 1963, who does not remember the assurance wafted over the airwaves by three gentle voices that "the answer, my friend, is blowing in the wind"?
In the 32 years since Peter, Paul and Mary introduced Bob Dylan's music into the pop mainstream, the trio's homogenized folk-pop sound and its spirit of upbeat humanism have changed hardly at all.
In "PP M&amp; (Lifelines)," a quirkily titled album that has the feel of a grand, elegiac summing up, the trio, whose members are now in their late 50's, are joined by three generations of folk and blues performers.


Margaret Gifford, Todd Tibbetts
Margaret Rose Gifford, a vice president of Financial Security Assurance, a bond insurance company in New York, was married yesterday to Todd Andrew Tibbetts, the manager for trust investments and foreign exchange at the Sandoz Corporation, the Swiss pharmaceutical company in New York.
The Rev.
Lawrence J. Madden performed the ceremony at Holy Trinity Roman Catholic Church in Washington.
Ms.
Gifford, 36, is keeping her name.
She graduated from Fairfield University and received a master's degree in public administration from Harvard University.
She is the daughter of William and Marion Gifford of Annandale, Va.
The bride's father, formerly the vice president of communications for General Public Utilities in Parsippany, N.J., retired in 1993 as the special assistant for external affairs to the Secretary of the Air Force, in Washington.


Habitats/Astoria, Queens; The Old Neighborhood
PAST The Original Chirping Chicken, the Sanford Diner, the Modern Barber and the Broadway Tavern; past John and Angelo's Italian Delicatessen, Shima's Fine Japanese Cuisine and Lemonia Gyros Souvlaki Hamburgers, and past an old man sitting in a white plastic chair on the sidewalk is Dominic Casamento's block of 29th Street.
Here, in Astoria, Queens, between Broadway and 31st Avenue, Mr.
Casamento has just bought a wreck of a two-story brick house, the only run-down building on an otherwise immaculate street.


Crossed Paths on the Road to 'Authenticity'
RANK-AND-FILE musicians rightly scorn the notion of an authentic performance.
Classical tradition is premised not on a robotic replication of the composer's instructions but on a vital re-creation of the score in the heat of the present.
Yet it is possible for a performance or recording to document the composer's original idea with uncommon precision.
Two recently released symphonic cycles make bids toward authenticity in very different ways: John Eliot Gardiner's period-instrument Beethoven survey on Archiv (436 900-2; five CD's) and a reissue of 1950's broadcast performances of Carl Nielsen's symphonies on Danacord (351/3; three CD's).
Mr.
Gardiner created the Orchestre Revolutionnaire et Romantique six years ago in anticipation of a Beethoven cycle, and its name proclaims his intention.
He wants the primal, brazen shock of Beethoven's orchestration, with its thudding timpani, blaring woodwinds and militant brass.
He wants to show Beethoven's connection to French revolutionary contemporaries like Gossec and Mehul.
He wants a smaller orchestra so that Beethoven's harmonic and rhythmic surprises stand out more clearly.
He wants brisk tempos that whip up a Toscaninian atmosphere of excitement.


Nets Win With a Makeshift Lineup and Mirrors
The Nets thought about it for a while, throwing up awkward shots in the first quarter and letting yet another of the league's poorer teams steal from them in the backcourt.
It had all the earmarks of another trip to the corner store, dollar in hand, lucky numbers swimming in their heads.
But Sleepy Floyd noticed a subtle change early on.


The Glory of Ruth
To the Sports Editor:
Heywood Hale Broun's poetic remembrance of Babe Ruth's final game on the mound ("The Autumn of the Babe on a Bright Fall Day," The Times, April 2) served as a wonderful introduction to the delayed, but anxiously awaited, start of spring training.
One statistical tidbit: Ruth remains the only player in baseball history to pitch in at least 10 seasons and have a winning percentage above .500 every year he pitched.
His worst year was 1919, when his record was 9-5 (.643).
ALLAN WOOD  New York


Slavery Denied Legal Marriage to Blacks
To the Editor:
Re "Bringing Slavery's Long Shadow to the Light" (front page, April 2): There is a valuable but little-known resource available to anyone seeking detailed knowledge of slave life.


JACK FINNEY
In 1963, I co-wrote the screenplay for Jack Finney's "Good Neighbor Sam." The Jack Lemmon picture was very successful, but Jack Finney was a mystery.
We never heard from him nor could we learn anything about his personal life . . .  until I saw Bob Ickes's article "Jack Finney: As Time Goes By" (March 19).


PLAYING IN THE NEIGHBORHOOD
ASTORIA A Film Retrospective For a Yugoslavian Muse


A Modern Quandary For Princeton's 250th
A film maker has been commissioned to shoot a documentary.
An alumnus has suggested that all 60,000 living graduates of Princeton link hands across America.
And then there's that logo.
It's all part of the planning for next year's 250th anniversary of Princeton University, whose charter was signed Oct. 22, 1746.
The university expects to spend $3 million to $5 million on anniversary events, including at least 20 academic conferences.
It plans its most ambitious fund-raising campaign ever, with a goal of $750 million to $800 million over five years.
It has even applied to the Postal Service for a commemorative card and stamp.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League  BALTIMORE ORIOLES -- Agreed to terms with Kevin Brown, Doug Jones and Jesse Orosco, pitchers, on one-year contracts.
Placed Mark Eichhorn, pitcher, on the 15-day disabled list.
BOSTON RED SOX -- Agreed to terms with Mike Macfarlane, catcher, on a one-year contract, and Mike Hartley, pitcher, on a minor-league contract.
Traded Scott Cooper, third baseman; Cory Bailey, pitcher; and a player to be named to St.
Louis for Rheal Cormier, pitcher, and Mark Whiten, outfielder.
CALIFORNIA ANGELS -- Agreed to terms with Bob Patterson, pitcher, and Rene Gonzales, infielder, on minor-league contracts.
CHICAGO WHITE SOX -- Agreed to terms with Jim Abbott, pitcher, and Mike Devereaux, outfielder, on one-year contracts.
CLEVELAND INDIANS -- Agreed to terms with Orel Hershiser, pitcher, on a one-year contract.
DETROIT TIGERS -- Agreed to terms with Alan Trammell, shortstop, on a one-year contract.
KANSAS CITY ROYALS -- Agreed to terms with Tom Browning, pitcher, on a one-year contract and Jose DeJesus, pitcher, on a minor-league contract.
NEW YORK YANKEES -- Agreed to terms with Dion James, outfielder, on a one-year contract.
OAKLAND ATHLETICS -- Agreed to terms with Dave Stewart, pitcher, on a one-year contract, and Rick Honeycutt, pitcher, on a minor-league contract.
SEATTLE MARINERS -- Designated Chris Howard, catcher, for assignment.
TEXAS RANGERS -- Agreed to terms with Bob Tewksbury, pitcher, on a one-year contract.
National League  CINCINNATI REDS -- Agreed to terms with Mike Jackson, pitcher, on a one-year contract.
COLORADO ROCKIES -- Agreed to terms with Larry Walker, outfielder, on a four-year contract, and Bill Swift, pitcher, on a three-year contract.
FLORIDA MARLINS -- Agreed to terms with John Burkett, pitcher, on a two-year contract and Bobby Witt, pitcher, and Andre Dawson, outfielder, on one-year contracts.
NEW YORK METS -- Agreed to terms Robert Person and Hector Ramirez, pitchers, and Omar Garcia, first baseman, on one-year contracts.
PITTSBURGH PIRATES -- Designated Roberto Ramirez, pitcher, for assignment.
ST.
LOUIS CARDINALS -- Agreed to terms with Bernard Gilkey, outfielder, on a one-year contract.
SAN FRANCISCO GIANTS -- Agreed to terms with Mark Leiter and Terry Mulholland, pitchers, on one-year contracts.
Mid-America League  LAFAYETTE LEOPARDS -- Signed Jason Smith, pitcher.
Basketball National Basketball Association  ORLANDO MAGIC -- Signed Darrell Armstrong, guard, for the remainder of the season.
Football  Canadian Football League  SAN ANTONIO TEXANS -- Re-signed Hurlie Brown, linebacker, and Mark Stock, wide receiver.


School of Americas
To the Editor:
Your April 3 news article on the United States Army training academy for Latin American soldiers quotes a School of the Americas spokesman saying that of 59,000 students, "less than 300 have been cited for human rights violations like torture and murder, and less than 50 have been convicted of anything." The number is almost certainly greater than 300.
Few individuals who commit human rights abuses are identified or face prosecution.


A No-Zoo Revue: No Reopening Any Time Soon
The gates to the Children's Zoo in Central Park are padlocked, but a sign out front seems to offer promise: it says that the zoo is slated for reconstruction and that a scale model will go on display soon.
But some eager parents may not realize that the sign has been there since the zoo shut down three years ago, that planners are nowhere close to building a model, and that the prospect of reconstruction is so remote that today's toddlers will be lucky if they can bring their children to a new zoo.


Scuffed Ball
To the Sports Editor:
Dave Anderson is correct in pointing out that a season of only 144 games would be "smudged" ("Smudge Already on Baseball," The Times, April 2).
The solution to that problem would be to bring back the seldom-played doubleheader.


Lands of His Fathers
THE CROSS AND THE PEAR TREE  A Sephardic Journey.
By Victor Perera.
Illustrated. 282 pp.
New York: Alfred A. Knopf. $25.


Financial Fear And Retirement
To the Editor:
"Another Day Older And Running Out Of Time" (March 26) accurately assesses today's retirement savings problem.


Catching Up: Boots, Booze and Blues
BLUES in the night?
"Not in my backyard," I sing to all who will listen, predicting noise, cars, milling drunkards in the dark and empty bottles in the morning.
Carl Jensen listens.
From his stall at the Union Square Park Greenmarket, he can see the grand old American Savings Bank building on East 15th Street, soon to become a fast-fun franchise, a 1,500-seat restaurant-nightclub called the House of Blues.


New Name Earns Chance To Battle Against His Idols
The new name on the Masters leader board has a boyish, spunky face.
Brian Henninger is the name, golf is his game.
"When I have an opportunity to win; I have some gut ability," he was saying after his four-under-par 68 tied Ben Crenshaw for the lead at 206 going into Sunday's final round.
"I've idolized all these guys, but I'm not afraid to compete against anybody."


Corrections
An article and a biographical summary last Sunday about Glenn Dicterow, the concertmaster of the New York Philharmonic, misspelled the name of the violin Mr.
Dicterow plays for the orchestra.
It is a Guarnerius del Gesu, not Guarnarius.


Did Jeffrey MacDonald Murder His Family?
To the Editor:
Prince Beasley, a retired Fayetteville, N.C., police officer, and I were the first to obtain a signed confession from Helena Stoeckley, the woman in the white floppy hat seen standing on the street corner by a military policeman while he was en route to the murder scene.


Indianapolis Signs Place-Kicker Cofer
Place-kicker MIKE COFER is returning to the National Football League after a one-year absence.
Cofer, who has scored 681 points in seven N.F.L. seasons, signed on Friday with the Indianapolis Colts.
The free agent's most productive season was 1989, when he led the N.F.L. with 136 points, setting franchise records for the Super Bowl champion San Francisco 49ers for consecutive field-goal attempts converted (17) and field goals in a season (29).


Please Pass A Wing, Boggs Is Back
Wade Boggs sneaked into the clubhouse here late Wednesday night, sat at his locker and stared at the shiny helmets, the unused bats and the rows of Yankee uniforms.
He peeked at the name plates scattered throughout the large room, from Mattingly to Tartabull to McDowell.
He did not stay long, just long enough to retrieve the feeling he had lost.
Baseball is back, so Boggs is back, so scribble a bunch of hits in the scorebook and expect another .300 average.
Those are some of the thoughts he contemplated during his visit to the empty clubhouse, a visit that gave him an early idea of how it felt to be back working and hitting.
The warm feeling had been absent for almost eight months.


April 2-8: Radiation and Chemotherapy; Long-Term Cancer Studies Affirm the Benefits Of Treatment Therapies
Women who face breast cancer received reassuring news last week from two long-term studies published in The New England Journal of Medicine: promising treatments now in wide use remain effective at keeping cancer at bay 10 and even 20 years later.
One study involved a 10-year follow-up of 247 women treated for early breast cancer at the National Cancer Institute in Bethesda, Md.
The women were randomly assigned to undergo mastectomy or lumpectomy followed by radiation therapy.
The study found lumpectomy and radiation therapy prevented cancer recurrence and saved lives as effectively as a mastectomy.
Although 18 percent of the lumpectomy patients eventually had to have a mastectomy to treat a recurring cancer within the breast, their chances of survival were not diminished by this kind of recurrence.
On the other hand, women who had mastectomies without radiation to the breast area were twice as likely as the lumpectomy patients to develop more ominous recurrences in the chest wall and surrounding lymph nodes.


SPLENDOR TO SPARE
When a major earthquake hit Southern California last year, it virtually destroyed the house of one of Michael Smith's clients.
Redoing the interiors gave the Los Angeles designer a chance to rethink his approach.
The house had been done in a thoroughly English country style.
"It was a multitude of chintzes," Smith says, noting that the motif is a favorite with the Hollywood crowd.
It's elegant; it's English; it looks old.
But, Smith wondered, did it really belong in California?
He loved the look as much as everyone else, but felt that the style had turned sloppy from overuse, too much layering and too many patterns.
He sought something lighter.
His clients, two screenwriters, were also ready for a change.
Smith first worked on their turn-of-the-century cottage three years ago; more recently, the clients wanted to start collecting antiques.
So the designer turned to the 18th century, known for its purely shaped, unornamented furniture.
Besides its clean and comfortable look, Smith says, "this furniture fits so well in contemporary settings."


Man Is Arrested in Killing of News Vendor
A man was arrested on Friday in the death of a midtown Manhattan newsstand vendor who was fatally shot early last year during a morning robbery near Pennsylvania Station, the police said.
The man, John Poole, 21, was leaving Rikers Island on Friday afternoon after serving 11 months of a one-year sentence for armed robbery when he was arrested by detectives of the Midtown South precinct.


The Conception, Production and Distribution of Julia Ormond
Julia Karin Ormond, the 30-year old female lead opposite Brad Pitt of the $63 million hit "Legends of the Fall" and a star of two more big movies coming out this year, "First Knight" (opposite Sean Connery and Richard Gere) and "Sabrina" (opposite Harrison Ford), wants a drink of water.
Needs one rather desperately, in fact.
But she's stuck hobnobbing at this star-studded private cocktail party.
Right now she has just met Sherry Lansing, and the effervescent Paramount Pictures chairwoman is telling her how great the dailies have been from "Sabrina," how great Julia is in them, how great the movie is going. . . .
It's all very exciting to Ormond, of course, but is there no one here who can get her a plain glass of water without ice?
She needs it right away, because in a few minutes she has to leave this reception, enter a cavernous ballroom at Bally's Hotel in Las Vegas, pause elegantly in front of a horde of paparazzi screaming her name and mount a dais where she will sit next to Mark Canton, chairman of Columbia Tri-Star Motion Picture Companies, tell him how smart he was to release "Legends" when he did and make the first award acceptance speech of her movie career.
A crowd of 3,500 movie-theater owners are, at the moment, crunching on thick heads of iceberg lettuce and pitted black olives.
But at least each of the exhibitors gathered there in early March for the National Association of Theater Owners' Sho West -- an annual movie-industry lovefest put on for the folks who bring you overpriced popcorn and nonpareils -- has his or her own personal glass of water, while Ormond does not.


Women's Sports Get a Boost
There is joy in women's sports: Connecticut's basketball team, led by forward Rebecca Lobo, is now the reigning national champion.
The Lady Huskies' thrilling 70-64 comeback victory over Tennessee last Sunday completed a trifecta of great moments in the National Collegiate Athletic Association women's tournament.
Last year, North Carolina's Charlotte Smith drained a 3-pointer with seven-tenths of a second left to beat Louisiana Tech.
In 1993, Texas Tech's Sheryl Swoopes scored 47 points to lead the Red Raiders to an 84-82 victory over Ohio State.


Sara Holbrook, J. S. Guggenheim
Sara Holbrook, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John Holbrook Jr. of New York, was married yesterday to Jonathan Streett Guggenheim, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Charles Guggenheim of Washington.
The Rev.
Robert S. Morse, the Anglican Bishop of the Western States, performed the ceremony at St.
Stephen's Church in Oakville, Calif.
Mrs.
Guggenheim, 32, is a graphic designer in Los Angeles.
She graduated magna cum laude from Brown University.
Her father is an architect in New York.
Her mother, Edythe M. Holbrook, is the executive director of the American Russian Youth Orchestra in New York.


Expos Shedding Stars Whatever the System
Obviously, the direction the National League East race had been expected to take has undergone drastic revision with the trio of trades the Montreal Expos made last week.
The race, however, already had been affected, and the three trades only redirected the impact.
The reverberations were also felt in the American League East.
The Expos traded Marquis Grissom, their base-stealing center fielder, to division rival Atlanta; John Wetteland, their No. 1 relief pitcher, to the Yankees, and Ken Hill, their No. 1 starting pitcher, to St.
Louis.
The subtraction of those players eliminates the Expos, the best team in the major leagues last season, from N.L.
East contention.


IN SHORT: FICTION
ANY GIVEN MOMENT  By Laura Van Wormer. Crown, $23.


THE COLOR OF FLOWERS
Nature has never been afraid of color - even when combinations seem to clash.
The blossoms here mingle as freely in a room as they might in a field or a cottage garden.
Their contrasting hues offer an opulence that's free of artifice; three of the vases are actually covered with leaves.


Mystery Follows Fastest Runner
Who were those two men on the back of a photo pickup truck yesterday yelling split times, encouragement and perhaps instructions to the winner of the Trevira Twosome 10-mile run through Central Park, almost getting him disqualified?
As it turned out, El Arbi Khattabi of Morocco, a world-class runner, kept the victory and the $5,000 winner's purse.
He said he had never seen the men before.
He said he did not know what they were yelling or whether it was aimed at him.


'Making Faces' Takes On Literal Cast at the Hudson Museum
I'M mixing, I'm mixing," Rigoberto Torres said, moments before slathering wet plaster onto the faces, necks and shoulders of Keon Iglehart and Jeanine Murray at the Hudson River Museum of Westchester here. The Bronx sculptor was demonstrating the art of plaster casting to ninth-grade students from the Museum Junior High School, participants in a magnet school program sponsored by the museum and the Yonkers public schools.
Keon and Jeanine reclined together on an elevated table in the museum workshop, holding a pose while the artist prepared his materials and advised them to relax.
Soon they would be breathing air through straws inserted into their nostrils while some of their classmates assisted the sculptor.
Keon and Jeanine were not boyfriend and girlfriend, but the pose was a loving one: heads close together, with her left hand resting on his right shoulder.


Pockets of Corruption
In the past several years, police officers have been investigated for illegal acitivies including brutality, drug dealing and theft.
Here is a summary of the major cases and the officers who have been charged. 30TH PRECINCT, HARLEM
In August 1993 several Harlem police officers were videotaped breaking into an apartment that had been set up by undercover officers as a phony drug den.
The sting operation, which followed reports that officers had been shaking down drug dealers and stealing property on their beats opened up one of the city's biggest police corruption scandals in decades.
In the days and months that followed, more than two dozen other officers and supervisors were arrested.
The most recent arrests came last week, when two officers and a sergeant were accused of falsifying arrest records and lying in court to win convictions.
Peter Allgor -- assault -- case pending
Jorge Alvarez -- grand larceny -- pleaded guilty, sentence pending
John Arena -- drug conspiracy -- acquitted
David Benitez -- extortion -- pleaded guilty, sentence pending
Edward M. Checke -- perjury -- case pending
Alphonso Compres -- robbery, assault, drug conspiracy -- case pending
Michael Dauphinee -- perjury -- case pending
Chris DiLorenzo -- perjury, drug conspiracy -- case pending
George Eckerson -- civil rights conspiracy -- case pending
Justine Fazzini -- perjury, civil rights conspiracy -- pleaded guilty, sentencs: 15 months
Ruben Garza -- drug distribution -- pleaded guilty, sentence pending
Theodore Giovaniello -- perjury, civil rights conspiracy -- pleaded guilty, sentence pending
Kevin Kay -- civil rights conspiracy -- pleaded guilty, sentence pending
Michael Kennedy -- attempted assault -- case dismissed
William H. Knox -- perjury, drug possession -- pleaded guilty, sentence pending
Richard McGauley -- perjury, civil rights conspiracy -- pleaded guilty, sentence pending
Russell Litwenak -- burglary -- case pending
Kevin Nannery -- perjury, civil rights conspiracy -- pleaded guilty, sentence pending
Thomas J. Nolan -- perjury -- pleaded guilty, sentence pending
George Nova -- drug distribution -- pleaded guilty, sentence pending
Armando Palacio -- perjury -- case pending
Danny Parson -- grand larceny, evidence tampering -- case pending
Stephen L. Pataki -- perjury -- case pending
Josue Rivera -- drug conspiracy -- case pending
David Rios -- perjury -- case pending
Stephen Setteducato -- grand larceny, evidence tampering -- case pending
Blake C. Struller -- grand larceny, drug distribution -- pleaded guilty, sentence pending
Alberto Vargas -- drug dealing -- pleaded guilty, sentence pending
Randy Vazquez -- drug possession, sale -- case pending
James Velez -- perjury -- case pending
Joseph M. Walsh -- perjury, civil rights conspiracy -- pleaded guilty, sentence pending
Michael Walsh -- illegal searches, drug sale -- pleaded guilty, sentence sealed
Frederick Wagner -- falsifying records -- case dismissed 73D PRECINCT, BROOKLYN
During the summer of 1993 a former police officer told investigators about a group of officers who broke down the doors of drug dealers and divided the stolen booty in an abandoned coffin factory.
Thus began the Morgue Boy's investigation.
In a trial that ended on Tuesday, jurors acquitted three officers of extortion charges but deadlocked on civil rights charges stemming from what prosecutors said were illegal searches and arrests based on false evidence.
Christopher Banke -- obstruction of justice -- pleaded guilty, sentence pending
Philip Carlucci -- conspiracy -- pleaded guilty, sentence pending
Kevin Hembury -- conspiracy -- pleaded guilty, sentence pending
Keith Goodman -- extortion, conspiracy -- acquitted
civil rights violations -- mistrial
Frank Mistretta -- extortion, conspiracy -- acquitted
civil rights violations -- mistrial
Richard Sanfilippo -- extortion, conspiracy -- acquitted
civil rights violations -- mistrial 109TH PRECINT, QUEENS
Early last year the Police Department received a series of complaints form residents in and around Flushing that several officers were using drugs on the job.
Four officers were ordered to take drug tests: one resigned and the other three failed their tests and were dismissed.
The department also set up a series of corruption stings, resulting in the arrests of two officers and one former officer, who are accused of stealing $1,400 while responding to a false report of a kidnapping.
Police officials say more officers are under investigation.
Anthony Biancaniello -- grand larceny -- case pending
Joseph DiGregorio -- grand larceny -- case pending
John Pylyp -- grand larceny -- case pending
48TH PRECINCT, THE BRONX
The 48th Precinct is the latest focus of corruption inquiries, with two dozen officers currently under investigation, police officials say.
After sting operations involving undercover officers posing as drug dealers, eight officers from the 48th have been placed on desk duty, and officials say that indictments of more than a dozen more could come as early as this week.
One of the officers on desk duty, Timothy Zaccardo, has also been charged by the Rockland County District Attorney with participating in a suburban cocaine ring.
Officers from the 48th are believed to have robbed drug dealers, sold narcotics and beat up suspects.


G.O.P. Finds It Difficult to Deflect Attacks on the School Lunch Proposals
Of all the accusations flung back and forth in the new Congress, none infuriates Republicans more than the assertion that they are cutting the school lunch program.
Speaker Newt Gingrich of Georgia said recently that the fight over that program was "one of the most horrendously disgusting examples of demagogy I have ever seen."


DIARY
TAXES  Numbers Don't (Always) Lie  Would it be humanly possible to come up with tax cuts universally considered fair?
Of course not.
Seventeen experts will get out calculators and show, with mathematical certainty, 17 different evaluations -- which just might be linked to those experts' politics.
And so it was when the House passed its tax cuts last week -- triumphantly waving the Contract With America.
Republicans pointed proudly to cuts that bulged to 4.4 percent for the middle class and trickled down to 2.9 percent for the wealthy, while Democrats complained that the wealthy would get an outsized share of the cuts.
Yes, both were probably right.
But more to the point: the Senate is likely to have different ideas, and a Clinton veto looms if it doesn't.
In any case, can the nation really afford a tax cut now?
In a poll, 55 percent of Americans said no.
ENTERTAINMENT  Mr.
Bronfman Goes Hollywood  The lure of Hollywood is powerful, and laden with risk.
Sony found that out, losing billions on Columbia Pictures.
And Matsushita found it out in its stormy ownership of MCA.
But Edgar Bronfman Jr. of Seagram wants to try his hand anyway, agreeing last week to buy 80 percent of MCA from Matsushita.
The deal involves some big reshuffling of corporate money -- Seagram's getting the cash by selling most of its Du Pont stake for $8.8 billion -- as well as marking a big shift by Seagram, from drinks to entertainment.
And it will undoubtedly involve some big reshuffling in Hollywood, for MCA is likely to lose Lew Wasserman, its 82-year-old chairman, and it's unlikely that Steven Spielberg would keep providing the studio with his golden touch.
ADVERTISING  Where There's Smoke . . .
Cigarette ads on television are illegal, of course -- have been for two decades.
It couldn't be clearer.
Or could it?
If a sports arena advertises cigarettes to fans, and the camera lingers on those ads, does that constitute television advertising?
The Justice Department says it does -- though arenas and stadiums are loaded with such ads -- and last week it settled its first lawsuit to close that loophole, as Madison Square Garden agreed to keep the offending ads out of camera range.
The Garden called the deal a "formality," since it had removed tobacco signs in November.
But the agreement sends a clear signal to other sports sites.
Just days later came word that the Marlboro sign at Shea Stadium would be moved to be less visible to cameras.
TRANSPORTATION  Taxing Interstate Tickets  Taxes.
Everywhere you go, taxes.
And now, if where you go is across state lines by public transportation -- yes, another tax.
It used to be that states didn't tax interstate tickets -- the Supreme Court apparently barred that in 1948.
But last week the Court said no, that was different -- New York wanted then to tax a bus company's gross receipts.
Now it says the ticket price itself is fair game as long as the trip originates in the state -- that way there's no danger of taxing a company twice for the same ticket.
But the question is whether states, no matter how starved for cash, would want to take the political heat for levying what would undoubtedly be an unpopular tax.
For passengers, not transportation companies, would be hit hardest.
COMMUNICATIONS  Whatever You Say, Mr.
McCaw  Craig McCaw had a lot of money burning a hole in his pocket after selling his company to AT&amp;T, and he knows a lot about wireless communications.
Nextel, once a high flier in that very field, was badly in need of an investor.
So last week, in a marriage that both surely hope was made in technology heaven, Mr.
McCaw said he and his family would invest $300 million now -- and perhaps $1.1 billion over six years -- in the struggling company.
The deal: Nextel would scrap its effort to build a nationwide cellular network -- "been there," said Mr.
McCaw, "done that" -- and focus on private dispatch networks, like those for truck or taxi fleets.
Nextel's stock sold for a quarter of what it did in the fall before jumping on this news; for $1 billion, it would probably have gone into the diaper business.
BANKING  Adding Up Chase's Parts  In banking, bigger is better, right?
Consumer banking, corporate business, global lending -- adding up to a strong, diverse business.
That's what giants like Chase Manhattan believe, and Chase is doing fine at it -- its profits growing steadily.
But some investors like things simple and easy to size up.
If something looks muddled, they want to break it into bite-size pieces -- parts, they bet, worth more than the whole.
That's clearly what's happening at Chase.
Last week a money manager named Michael Price -- known for pushing to wring all the value he can out of companies -- said he'd bought 6.1 percent of Chase, and the stock shot up 10 percent.
THE ECONOMY  Too Hard a Landing?
What gives?
The markets like signs that the economy's slowing to a nice even pace, and most of the week the Dow industrials bumped to new highs for that very reason.
But when word came Friday that the unemployment rate had reversed course and risen to 5.5 percent -- a sure sign of slowing -- stocks retreated, with the Dow ending up off 12 after being off 36 earlier.
Could things be slowing too much?
Manufacturing lost a lot of jobs, and total payroll jobs rose just 203,000.
"We can kiss the soft landing goodbye," said one economist.
But the Administration was more upbeat -- it needs that soft landing badly -- as Labor Secretary Reich saw the economy in a steady "glide pattern."  AIR POLLUTION  Smog?
Cars Have It for Dinner  Forget "zero emission" vehicles, the lab-coat name for electric cars.
The latest answer to foul air is a "negative emission" car.
No, there's no Mobius strip of a tailpipe, twisted in on itself and spewing exhaust into some Star Trek-style parallel universe.
Well, not exactly.
Last week Engelhard, which developed catalytic converters in the 70's, came up with a way for cars to, essentially, devour any smog in their path.
A new catalyst would break down existing smog, or ozone, into breathable oxygen -- but would do nothing for the car's own exhaust.
Sound far-fetched?
The stock market didn't think so, as Engelhard stock jumped 30 percent in a day, and futures prices for platinum -- a key part of the process -- hit a four-year high.
An unanswered question: after it eats all Los Angeles smog, will it eat Los Angeles too?
GEOGRAPHY  Take a Left at the Berlin Wall  Be realistic.
With national boundaries sometimes seeming to shift by the day, with countries born and countries dying, no one could possibly keep up.
You could easily forget that a faraway place called the Soviet Union had, well, gone through some changes.
So Dow Jones should certainly not be faulted for featuring, on its just-released '94 annual report, a globe with these words: Union of Soviet Socialist Republics.


Urban Backyard To Be Revitalized
Brooklyn's last forest, where white oak, red maple and tulip trees once inspired the poet Marianne Moore, is today a patchy grove of quick-growing weed trees.
Scientists say the forest, which covers half the 525-acre Prospect Park, is dying, a victim of mountain bikes and millions of footsteps.
Not to mention a few ecological missteps by the park's designers, Frederick Law Olmsted and Calvert Vaux.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article on page 15 of the Arts and Leisure section today about French female directors misstates the opening date for the film "6 Days, 6 Nights." It is May 26, not May 6.


CHILDREN'S BOOKS
DELIVER US FROM EVIE  By M. E. Kerr. 177 pp.
New York: HarperCollins Publishers. $15. (Ages 12 and up)


April 2-8: Fast Science in Australia; A New Virus Identified In Deaths of Horses and Man
In one of the quickest discoveries in the annals of medicine, scientists in Australia have identified a novel virus as the cause of a mysterious outbreak that killed one man and 14 racing horses.
Twelve days after the outbreak of an acute respiratory disease was detected on a farm near Brisbane last September, a scientific team headed by Dr.
Keith Murray of the top security Australian Animal Health Laboratory identified the virus and its link to the sickness.


The New 'New Jersey': Brickbats and Hallelujahs
To the Editor:
"Help New Jerseyans navigate life in their home state?" ("To Our Readers," April 2).
How patronizing can you get?
As a native Manhattanite -- one who would be very happy never to set foot on your uninhabitable island again -- and a 15-year New Jerseyan, I am annoyed by the attitude of your new New Jersey section. (Is it a coincidence that "Jerseywise" is the only nonpolitical cartoon allowed in your paper?)


Shipp Passes Skeptics on the Long Road Back
On a balmy afternoon last Wednesday, Tchaka Shipp strolled five blocks from his home in South Jamaica, Queens, to shoot some hoops.
Wearing a Michael Jordan T-shirt and a Chicago White Sox cap flipped backward, Shipp fluidly dunked on a netless rim.
His 6-foot-8-inch frame attracted the attention of several teen-agers on the tree-lined, asphalt court.
"Who are you?" one of them asked.
Shipp summed up his basketball resume: In 1991, he helped win the city championship while a star at Lincoln High School in Brooklyn.
From 1992 to 1994, he played for Seton Hall before transferring to the University of California in Irvine.


THE WORLD: Unlucky Bucks; In New Diplomatic Struggles, Money Is An Unreliable Ally
HERE'S one of the hard truths of the new world of economic diplomacy: Twenty billion dollars doesn't buy as much gratitude as it used to.
If it did, American officials would not be sweating this week over whether Mexico, fresh from a $20billion American bailout, would undercut the savior of its economy by voting against President Clinton's effort to win an indefinite, worldwide extension of the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty.


Can P.S. 3 Keep Marching to an Off-Beat?
Twenty-four years ago, when Lucy Rubin started teaching at Public School 3, parents accused her of stifling their children's creativity after she corrected their "inventive" spelling.
But recently, Ms.
Rubin said, when she told a group of parents "that by third grade we need to teach real spelling, they burst into applause."
Although a proponent of traditional spelling, Ms.
Rubin points with some consternation to the recent incident as a sign that parents today are "less idealistic" than the band of avant-garde intellectuals and artists who founded P.S. 3 in 1971 and laid the groundwork for what remains a funky, colorful school sizzling with energy.
It is a place where open classrooms and mixed grade levels are the norm, textbooks and tests anomalies.


Forgotten Men
To the Sports Editor:
So they got within hours of their Field of Dreams -- the replacement players, that is.
I believe they came for the greatness of the game, giving up hearth and home for a shot at the show.
It would have been better for the game if they had the opportunity to play, even a few games.
They would have given us, the forgotten fans, a glimpse at the fantasy -- a second shot at risking everything for a chance to make it.
I hope some of them will be called back to the majors, if only to let us know that it is still possible.
As for the players and owners, a plague on both their houses.
ROBERT S. WEBBER  Teaneck, N.J.


POSTINGS: $179 Million in Projects Include Eight-Story Outpatient Care Center; Major Building Plan Approved at Montefiore
Funding was approved last week for a $179 million building program at Montefiore Medical Center in the Bronx that will include a new eight-story, 150,000-square-foot outpatient care center.
The $79 million center, to be called the Jerome L. and Dawn Greene Medical Arts Pavilion, is on the West Campus, at Bainbridge Avenue and East 210th Street in the Norwood section of the Bronx.
It is expected to be completed by May 1997 and will provide a range of services, including pediatrics, neurology and geriatrics.
The architect is Medifac Architects of Philadelphia.


Seeking the High-Profit Staples of Tomorrow
RON BARON began the Baron Asset Fund in the summer of 1987, not long before the crash in October.
In a way, that timing proved fortuitous.
Most of the fund's cash had not been invested before prices plunged, leaving him with plenty of cash to search for bargains.
He generally looks for stocks with niches or demographic factors that will cause them to soar, and has compiled a record far better than most small company stock funds -- up more than 10 percent in the first quarter of this year and a compound annual return of 14 percent over the last five years.
In the 12 months ended March 31, the fund was up 21 percent, a performance all the more impressive because the fund largely stays out of technology stocks, the stars of the last year.
That performance has started to bring in the cash.
The fund grew from $87 million at the end of 1994 to $161 million at the end of the quarter.
FLOYD NORRIS Q.  What's cheap these days?


Beg to Differ
To the Sports Editor:
I must disagree with Dave Anderson that the shortened schedule is a major stain on baseball.
It must be remembered that prior to the first expansion, each of the eight teams in the league played a 154-game schedule.
How many home runs would Babe Ruth have hit in a season, or in a lifetime, if he had played the 162-game schedule now in effect?
Would Hank Aaron ever have overtaken him?
Would Ted Williams have hit over .400 if he had to play eight more games, or would he have raised his average?
Didn't asterisks go out with Roger Maris?  ROBERT R. SIROTY  Dover, N.J.


April 2-8; Memories of a Killing Frenzy


Islanders Get a Point And Maybe Muller, Too
Yes, the Islanders played a game here tonight.
And they nearly won, thanks to the second stellar performance in as many nights by goaltender Tommy Soderstrom, who made 41 saves.
But Florida's Jason Woolley ricocheted a shot off Soderstrom with 12.5 seconds remaining in regulation, and the Islanders (11-20-5) had to settle for a 2-2 tie.


Peso or Dollar Wages? In Mexico, It Matters
JORGE ORTEGA and Kimberly Rustad have a lot in common.
They are both young Americans.
They both live here.
And they both love their jobs.
But one is paid in dollars and one in pesos, and because of the Mexican currency crisis, that has made a world of difference.
Mr.
Ortega is paid in dollars, and for him life is coming up roses -- much like the roses that now cost the equivalent of just 75 cents a dozen on Reforma, the elegant boulevard that runs through the heart of Mexico City.
With the peso falling by half against the American currency since the devaluation last year -- to about six to the dollar from three -- the flowers would have cost nearly twice that four months ago.


Signs That the South Accepts 'Lost Cause' at Last
Four generations of white Southern youngsters were brought up to treat the Civil War as a continuing conflict, an attitude nursed by family tales of underdog valor in "the War of Northern Aggression."
On playgrounds, pupils picking teams split into Yanks and Rebels.
In classrooms, Robert E. Lee, the Confederate commander, received at least equal billing with George Washington.
Many Confederate shrines were built with the generals facing north, as if ready to return to battle.


Corrections
An article on mortgage standards in some editions last week misstated the terms of a loan available at Chemical Bank in Connecticut.
The adjustable-rate loan that is offered with no points or fees and a $250 charge for conversion to a fixed-rate mortgage after one year carries an initial interest rate of 7 percent, not 5.5 percent.


Men as Women Is One Thing, But in Suits?
TO THE ACTOR JIM DALE, HIS latest production, "Travels With My Aunt," is like "four people dancing a pas de quatre in a ballet." His co-star, Brian Murray, compares it to keeping a ball aloft for two hours.
"You're tossing it, you're throwing it, or you're curving it," Mr.
Murray said.
"But it's never dropped on the ground. Otherwise, you're dead. At the same time, you're on a kind of trampoline while you're throwing the ball."
Timing is everything in this comic enterprise in which four male actors in business suits portray 20-odd Graham Greene characters -- men and women -- from the author's 1969 novel about a repressed retiree (Mr. Murray, mainly, though not always), whose eccentric, still libidinous 75-year-old aunt (Mr. Dale, solely) decides to educate him about life.


RESTAURANTS: QUICK BITE/Princeton; 'Student Special': A Club Sandwich, With a Twist of Ham
Nineteen steps below Nassau Street, just across from Princeton University's Firestone Library, is the Annex, a knotty-pine basement fairly festooned with all the accouterments of the classic college-town hangout.
Which, with its mix of students, professors and other locals, is what the Annex is and has been for 50 years.
The design scheme here is 100 percent varsity (from the orange-and-black placemats with shield and tiger to the line-up of Ivy League varsity shields over the bar); the waitresses are traditionally motherly, and the menu is Italian-American, with everything from pasta to poultry to sandwiches, all at generally student-friendly prices.
There are always chef's specials in the $4-to-$8 range (for an entree, salad, bread and butter and a choice of either spaghetti or two vegetables), and if you're lucky, it will be Italian potato night, when you can get potatoes sauteed in olive oil and garlic.
From this groaning board of a menu, one entry has long stood out, at least to my taste -- the $4.25 "Student Special," an unusual turn on the old club sandwich.
The Student Special is composed of the predictable bacon, lettuce and tomato on toast, but the traditional turkey has been supplanted by a portion of ham.
This is a large portion of ham; in fact, if one were redesigning the sandwich, there might be a little less ham and a bit more bacon.
But then again, the ham-heavy Student Special has certainly stood the test of time.
MICHAEL KAGAY
The Annex, 128 1/2 Nassau Street, Princeton, (609) 921-7555.
Hours, Monday to Saturday, 11 A.M. to midnight.


MY MOTHER IS SPEAKING FROM THE DESERT
I read Mary Gordon's "My Mother Is Speaking From the Desert" (March 19) in one breath, eager to befriend instantly another woman who is mother to her mother, with no end in sight.
My mother knows Anna Gordon, as do I. They eat in the dining room together in the same excellent nursing home.
Yet, the history of each "inmate," as my mother calls them, is different.
My mother begs me for black eye liner and brow pencil, that she may continue to make up her extraordinary eyes, always her most striking feature.
She cannot have black, which she used with elegant understatement for 60 years, because now, at 83, she can only use it as a crayon, to become a grotesquely painted clown.
So I protect her from humiliation and buy her only light brown.
She is uncomprehending; I am mean, withholding.
We are both dehumanized.


In Pastoral Arcadia, Death Plays a Part
To the Editor:
In Vincent Canby's review of Tom Stoppard's "Arcadia," Mr.
Canby did not have space to discuss the significance of the play's title (Arts pages, March 31).


Jill A. Blank, Paul Aschkenasy
Jill Ann Blank, a daughter of Jeffrey and Carol Blank of Abington, Pa., was married last evening to Paul Mark Aschkenasy, the son of Dorothy Aschkenasy and Peter Aschkenasy, both of New York.
Rabbi Alan Fuchs performed the ceremony at the Four Seasons Hotel in Philadelphia.
Mrs.
Aschkenasy, 25, graduated from the University of Wisconsin at Madison and is to receive a law degree from Yeshiva University in June.
She expects to become an assistant district attorney in New York County in September.
Her father is a shopping center developer in Jenkintown, Pa.


Agassi Will Move Up to No. 1 Tomorrow
ANDRE AGASSI is no longer chasing No. 1; it's now his turn at the top.
The ATP Tour has confirmed the 24-year-old Las Vegan will be No. 1 when the computer ranking is released tomorrow.
He has a 187-point lead over PETE SAMPRAS, his Davis Cup teammate who had held the top ranking since September 1993.
The ranking caps Agassi's rise from wrist surgery and a ranking in the 30's early last year to his winning the last two Grand Slam tournaments, the United States and Australian Opens.


Melissa Citrin, Richard Shulman
Melissa Lipton Citrin, the daughter of Sherry and Dr.
Gary Citrin of Fort Lee, N.J., was married last evening to Richard Michael Shulman, a son of Joseph Shulman of Huntington Woods, Mich., and the late Evelyn N. Shulman.
Rabbi Meir Berger performed the ceremony at Tavern on the Green.
Mrs.
Shulman, 26, graduated cum laude from the University of Vermont, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa.
She is a coordinator at Jacobs Media, programming consultants to radio stations, in Southfield, Mich.
Her parents own Jaros Pharmacy in New York.


Norris Lands Blow Right To His Career
Terry Norris was adamant that he never heard the bell.
And so he did what he was trained to do tonight.
When he saw the inviting, unprotected chin of Luis Santana, the World Boxing Council superwelterweight champion -- Norris unloaded a punch.
And with that shot, Norris completed an unenviable double: for the second time in two fights against the Dominican, he was disqualified.
Yes, Norris lost the title last November in Mexico City when he whacked Santana in the back of the head.
Santana was carted off in a stretcher that fight and heard himself pronounced the new champion while on his back.


In Rising Numbers, College Applicants Turn to Home Computer
Liquid Paper, uneven typing and resulting endless nights were long the norm for college applicants.
But with the rise of the home computer, a growing number of colleges are letting them forgo the frustrations of paperwork and apply for admission electronically.
New York University and the 34-campus State University of New York are among those that have joined the trend this year.
Officials say they want to make the application process less daunting for their prospective students, who for some time have been asking for just that.


Got a Match?


District Chiefs Feel Cutbacks 'To the Bone'
Ever since the Giuliani administration cut financing for the city's 59 community boards by 18 percent, many district managers have been referring to themselves as an endangered species.
Although every community board is grappling with the cuts -- which will reduce budgets to $126,000 by July 1 -- the consequences have been most severe in the Bronx, where three longtime district managers have resigned since the beginning of the year, nearly every board office has lost support staff, and money for phone service, postage stamps, paper clips and other office needs has been greatly reduced.


WHAT, US WORRY?
The former Governors are laughing, in the picture illustrating your article, because they are treated as winners, not losers.
Todd Purdum's question on the "cumulative aggregate margin of victory" deserves the award for the greatest soft-pitch interview question of all time.
When will we have a conversation with Governors Pataki, Rowland and Bush?
HAROLD B. REISMAN Weston, Conn.


Sharpton Assails Leader's Remark on Poor
The Rev.
Al Sharpton has called for the State Senate majority leader, Joseph L. Bruno, to step down from budget negotiations in response to Mr.
Bruno's recent remark that blacks and people of Hispanic background "got their hands out" for welfare.
At a meeting of delegates from the state's Black Political Convention in Brooklyn yesterday, Mr.
Sharpton criticized Mr.
Bruno, calling his remarks "racist and insensitive."


The New Realities At Sagamore Hill
John Burke's Letter to the Editor, "How Sagamore Hill Should Be Run"  [ Feb. 19 ] , presented several misconceptions, misquotes and distortions of fact regarding the operation and management of the Sagamore Hill National Historic Site.
Yes, significant changes have occurred throughout the 1950's, 60's and 70's, as Mr.
Burke commented.
Sagamore Hill continues to receive thousands of visitors who are interested in Theodore Roosevelt's legacy, his family life and the important decisions he made here during his Presidency.
However during recent years the Theodore Roosevelt Home has experienced vandalism such as the carving of initials on some woodwork, the mishandling of animal mounts and the theft of objects.
Despite Mr.
Burke's claim of installing alarms and his knowledge of interior protective measures, I remind him of the taking of the President's revolver, never recovered, in summer 1990.


The Alleluias Ring Out for Easter
A WEEK of sacred music opens today with performances of oratorios by Johann Sebastian Bach in New Haven, Greenwich and Winsted.
The Yale Institute of Sacred Music presents the St.
Matthew Passion in a free concert at 3 P.M. in Woolsey Hall in New Haven.
The St.
John Passion will be heard in Greenwich at St.
Barnabas Church, in a performance featuring instruments and techniques of the Baroque era.
At St.
Joseph's Church in Winsted, a 40-voice children's choir is featured in Chorus Angelicus.
Both are at 4 P.M. and admission is charged.


Corrections
An answer in the Q &amp; A column last week about activities for children in London misstated the toll-free number outside New York City of the British Tourist Authority.
It is (800) 462-2748.


Commercial Property/Cyberspace; Having a Mouse in the Office Is Becoming Essential
STEPHEN D. DADOURIAN's client needed about 15,000 square feet in midtown.
Rockefeller Center had a 19,000-square-foot floor available at 630 Fifth Avenue, at 50th Street.
So Mr.
Dadourian, a principal at the D.G.
Hart brokerage, phoned a Rockefeller Center leasing agent.
The two men called up the floor plan at their respective computers.
"How about we try this?" one asked, using a mouse to subdivide the space, and describing the process enough so the other could replicate it.


TODAY'S SECTIONS
Special Today: Home Design/Magazine Part 2 Opulent Simplicity:
More and Less: Today's interiors are about understated luxury.
Interpreting Chairs: They're not just for sitting.
From Sheets to Spoons: Clothing designers do the home.
Week in Review Section 4
President Clinton and Congress have squared off on the basic question of government: Who owes what to whom?


Bookshelf
MISOSO: Once Upon a Time Tales From Africa.
Retold by Verna Aardema.
Illustrated by Reynold Ruffins.
Apple Soup/ Knopf. $18. (Ages 5 and up) A dozen traditional stories from the perimeter of Africa south of the Sahara Desert, each with an implicit moral, have been gracefully retold and given handsome, stylized illustrations.
With a map, glossaries and a bibliography.


Walk Dog or Run Errands, But Don't Do Both
To The Editor:
With steam building, I read Carol Arber's article, "Ziggy's Ransom" (March 19) about her dog being stolen from outside a deli.
Will these so-called dog lovers never learn?
You walk a dog, or you do errands or go for a meal.
You don't combine these efforts for your convenience.


Mexican Chief Attacks U.S. Critics of Aid
After hearing United States lawmakers threaten day after day to cut off $20 billion in aid, Mexican officials came here this week to strike back.
Among them was President Ernesto Zedillo, who used his first speech in the United States since taking office to attack critics of his policies and of American aid as backward-looking isolationists.
He specifically rebuked Senator Jesse Helms, chairman of the Foreign Relations Committee, for implying that Mexican billionaires might be drug lords, and the Central Intelligence Agency for telling lawmakers that Mexican oil exports pledged as collateral for the American loans were dangerously eroding.


The Credit Hogs Are Chomping on Your Card
A CREDIT card holder who is $600 under his limit takes a trip and charges three nights in hotels, two tanks of gasoline and three days of car rental at a total cost of $470.
Then he wants to use the card in a gift shop.
How much credit is left?
Maybe $130. Or maybe nothing.


UNNATURAL HISTORY: Saving the Whalebones
Masters of the Ocean Realm," an exhibit on a five-year tour of North America, is made of parts of whales like the humpback above, which washed up on Venice Beach in California last month. It seems that the whale was hit by a Navy destroyer.
The Natural History Museum of Los Angeles County responded, as it does regularly to reports of dead whales and dolphins.
Researchers removed the skull and skin samples, and the rest of the carcass was buried 20 feet deep.


Allison Marcus, Jeffrey Herzog
Allison Marcus, the daughter of Alan and Judith Marcus of Ridgewood, N.J., was married last evening to Jeffrey Herzog, the son of Sumner Herzog of Morristown, N.J., and Lesley Frost of Bridgewater, N.J.
Rabbi Carol Balin performed the ceremony at the Plaza in New York.
Mrs.
Herzog and her husband, both 25, graduated from American University.
She is an associate account executive at the Marcus Group in Secaucus, N.J., a public relations and lobbying concern owned by her father, who is its president.
Her mother is a special education teacher at the Hawthorne Elementary School in Teaneck, N.J.


On Sunday; Quick! Before The Ink Dries On the Contract
"NEWT happens in D.C.," said Kyla Brown, a restless college junior taking a year's leave from New York to see what's going on out there.
With the world to investigate far from Vassar and her Manhattan roots, she's got no farther than the national capital, where she's avidly discovering that the Contract With America is an exotic focal point that defies geography and academic agenda.
"We're all going to be affected by it," said the 21-year-old student, a nonstop talker with all sorts of poise and counter-poise who plunged into a ground-level, up-close summary of Speaker Newt Gingrich's juggernaut agenda for the benefit of a fellow New Yorker seeking some bearings in Washington last week.


New Display Data Put to the Test by Avis
Avis is testing a safety device in four cities that projects information from the dashboard onto the windshield so it is visible at a spot just above the top of the hood.
The "head-up display" device, designed by Delco Electronics, shows the driving speed; whether a turn signal or high beam is on, and when fuel, battery or water temperature requires attention.


Horses and Festivals: A Winning Combination
Balloons, boat races and block parties will herald the Kentucky Derby, to be held in Louisville, Ky., on May 6, and the Preakness Stakes in Baltimore on May 20, two of the three horse races of the Triple Crown; the third is the Belmont Stakes on June 10 at Belmont Park on Long Island.
The Derby and the Preakness are both preceded by festivals


For Seniors, The Final Test
Last week was the last chance for seniors to pass the state's three-day seven-and a-half-hour High School Proficiency Test, which measures reading, writing and math skills.
If you pass, you can graduate; if you fail, you will probably have to go to summer school and take the test again in October.
The class of 1995 is the first to face the test as a graduation requirement.
Gerald DeMauro, director of the Bureau of Assessment for the state Department of Education, says the test validates the importance of a New Jersey high school diploma.
"It's the only way we have of giving one uniform statewide assessment of those skills," he said.


Last (Amtrak) Train Out of Town
AMTRAK and the Atlantic County Improvement Authority spent millions of dollars a decade ago so that people like Robert and Patricia Heusel, schoolteachers from Hot Springs, Ark., could take a train to Atlantic City.
The Heusels didn't want to spend last Saturday in Washington, where they were on vacation.
It was April Fool's Day, and they wanted to dosomething foolish.
They impulsively spent $102 for a pair of round-trip Amtrak tickets for their first trip to the Boardwalk -- which was also their first train ride.
They boarded the 9 A.M. at Union Station.
They arrived in Atlantic City at 12:25 P.M. and took a bus to a casino, the Sands, where they were given $10 in coins.
Not only did they win back the cost of the trip when they got lucky on the slot machines; they witnessed the end of an era.
Along with 101 other passengers that night, the Heusels were on the last Amtrak run out of Atlantic City.
After the 10:15 rumbled out of the rail terminal, Amtrak closed its ticket office and removed just about everything but the tracks, hoping to shave $4.6 million from its budget.
The end of Amtrak's six-year run did not mean the end of rail transportation to Atlantic City, which is still provided by New Jersey Transit.
But for people like the Heusels, going to Atlantic City by train would no longer be an effortless caprice.
"It's really too bad," Mr.
Heusel said, getting coffee in the cafe car.
"I could really get to like this."
On the platform, Richard Del Bono, the engineer on the 10:15, solemnly embraced saddened Amtrak employees.
"This is an emotional moment," he said.
"I ran the first train down here in 1989, and now I'm riding the last one out."
Though Amtrak's era in Atlantic City is hardly long enough to be called an era, the railroad era is something else.
The city's initial prosperity was based on the ease with which day-trippers from Philadelphia and New York could board a train and, within a few hours, inhale the salt breeze.
A railroad conductor, Alexander Boardman, invented the city's Boardwalk.
In the 1930's, the city had two train terminals, one at South Carolina Avenue, the other at what has become the bus terminal, at Missouri and Arctic Avenues.
The railroads left Atlantic City in 1982, victims of the automobile and the casino bus.
But when bus-exhaust pollution levels began to rival those at the Lincoln Tunnel, the county improvement authority spent $20 million for a new terminal to adjoin a new convention center (now under construction and scheduled to open in 1996).
Amtrak paid for repairs and track improvements; the state built or restored stations along the line.
Amtrak and the casino industry had high hopes for the train.
Amtrak added a first-class club car and encouraged chartered junkets for high rollers.
Some casinos offered coin refunds to passengers.
And New Jersey Transit began commuter service for casino employees.
But Amtrak never quite got enough warm bodies.
For last few years, its trains were rarely more than half full.
"It meant a lot to some people," said the conductor on the 10:15, Earl Davisson, who, instead of punching tickets, was autographing them.
"We had our regulars we'd see every week. There was a group up in Connecticut that would charter a whole car once or twice a year. We had birthday parties all the time.
"Now I hear we might be back when they get the convention center open. But then again we might not. Nobody thought we'd be back when they stopped in '82, but here we are. Or were."
He signed a ticket. "Nothing's forever."


Talk, Talk, Talk, Talk, Talk, Talk. O.K. Next Scene.
LATELY, WORDS HAVE BEEN speaking louder than actions in movies.
Though there has always been conspicuous talk in pictures -- voice-overs, explanatory passages, political speeches and other forms of volubility -- a kind of New Talk is now more prominent than the Old Talk.
Old Talk takes the form of conventional voice-over narration in films like "Double Indemnity," long expository segments like those at the end of "Psycho" and "J.F.K.," the high-tech talk of "Jurassic Park," the procedural conversations in yessir movies like "The Hunt for Red October" and "Clear and Present Danger," and the sometimes didactic preachiness of "Network" and "On the Waterfront." Old Talk supports action.


The 100-Day Hurricane
Let no one begrudge House Speaker Newt Gingrich full credit for his achievements as a political strategist.
For the last five months, he has supplanted the President as the most important shaper of the national political debate.
Before that, he pulled off the most difficult trick in campaign planning, which is to impose a single theme on the hundreds of races decided in an off-year Congressional election.
No dispassionate judge of political talent can fail to be impressed.
This is skill of a high and rare order.
Yet people do not much like him.
Only 16 percent rated him favorably in a New York Times/CBS News Poll.
Surely one reason is the lack of an elevating vision in Mr.
Gingrich's politics.
He projects a seething anger that the American people are picking up on their emotional radar.
Even for those who believe that Americans need a dose of fiscal discipline and boot-strap ambition, Mr.
Gingrich seems extreme because the nation he would create would be pinched, unfair and punitive.
His gift for tactics is not matched by a talent for seasoning power with compassion.


Correction
An article on this page last Sunday misstated the year of Babe Ruth's last game as a Yankee.
It was in 1934.
Oct. 1, 1933, was his last game as a Yankee pitcher.


Even Japanese Don't Buy Those Trade Excuses
To the Editor:
I read Thomas L. Friedman's "Only 88 More to Go" (column, March 26), on United States policy toward Japan with skepticism, but incredulity describes how I read the response of Christophe Cremault (letter, April 2).


April 2-8: E-Mail
The Week in Review's electronic mail address is review@nytimes.com.


Cost Is the Issue as Waterside Faces Repair Program
ON rainy days, water leaks through cracks on the deck of Waterside Plaza, the 1,100-unit Mitchell-Lama residential complex on a platform over the East River off the East 20's.
It seeps down through the roof of the garage below.
So the management has installed pans near the garage ceiling to catch the water and channel it through pipes to sewer lines.
How many pans?
"Plenty! Hundreds!" said Hussein Sarangi of the maintenance department.
"It's a serious problem."


To Our Readers
Much of the special coverage of computers and technology that formerly appeared in the business section on Sunday has been moved to business day on Monday.


Ideas &amp; Trends; Easter, the Movable Feast
HERE are two things about Easter that hop: the bunny and the date.
Unlike the fixed star of Christmas, Easter moves with the planets.
It is celebrated on the first Sunday after the first full moon occurring on or after March 21, the vernal equinox.
In 1995, that's a week from today.


BEST SELLERS: April 9, 1995
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
1
58
THE CELESTINE PROPHECY, by James Redfield. (Warner, $17.95.) An ancient manuscript, found in Peru, provides insights into achieving a fulfilling life.
2
2
4
OUR GAME, by John le Carre. (Knopf, $24.) Espionage, larceny and murder in Eastern and Western Europe in the post-cold war era.
3
4
42
POLITICALLY CORRECT BEDTIME STORIES, by James Finn Garner. (Macmillan, $8.95.) Classic tales respun to avoid offending current sensibilities.
4
3
7
BORDER MUSIC, by Robert James Waller. (Warner, $17.95.) A Texas rancher and an exotic dancer.
5
5
5
THE GLASS LAKE, by Maeve Binchy. (Delacorte, $23.95.) The unspoken ties that bind a woman and her mother in a small Irish town.
6
8
139
THE BRIDGES OF MADISON COUNTY, by Robert James Waller. (Warner, $16.95.) A photographer and a farmer's lonely wife in Iowa.
7
7
8
DAISY-HEAD MAYZIE, by Dr.
Seuss. (Random House, $15.) A girl's head unexpectedly sprouts a daisy.
8
6
9
ORIGINAL SIN, by P.D.
James. (Knopf, $24.) Adam Dalgliesh probes a case involving intrigue, malice and murder in a prestigious London publishing house.
9
10
25
MUTANT MESSAGE DOWN UNDER, by Marlo Morgan. (HarperCollins, $18.) In Australia's outback, an American woman learns about aboriginal philosophy.
10
11
12
KISS THE GIRLS, by James Patterson. (Little, Brown, $22.95.) A police detective pursues a serial killer.
11
9
2
SILENT TREATMENT, by Michael Palmer. (Bantam, $21.95.) A physician is the prime suspect when his estranged wife dies mysteriously in a hospital.
12
1
A DOG'S LIFE, by Peter Mayle. (Knopf, $20.) The memoirs of Boy, a shaggy canine in Provence; with drawings by Edward Koren.
13
12
3
PHENOMENAL WOMAN, by Maya Angelou. (Random House, $10.) Four poems celebrating women.
14
1
MOO, by Jane Smiley. (Knopf, $24.) Intrigues and machinations on the campus of a Midwestern state university.
15
15
3
MCNALLY'S TRIAL, by Lawrence Sanders. (Putnam, $23.95.) Archy McNally uncovers a criminal operation at a Palm Beach funeral home.
16*
4
ROGUE WARRIOR: GREEN TEAM, by Richard Marcinko and John Weisman. (Pocket, $23.) Navy Seals contend with a violent religious movement.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Nonfiction
1
1
4
BREAKING THE SURFACE, by Greg Louganis with Eric Marcus. (Random House, $23.) The memoirs of the former Olympic diving champion.
2
2
26
THE HOT ZONE, by Richard Preston. (Random House, $23.) The discovery of a lethal virus, more infectious than H.I.V., and the efforts to keep it from spreading.
3
3
8
THE DEATH OF COMMON SENSE, by Philip K. Howard. (Random House, $18.) How governmental rules and regulations are fettering the lives of all Americans.
4
4
15
SISTERS, by Carol Saline.
Photographs by Sharon J. Wohlmuth. (Running Press, $27.50.) The relationships of 36 sets of sisters, reported in words and pictures.
5
5
31
COUPLEHOOD, by Paul Reiser. (Bantam, $19.95.) Essays on the ups and downs of marriage by the television star and stand-up comedian.
6
7
4
AN ANTHROPOLOGIST ON MARS, by Oliver Sacks. (Knopf, $24.) Seven tales about people who compensated for their neurological afflictions by constructing worlds of their own.
7
10
7
THE DISCIPLINE OF MARKET LEADERS, by Michael Treacy and Fred Wiersema. (Addison-Wesley, $25.) A discussion of competitive business strategies.
8
6
57
MIDNIGHT IN THE GARDEN OF GOOD AND EVIL, by John Berendt. (Random House, $23.) The mysterious death of a young man in Savannah, Ga.
9
8
9
I WANT TO TELL YOU, by O.J.
Simpson. (Little, Brown, $17.95.) The former football star, now on trial for murder, responds to letters he has received.
10
9
68
THE BOOK OF VIRTUES, by William J. Bennett. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $30.) Moral stories adapted from the Greeks, the Bible, folklore and elsewhere.
11
11
4
BEING DIGITAL, by Nicholas Negroponte. (Knopf, $23.) A discussion of ways computers will change our lives in the future.
12
15
19
THE WARREN BUFFETT WAY, by Robert G. Hagstrom Jr. (Wiley, $24.95.) An account of the career of the man said to be the world's most successful investor.
13
14
25
DON'T STAND TOO CLOSE TO A NAKED MAN, by Tim Allen. (Hyperion, $19.95.) Anecdotes and meditations on life by the star of "Home Improvement."
14
13
2
THE DIARY OF A YOUNG GIRL, by Anne Frank.
Edited by Otto H. Frank and Mirjam Pressler. (Doubleday, $25.) The "definitive edition."
15
25
JAMES HERRIOT'S CAT STORIES, by James Herriot. (St. Martin's, $16.95.) A collection of tales.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous
1
1
98
MEN ARE FROM MARS, WOMEN ARE FROM VENUS, by John Gray. (HarperCollins, $23.) Communicating.
2
2
8
THE BEARDSTOWN LADIES' COMMON-SENSE INVESTMENT GUIDE. (Godin/Hyperion, $19.95.) Tips for successful investing from 16 Illinois women.
3
4
FIRST THINGS FIRST, by Stephen R. Covey et al. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $23.) Ways to organize your life.
4
4
4
THE SEVEN SPIRITUAL LAWS OF SUCCESS, by Deepak Chopra. (Amber-Allen/New World Library, $12.95.) How to "generate wealth in all its forms."
Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending March 25, at 3,050 bookstores plus wholesalers serving 28,000 other retailers (gift shops, department stores, newsstands, supermarkets), statistically weighted to represent sales in all such outlets nationwide.
An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
And Bear in Mind (Editor's Choices of other recent books of particular interest) GENIUS IN DISGUISE: Harold Ross of The New Yorker, by Thomas Kunkel. (Random House, $25.) Forty-four years after Ross's death, this first full-scale biography of the creator of The New Yorker tries to account for the formidable editorial instincts, integrity and self-knowledge that underlay his success.
THE LAST GREAT FRENCHMAN: A Life of General de Gaulle, by Charles Williams. (Wiley, $30.) The career of the much-taller-than-life soldier whose political victories were based on a loathing for politicians and a willingness to chuck his allies when he thought they were wrong.
LONDON: A Social History, by Roy Porter. (Harvard University, $29.95.) The development of the Great Wen over 400 years, examined as a quasi-biological explosion that everyone feared and no one could curtail.
THE LOVES OF FAUSTYNA, by Nina FitzPatrick. (Penguin, paper, $9.95.) At a sign from heaven, the Polish heroine of this frolicky picaresque novel abandons her virginity; when martial law arrives in 1981, she opens serious negotiations with the powers of political darkness.
MOZART: A Life, by Maynard Solomon. (HarperCollins, $35.) A psychologically informed and often brilliant analysis of Mozart (and his father) that complicates rather than simplifies our understanding of Mozart.
As it should.
THE NEW VICTORIANS: A Young Woman's Challenge to the Old Feminist Order, by Rene Denfeld. (Warner, $21.95.) The author contends that established feminism, like its suffragist predecessor, has abandoned the quest for equality and turned to bashing male vices.
NEW YORK 1960: Architecture and Urbanism Between the Second World War and the Bicentennial, by Robert A.M.
Stern, Thomas Mellins and David Fishman. (Monacelli/Penguin, $125.) A huge book that takes account of the city's development as the world capital of finance and art; with extensive local descriptions.
A SCATTERING OF SALTS: Poems, by James Merrill. (Knopf, $20.) A collection, published weeks after his death, by a poet whose utter integrity suspended within it wit, irony, grief, frivolity, apparent frivolity, candor and reserve.
TOM PAINE: A Political Life, by John Keane. (Little, Brown, $27.95.) A good introduction to a difficult, often unlovable character and a highly effective propagandist of revolution.
A VOID, by Georges Perec. (Harvill/HarperCollins, $24.) The letter E never occurs in this 1969 French novel or in its translation by Gilbert Adair; what does occur is a wildly amusing feast of puzzles, mind games and rules broken just to exhibit their latent existence.
WAITING FOR THE DARK, WAITING FOR THE LIGHT, by Ivan Klima. (Grove, $21.) A fine, skeptical novel, published in Prague in 1993; its hero, a cameraman and would-be film maker, fears that the corruption of spirit induced under the old regime may be permanent.


Correction
Because of incorrect data supplied by Lipper Analytical Services, a chart on March 26 showing the track record for new mutual funds since 1989 omitted some funds started by Putnam, Smith Barney and Prudential.
A corrected chart appears on page 14.


Mystery Follows Fastest Runner
Who were those two men on the back of a photo pickup truck yesterday yelling split times, encouragement and perhaps instructions to the winner of the Trevira Twosome 10-mile run through Central Park, almost getting him disqualified?
As it turned out, El Arbi Khattabi of Morocco, a world-class runner, kept the victory and the $5,000 winner's purse.
He said he had never seen the men before.
He said he did not know what they were yelling or whether it was aimed at him.


'He Knows It By Heart!'
To the Editor:


Playing Good Cop-Bad Cop On School Financing
Leo F. Klagholz has served Governor Whitman well in many ways, from scouring education budgets for every last dime to embarking on a yearlong quest for a constitutionally valid definition of a complete public education.
But it is as the messenger of bad news that he helps the Governor most, because in the unfolding debate over state aid for local schools, that role has allowed Mrs.
Whitman to focus on the good news.
New Jerseyans spend $10,000 per student on average, more than any other state, which helps explain why property taxes are so high for many people, and why the approaching school budget vote, on April 18, will be so closely watched in Trenton.


McNamara Recalls, and Regrets, Vietnam
Robert S. McNamara, once a champion of the escalation of the Vietnam War, says in a memoir to be published in the coming week that he has now concluded that the United States "could and should have withdrawn from South Vietnam" in late 1963 after the assassination of President Ngo Dinh Diem or a year or so later.
In November 1963, 78 Americans had died in the war in Vietnam.
In late 1964, the total stood at 225.
By the war's end in 1975, it had passed 58,000.


Sotomayor Did It
To the Sports Editor:
If George Steinbrenner has any sense of decency, he will invite Judge Sonia Sotomayor to throw out the first ball at opening day ceremonies at Yankee Stadium later this month.
She accomplished what the owners, the players, their sad-faced lawyers, federal mediators and even President Clinton could not accomplish: She ended the baseball strike.
JAMES TACKACH  Narragansett, R.I.


Stuffed in a Fantasy
H  By Elizabeth Shepard. 160 pp. New York: Viking. $17.95.


Did Jeffrey MacDonald Murder His Family?
To the Editor:
Fred Bost and I are glad that our book "Fatal Justice: Reinvestigating the MacDonald Murders" convinced your reviewer, Joe Sharkey, that "the Mac Donald trial was a sorry spectacle of gross legal ineptitude" (March 19).
But in taking us to task for "courtroom advocacy" that is not, he insinuates, "painstakingly honest," Mr.
Sharkey then proceeds to get the facts (major and minor) wrong, and he seriously misrepresents our book.


Finally, a Plan. But Is It Moot?
After several lengthy public meetings and extensive discussion, Community Board 7 endorsed a design last week to relieve overcrowding in the subway station at Broadway and 72d Street.
But the community leaders' intensive efforts may ultimately be an exercise in wheel-spinning: rebuilding the station would cost $101 million under the plan chosen by the board, whose role is only advisory, and Transit Authority officials said they would not know until 1997 whether the State Legislature would provide the money for the project.
Moreover, the officials did not say whether they would accept the community board's recommendation.


Conversations / Clay Felker; He Created Magazines by Marrying New Journalism to Consumerism
FEW journalists have left a more enduring imprint on late 20th-century journalism -- an imprint that was unabashedly mimicked even as it was being mocked -- than Clay Felker.
The Sunday supplement that he transformed into New York magazine in 1968 became a prototype that heralded a highly personal brand of the New Journalism that was widely imitated by other publications and by television.
Mr.
Felker also edited The Village Voice, Esquire, Adweek and Manhattan inc.
But it was as founding editor of New York, until he lost control to Rupert Murdoch in 1977, that he shaped his public persona.


Don't Blame the Malls For Downtowns' Troubles
To the Editor:
Once again, shopping malls are made the scapegoat for the troubles of a downtown shopping area ("With Dreams of Croissants and Nova, South Orange Takes On the Malls," April 2).
Your article asserts that malls "less than 20 miles away" from South Orange, including ours, have pushed numerous retailers out of business.
But there are thriving downtown shopping areas much closer to our mall than South Orange: Millburn, Chatham, Madison, Maplewood and Summit.
Your article didn't mention that Manhattan, with its enormous array of retail establishments, is also less than 20 miles away.
Nor was there any reference to the millions of square feet of retail space that have appeared along Route 10 and Livingston and Prospect Avenues.


Rockies Open Their Wallet For Two Stars
Jerry McMorris of the Colorado Rockies has served recently as the lead negotiator in the baseball owners' effort to place a serious drag on player salaries.
Today McMorris's Rockies erupted in the most extravagant spending spree of their three-year history.
In the face of hefty free-agent unemployment and severe salary slashes for many players who have found jobs, the Rockies joined their high-revenue, big-spending brethren by committing $35.15 million worth of contracts to the free agents Larry Walker and Bill Swift.


A Silent Message To Baseball
To the Sports Editor:
I wanted to find a way for baseball fans to show their disdain toward both the owners and players.
My plan would take place on opening day in every baseball city, after the national anthem is played, and all fans would remain standing and turn our backs to the field for the first inning.
This would show our feelings to the players and owners.
No booing, just our backs and silence.
DAVID B. NUSS  Atlanta


To Protect and Serve (and Shop): Police Escort the Elderly
May Ricca and her friends at the Ridgewood Bushwick Senior Center now go shopping under a police escort.
To grow old in Bushwick is to be among the most vulnerable, defenseless members of a dangerous neighborhood.
It means worrying about robberies and scams, and sometimes worse: a 78-year-old man was shot to death there in December.


On the Roads: 9 Spots to Steer Clear Of
A look at trouble spots you may encounter in the next week -- or month, or months -- courtesy of the State Department of Transportation.
1.
ROUTE 208, southbound, in Fair Lawn: no left turns onto McBride Avenue.
Detour posted.
2.
INTERSTATE 287, northbound, between Route 24 and Interstate 80 in Parsippany: left lane closed through October to build a car-pool lane.


The New 'New Jersey': Brickbats and Hallelujahs
To the Editor:
What a breath of fresh air!
This new section seems to care about life here.
For the first time in what seems decades, the section truly deserves the name The New York Times.
RALPH COPLEMAN Lawrenceville


April 2-8: He Took at the Office; United Way's Head Guilty, But Giving Goes On
A Federal jury found William Aramony, the long-time president of United Way of America, guilty of taking more than $600,000 from the charity and using it for vacations and other luxuries for himself and a teen-age girlfriend.
Mr.
Aramony's attorney said he will appeal.
Still ahead is a suit by the New York Attorney General charging Mr.
Aramony and another former executive with breach of fiduciary duty.
United Way of America is to unveil a plan to improve both its image and its fund-raising.
Opinion surveys show that confidence in United Way "has pretty well recovered," said Elaine Chao, president of the organization, which provides marketing and other services to local United Way drives.
Fund-raising has also recovered.


Expos Shedding Stars Whatever the System
Obviously, the direction the National League East race had been expected to take has undergone drastic revision with the trio of trades the Montreal Expos made last week.
The race, however, already had been affected, and the three trades only redirected the impact.
The reverberations were also felt in the American League East.
The Expos traded Marquis Grissom, their base-stealing center fielder, to division rival Atlanta; John Wetteland, their No. 1 relief pitcher, to the Yankees, and Ken Hill, their No. 1 starting pitcher, to St.
Louis.
The subtraction of those players eliminates the Expos, the best team in the major leagues last season, from N.L.
East contention.


New Name Earns Chance To Battle Against His Idols
The new name on the Masters leader board has a boyish, spunky face.
Brian Henninger is the name, golf is his game.
"When I have an opportunity to win; I have some gut ability," he was saying after his four-under-par 68 tied Ben Crenshaw for the lead at 206 going into Sunday's final round.
"I've idolized all these guys, but I'm not afraid to compete against anybody."


'Shlemiel' Continues A Path to Broadway
WHEN "Sunset Boulevard" takes this season's Tony Award for best musical, you can blame it on Shlemiel.
With no competition to speak of -- except "Smokey Joe's Cafe," a cluster of pop songs ("Hound Dog" and "Yakety Yak") of the 50's and 60's -- the show about Norma Desmond, a mad loser, is a predetermined winner.
Only Shlemiel, the fool, might have proved that Andrew Lloyd Webber's extravagant musical is not fool-proof.
"Shlemiel the First," a small musical that has amassed a large measure of adoration, was in place for an opening night on Broadway April 26 at the Neil Simon Theater.
But that was not meant to be.


Ideas &amp; Trends: Faster. Farther. Higher.; Faking It on Broadway
THE most powerful man on Broadway has some trouble keeping good help.
It's easy to see why.
Sir Andrew Lloyd Webber is, of course, the composer of "Jesus Christ Superstar," "Joseph and the Amazing Technicolor Dreamcoat," "Cats," "Evita," "Starlight Express," "The Phantom of the Opera," "Aspects of Love" and "Sunset Boulevard." He's also the owner of a media conglomerate, the Really Useful Group, that produces his shows, owns theaters in Europe, is moving into movies and had a pre-tax profit of more than $70 million last year.


County's Congress Members Speak Out
FOR members of both parties, the first 100 days of the 104th Congress have spelled change -- and the experiences of the four United States Representatives from Westchester are no exception.
At the Capitol here last week, the veteran Republican member of the county's contingent reported that he was finally realizing a long-cherished dream after 22 years.
Two incumbent Democrats said they had discovered, embarrassingly at times, what it felt like to be on the minority side of the aisle.
And a Republican newcomer to Congress observed that she could not have picked a better time to come to this city.
For Benjamin Gilman, a Republican who has served the 20th Congressional District since 1972, last November's Republican sweep meant that he could finally ascend to the chairmanship of the House Foreign Affairs Committee, a post he had coveted for many years as a member of the minority party.
A middle-of-the road Republican, Mr.
Gilman said the last three months in Congress had given him "the opportunity to shape policy rather than just react."


Appeal of the Shade-Loving Barrenwort
TO be goofy about a particular plant is, well, goofy.
But gardeners are allowed certain enthusiasms.
Take, for example, Epimedium.
Few gardeners know this plant by its common name, barrenwort, and that probably is a good thing.
The plant is far from barren and could be considered the perfect ground cover.
The reasons for extolling this plant are many, but probably its most praiseworthy quality is that it is easy to grow.
Epimedium makes few demands on those who set it out, literally growing on its own and in the shade, too.
For landscape designers especially, it is one of the most useful groundcovers around.


A Turn of the Screw: Masters Gets Even Tighter
The Masters got wound a whole lot tighter today.
On a perfect spring afternoon, with the Augusta National golf course bathed in light and with roars rolling across the greensward like waves on a shoreline, the tournament took a historic turn.
In classic Masters fashion, a story line for the ages emerged from the shadows.
The most obscure player in the field, Brian Henninger, who got here on the basis of a victory in a rain-shortened, 36-hole tournament, is tied for the lead with one of the most popular Masters champions ever -- Ben Crenshaw.


The Catch of the Day Wasn't Always Fish
THE first of our trout-fishing flies had barely touched the waters of the Burano River when down it came: rain.
Not just a drizzle or a shower, but great, permanent sheets of water that first scarred the stream with a frenzied acne, then turned it into a cappuccino torrent of mud.
The day's fishing had hardly begun, and now it was over.
This being Italy, though, there was a consolation prize -- a prize better, some would say, than any old fish.
The Burano runs just north of the delightful medieval town of Gubbio with its limestone turrets overshadowed by the 14th-century sweep of the Consuls' Palace.
And there, in the Taverna del Lupo, was some of the best food Italy can provide: porcini mushrooms delicately laced with black truffle in a light, balsamo sauce (made with balsamic vinegar); panzerotti, a kind of pasta, with ricotta and spinach; rare roast beef grilled with rosemary, ice cream served in crepes surrounded by raspberries and red currants in their own juice.


A New Weapon In an Old War -- A special report.; Latest Tactic Against Abortion: Accusing Doctors of Malpractice
Dr.
Brian Finkel, whose practice consists mostly of performing abortions, sounds matter of fact when he talks about the bullet-proof window in his office, the bullet-proof vest and helmet he wears walking to his car, the guns he carries, the years of demonstrations outside his office and the threats he has received.
But he sounds thoroughly outraged -- and, in his own bluff way, hurt -- when he gets on to the subject of John Joseph Jakubczyk, general counsel to Arizona Right to Life, and the newest anti-abortion strategy: malpractice suits against the doctors who perform abortions.


Women's Sports Get a Boost
There is joy in women's sports: Connecticut's basketball team, led by forward Rebecca Lobo, is now the reigning national champion.
The Lady Huskies' thrilling 70-64 comeback victory over Tennessee last Sunday completed a trifecta of great moments in the National Collegiate Athletic Association women's tournament.
Last year, North Carolina's Charlotte Smith drained a 3-pointer with seven-tenths of a second left to beat Louisiana Tech.
In 1993, Texas Tech's Sheryl Swoopes scored 47 points to lead the Red Raiders to an 84-82 victory over Ohio State.


Adding a Canadian Colt To Triple Crown Picture
At the Eastern end of the road to Kentucky, the two archrivals, Thunder Gulch and Suave Prospect, were working up to their third confrontation next Saturday in the Blue Grass Stakes at Keeneland in Kentucky.
But they may be upstaged by last year's Canadian juvenile champion, Talkin Man, who became one of the hottest horses on the Triple Crown trail when he won the Gotham Stakes by seven lengths.
Talkin Man, who made his 1995 debut two weeks ago, will race at Aqueduct again in the Wood Memorial next Saturday while Thunder Gulch and Suave Prospect duke it out in Kentucky.
Then all three colts figure to show up for the Kentucky Derby three weeks later, where they will be joined by Afternoon Deelites and Timber Country, the Western stars who held their own shootout yesterday in the Santa Anita Derby.


Mexican Government and Rebels to Meet Today to Prepare New Round of Peace Talks
Two months after army troops drove peasant insurgents from territory they controlled in the southern state of Chiapas, Government and rebel representatives are to meet again on Sunday to prepare for a new round of peace talks.
In a brief statement issued just before midnight on Friday, the Mexican Interior Ministry said the two sides had agreed to meet in San Miguel, a village that was formerly considered a stronghold of the rebel Zapatista National Liberation Army.


Please Pass A Wing, Boggs Is Back
Wade Boggs sneaked into the clubhouse here late Wednesday night, sat at his locker and stared at the shiny helmets, the unused bats and the rows of Yankee uniforms.
He peeked at the name plates scattered throughout the large room, from Mattingly to Tartabull to McDowell.
He did not stay long, just long enough to retrieve the feeling he had lost.
Baseball is back, so Boggs is back, so scribble a bunch of hits in the scorebook and expect another .300 average.
Those are some of the thoughts he contemplated during his visit to the empty clubhouse, a visit that gave him an early idea of how it felt to be back working and hitting.
The warm feeling had been absent for almost eight months.


Did Jeffrey MacDonald Murder His Family?
To the Editor:
Prince Beasley, a retired Fayetteville, N.C., police officer, and I were the first to obtain a signed confession from Helena Stoeckley, the woman in the white floppy hat seen standing on the street corner by a military policeman while he was en route to the murder scene.


Was the Pilot Drunk? DNA Might Tell
Of 975 pilots killed in plane crashes in the United States in 1989 and 1990, the Federal Aviation Administration found alcohol in tissue samples from about 8 percent.
But how many of those 79 pilots were actually flying under the influence?
About a quarter definitely were and about a quarter were not, according to a re-analysis of tissue samples of the pilots, nearly all of whom were private pilots in general aviation planes.
But for 36 of the 79, no clear determination was possible.


Allison Bandier and Jeffrey Koffman
Allison Caren Bandier, a daughter of Denise LeFrak and Martin N. Bandier, both of New York, was married last evening to Jeffrey Paul Koffman, a son of Ruthanne and Burton Koffman of Binghamton, N.Y.
Rabbi Elihu Schagrin officiated at the Pierre in New York.
The bride and the bridegroom, both 30, graduated from the University of Pennsylvania.


Islanders Get a Point And Maybe Muller, Too
Yes, the Islanders played a game here tonight.
And they nearly won, thanks to the second stellar performance in as many nights by goaltender Tommy Soderstrom, who made 41 saves.
But Florida's Jason Woolley ricocheted a shot off Soderstrom with 12.5 seconds remaining in regulation, and the Islanders (11-20-5) had to settle for a 2-2 tie.


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
PLAYS AND MORE
A full plate of theater, art and music is available at the Schoolhouse in Croton Falls today.
Five one-act plays by members of the new Schoolhouse Writers Workshop will be presented at 1 P.M. under the direction of Douglas Michael.


Bookshelf
MISOSO: Once Upon a Time Tales From Africa.
Retold by Verna Aardema.
Illustrated by Reynold Ruffins.
Apple Soup/ Knopf. $18. (Ages 5 and up) A dozen traditional stories from the perimeter of Africa south of the Sahara Desert, each with an implicit moral, have been gracefully retold and given handsome, stylized illustrations.
With a map, glossaries and a bibliography.


Celebrating Feminism's Superwoman
SHE was one of the most famous people of her time -- "Miss Anthony of the World" -- the most popular woman in the United States, feted by presidents, idolized by the press.
Her autograph sold for hard currency and newborns were named after her.
She was deemed suitable for comparison only to male icons like Napoleon and Bismarck.
A certified saint and visionary by most accounts, she was an international sensation who could reliably bring down the house wherever she went -- and she went far and wide.


The Elusive Women Who Inhabit The Quirky Films of Hal Hartley
LIKE OTHER ACTRESSES associated with the work of a particular director, the women in Hal Hartley's films seem to share a family resemblance on screen.
Think of Mia Farrow and Diane Keaton before the lens of Woody Allen or Liv Ullmann and Bibi Andersson vis-a-vis Ingmar Bergman.
If Mr.
Allen's women are high-strung and Mr.
Bergman's ripe, Mr.
Hartley's are beautiful but elusive, curiously self-contained.
They avoid the camera's eye.
They move as if through water.
They may be seething inside, but on the surface they are composed.
Mr.
Hartley is no ordinary film maker.
His timing is offbeat, his narratives off center.
He often directs his actors as precisely as if he were choreographing them, down to the tilt of their head and the angle of their gaze.
His protagonists are as likely to be women as men.
And while the men are often furiously driven by sorrow, anger or lust, the women are frequently cool and preoccupied, and always intelligent.


Andrea L. Paul, Philip A. Mintz
Andrea Lynn Paul, a daughter of Judith and Herbert Paul of North Woodmere, L.I., was married last evening to Philip Adam Mintz, the son of Rayna Ragonetti of New York.
Rabbi Brooks Sussman performed the ceremony at Temple Israel in Lawrence, L.I.
Mrs.
Mintz is a vice president of Chemical Bank in New York.
She graduated from Emory University and received an M.B.A. from New York University, where her husband is studying for an M.B.A.
Her father is a tax lawyer in New York and a trustee of N.Y.U.


NEW YORKERS &amp; CO.
Today's Man Clothier Adds An Outlet in Mid-Manhattan Today's Man, the discount clothier, opened a store on Thursday at Fifth Avenue and 44th Street, just blocks away from stores that have dominated the men's fashion market.
The company hopes its 25,000-square-foot store will capture its customers from Brooks Brothers, Paul Stuart, F. R. Tripler and Wallachs, all of which are nearby.


Amy Segal, Philippe Heilberg
Amy Jill Segal, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Myron Segal of New York, was married last evening to Philippe M. Heilberg, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Jean-Claude Heilberg of Forest Hills, Queens.
Cantor Erno Grosz officiated at the Woodcrest Country Club in Muttontown, L.I.
The bride, 30, graduated from Emory University.
Until recently she was a sales and advertising manager at the Premier Mill Corporation, a manufacturer of chemical processing equipment in Reading, Pa.
Her father is president of the company.


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
'ART DECO STYLE'
"Art Deco Style," at the Wadsworth Atheneum in Hartford, might be regarded by some as a women's exhibition, but how can men resist these Erte illustrations of seductive ladies of the 1920's and 30's poured into the slinkiest of satin gowns?
Ten sketches by the costume and fashion designer, illustrator and a premier fashion historian of the period are the centerpiece of the show.
In addition, there are many examples of Art Deco furniture, decorative arts, jewelry and fashion accessories, including 50 beaded, mesh and otherwise luxurious evening bags.
A photo mural of the Bushnell's interior is featured, recently cited by the Art Deco Society of New York as a prime example of the genre.


Real Justice
To the Sports Editor:
Let the exhibition games begin, said Judge Sonia Sotomayor on March 31.
She didn't use those exact words but that is what she meant by her slap-on-the-wrist injunction.
She has now given permission to Bud Selig and Donald Fehr to posture for another five months (at full prices for tickets and full salaries) until Fehr pulls his serfs off the field again -- one minute before the playoffs begin.


PLAY MISTY
Like toddlers, the youthful ingredients of early spring are painfully malleable, requiring compassion and judiciousness, along with a firm hand.
The most precious of the season's offerings, fiddlehead ferns and shad roe, aren't even fully gestated, while soft-shell crabs and crayfish are in the process of becoming something else.
An overbearing cook can wreak havoc on youth, leaving the tender harbingers of spring old before their time.
Enter steaming, a brutal but mercifully brief technique that enables the cook to be both generous and firm.
And so, with determination aforethought, place an inch of liquid in the bottom of a pot and bring it to a vigorous boil.
Arrange the ingredients on a rack, suspended above the bubbling vapor and cover -- firmly -- to let nature take its course.
Luxuriating in such a mist is more powerful than total submersion.
It is hotter, it moves more rapidly, it has a determined fury.
The broth will absorb nearly nothing of what it cooks; rather, it warms the food in its own essence, making it more of what it is.


Agassi Will Move Up to No. 1 Tomorrow
ANDRE AGASSI is no longer chasing No. 1; it's now his turn at the top.
The ATP Tour has confirmed the 24-year-old Las Vegan will be No. 1 when the computer ranking is released tomorrow.
He has a 187-point lead over PETE SAMPRAS, his Davis Cup teammate who had held the top ranking since September 1993.
The ranking caps Agassi's rise from wrist surgery and a ranking in the 30's early last year to his winning the last two Grand Slam tournaments, the United States and Australian Opens.


2 Bridge Teams Play in Vanderbilt Final
Two long-shot foursomes survived close semifinals here on Friday for the Vanderbilt Team Championship at the American Contract Bridge League Spring Nationals here.
George Steiner of Seattle, Joe Silver of Montreal, Ron Gerard of White Plains and Mike Kamil of Teaneck, N.J., barely survived two earlier rounds.
At the midpoint of the semifinal against a squad led by Rita Shugart of Pebble Beach, Calif., they led by 2 imps.
After the third quarter they trailed by 2, then pulled away to win by 17.


Looking at the Poor in a Gilded Frame
THE POOR ARE ALWAYS WITH US AND almost always visible, yet not always seen.
The task of bringing them to public attention has repeatedly fallen to writers and photographers.
Nineteenth-century novelists like Dickens and Balzac captured the lives of those who were indentured to the Industrial Revolution and revealed them to those who had profited from it.
At the end of the century, photographers stepped in, but in the aftermath of World War I, as prosperity rapidly advanced in America, poverty retreated from sight once more.
The Depression brought it roaring back, with photographers in its train.
Another world war produced another period of prosperity and silence, and then, in 1962, Michael Harrington made the poor visible again by pointing out their invisibility in "The Other America." Today, of course, the urban poor are always in view.
Some say too much so.


Imagine All the Troubles You Don't Have
To the Editor:
Sherwin B. Nuland's review of my book "In Love With Daylight" (March 5) was such an agreeable piece of work that I hesitate to disturb it.
But there's a serious misreading of intent toward the end that maybe can be fixed without too much bloodshed.


Prospect of a Deadlock Hovers Over Simpson Trial
Jeanette Harris, the sixth and latest juror to be banished from the O. J. Simpson case, spent Friday backpedaling furiously from her description of irregularities in the jury room.
But one of her statements remained un amended, and to many lawyers following the case, prescient: her prediction of a hung jury.
Prosecutors have described Mrs.
Harris as a close-minded malcontent, so convinced of Mr.
Simpson's innocence that she blocked out all dissonant information, a woman whose words are entitled to little weight.


Of Romeo, Juliet and 'the School God Forgot'
Lord Capulet stands awkwardly on the small and shabby stage of P.S. 14 in Jersey City, a school surrounded by a high chain-link fence, like a fortress.
He has discarded baggy jeans for a floor-sweeping velvet-like robe with a faux-fur collar and cuffs.
His face is covered with pancake makeup.
A couple of boys hanging around the auditorium snicker and hoot.


All for the Cause of Peace
A dinner commemorates the 1994 treaty between Jordan and Israel, gives out awards and raises money to send children to camp, April 4.


Q. &amp; A.
A Fee For a Check On Credit Q I recently moved to a rent-stabilized apartment in New York City.
Before I signed the lease, the landlord required me to submit a check for one month's security, one month's rent and an additional $150 for a credit check.
I had also submitted $75 to a different landlord for a credit check for an apartment I did not take.


Think You're Safe At Home? Maybe Not
ANYONE disappointed by a stock fund's performance early this year might do well to check its international holdings.
Domestic stock funds have on average less than 6 percent of their assets invested abroad, and that portion is down from a year ago, according to Morningstar Inc., a fund research company in Chicago.


Writing on the Wall: A Birthday Treat for All
To The Editor:
Today, belatedly, I came across your Jan. 22. article, "The Birthday Boom." I am horrified!
What has become of creative, interactive play, not with computers, but between parents and children?
What has happened to parties where the children participate?
Spending as much money as the Joneses is not the issue.


MY MOTHER IS SPEAKING FROM THE DESERT
Is it possible that what Gordon views as her mother's "devotion to rot" is, in fact, an acceptance on her mother's part of the inevitable deterioration of her body and the winding down of her life?
A devotion, perhaps, to truth.
If ever I find myself in so precarious and scary a place, physically and psychically, as does Anna Gordon, I would only hope that no loved one of mine would be emotionally objective enough to render so analytical and harsh an assessment of me.


Miss Rudnitsky And Mr. Haftel
Jennifer Rudnitsky, the daughter of Shana and Howard Rudnitsky of Glen Rock, N.J., was married last Sunday to Benjamin Hugh Haftel, the son of Sandy and Bob Haftel of Allendale, N.J.
Rabbi H. Philip Berkowitz officiated at the Chanticler in Short Hills, N.J.
Mrs.
Haftel, 27, is a supervisor in benefits administration at Lever Brothers in New York.
She graduated from Dickinson College.
Her father is a senior editor of Forbes magazine in New York.


Slavery Denied Legal Marriage to Blacks
To the Editor:
Re "Bringing Slavery's Long Shadow to the Light" (front page, April 2): In the North American colonies, and the United States, unlike Roman Catholic areas to the south, slaves were never allowed to marry.


AN ABORTIONIST'S CREDO
I hate to take issue with anyone as courageous as an abortion provider like Dr.
Elizabeth Karlin.
But I winced at her statement: "There is only one reason I've ever heard for having an abortion: the desire to be a good mother. Women know when we don't have the resources to be the mother we expect to be."
Surely, there must be thousands of women who end their pregnancies knowing that they could be fine parents if they had to be.
The whole point of legal abortion is that they don't have to.
It may sound bald, but simply not wanting a child is as legitimate a reason for abortion as not being able to provide or care for one; a woman need not have a purer, more altruistic motive.


U.S. Keeps On Urging Russia On Iran Deal
The Clinton Administration has repeatedly warned Moscow in recent months that unless it cancels a project to build nuclear reactors in Iran, the United States will drop plans for nuclear cooperation that Russia badly wants, senior Administration officials said today.
This past week, Russian officials brushed aside these warnings and insisted that they would go ahead with the reactor project.
But Administration officials said they hoped the warnings, together with a growing campaign of pressure and inducements, would persuade Russia to announce plans to cancel the Iranian deal when President Clinton visits Moscow in May.


WEIRD SCIENCE: Scent of Pumpkin Pie
It's common knowledge that smell and sexuality are linked.
That's why there's a perfume industry.
But until now, the importance of food aromas to romance has received scant attention.
Dr.
Alan R. Hirsch, director of the Smell and Taste Treatment and Research Foundation in Chicago, has determined that certain odors can increase blood flow to the penis, contributing to erections.


And Then the Leading Lady Got Laryngitis
IT could have been "Macbeth," the theater's all-time symbol of the ominous.
Only this time the harbingers of bad luck were conspiring against the Two River Theater Company's production of "The Heidi Chronicles."
But Wendy Wasserstein's much lauded play has grown accustomed to winning.
And so "Heidi" overcame the hollow sound that threatened to muffle it, the confining stage that was extended to accommodate it and the makeshift structure set up to light it.
All in an unwelcoming 700-seat Monmouth University auditorium -- just the spot for a lecture, but hardly the intimate setting the company craves.


Amtrak's Broadway Limited Is to Become Literally That
No. 29, the railroaders called it.
The big train, the fastest train, hauled by a 480,000-pound, 4,620-horsepower, 20-wheel locomotive striped with real gold leaf.
It rumbled out of Pennsylvania Station at 6 P.M. and into the night at speeds as high as 100 miles an hour, down through North Philadelphia, along the Main Line, through Paoli and Lancaster and Harrisburg and through the Alleghenies to Pittsburgh, then west for 907 miles to a rendezvous with Chicago at 9 A.M.
It was the pride of the Pennsylvania Railroad: the Broadway Limited.


The Upstaging Of High Society
SOCIALITES are an endangered species.
A few years ago, women like Ann Getty, Pat Buckley, C. Z. Guest and Carolyne Roehm were the stars of glossy magazines and tabloid gossip columns, providing ordinary citizens a window on the prerogatives -- and peccadilloes -- of some of America's most privileged citizens.


The Renaissance Girl Of Montclair High
NAME Stephanie Greenwood.
SCHOOL Montclair High, senior.
S.A.T.
SCORES Verbal, 800; math, 800 -- perfect scores.
Of the 1,836,000 students who took the Scholastic Assessment Test in 1993-94, 5 girls and 20 boys received perfect scores.
GRADES Straight A's.
LEADERSHIP President of school chapter of National Organization for Women.
EXTRACURRICULAR ACTIVITY Black belt in tae kwan do.
MUSICAL INSTRUMENT Bassoon. Best solo at Toronto Music Festival.
COLLEGE STUDY PLAN Biochemistry, literature, international relations, philosophy, languages.
CAREER GOAL Something uncorporate.
HERO"My mom. She always demanded the best from us."
PERSON SHE WOULD LIKE TO MEET Joycelyn Elders, former Surgeon General.
QUOTE "I'd like to ask Hillary Clinton where she's been for the last year. She's been quiet." ROSALIE STEMER


A Fund-Raiser in Rye With Pataki as a Guest
THE Buick Classic 5000 business group invited the Governor to lunch.
And he has accepted.
Gov.
George E. Pataki will be the special guest at the Classic's kickoff lunch, which will begin a major fund-raising effort for the benefit of local hospitals.


Man Held in Killings Of Mother, Friend And Ex-Girlfriend
A man from Burlington Township, N.J., was arrested yesterday as the lone suspect in a 6-hour killing spree on Friday that left his mother, his former girlfriend and a former friend dead, county prosecutors said.
Sgt.
Jack Smith, a spokesman for the Burlington County Prosecutor, Stephen J. Raymond, said investigators theorized that jealousy provoked the slayings by Hugh D. Miller, 30, whose former girlfriend had begun seeing someone else.


Rangers Allege That Nordiques Tampered With Zubov
Pierre Lacroix, general manager of the Quebec Nordiques, has denied that he tampered with Sergei Zubov of the Rangers by asking Zubov's agent if Zubov would accept a trade to the Nordiques.
"I never did anything like that," Lacroix said from Ottawa, where the Nordiques played the Senators last night.


AN ABORTIONIST'S CREDO
Elizabeth's Karlin's "An Abortionist's Credo" (Hers, March 19) was a splendid essay, thoughtful and incisive.
But I am immensely frustrated that it took this long for the news media to reveal even offhandedly that many anti-choice protesters picket clinics one day, have an abortion the next and immediately return to the front lines to prevent others from using this service.
This practice has been common knowledge among Ob-Gyns for years.
We need some enterprising investigative reporter to "out" these hypocrites in a front-page expose.
SARA WATSON Vienna, Va.


Norris Lands Blow Right To His Career
Terry Norris was adamant that he never heard the bell.
And so he did what he was trained to do tonight.
When he saw the inviting, unprotected chin of Luis Santana, the World Boxing Council superwelterweight champion -- Norris unloaded a punch.
And with that shot, Norris completed an unenviable double: for the second time in two fights against the Dominican, he was disqualified.
Yes, Norris lost the title last November in Mexico City when he whacked Santana in the back of the head.
Santana was carted off in a stretcher that fight and heard himself pronounced the new champion while on his back.


Corrections
The Streetscapes column on March 19 omitted the credit for the photograph of the Metropolitan Museum of Art in 1880.
The picture was from the collection of Herbert Mitchell.


Complex Relations


OPULENT SIMPLICITY
The pendulum of style swings back and forth between excess and minimalism.
And the extravagant luxuries of the 1980's were supposed to yield to the pared-down 90's.
It hasn't happened.
Rather than settling on a middling path, today's most inspiring interiors draw from both extremes.
Indeed, the marriage of ornateness and spareness strikes an original pose.
A neo-baroque mirror propped on a mantle or a gilded table leg on a bare wood floor is idiosyncratic, not automatic.
A lone 18th-century chair can be sculpture.
In these complex times, what could be more fitting than the contradictory and rewarding impulses of opulent simplicity?


Sotomayor Did It
To the Sports Editor:
If George Steinbrenner has any sense of decency, he will invite Judge Sonia Sotomayor to throw out the first ball at opening day ceremonies at Yankee Stadium later this month.
She accomplished what the owners, the players, their sad-faced lawyers, federal mediators and even President Clinton could not accomplish: She ended the baseball strike.
JAMES TACKACH  Narragansett, R.I.


Conceptual Gallery Space: A (Very) Different Way to Look at Art
Just as dusk settled over the brick hulk of the New York Security building on Laight Street in TriBeCa last Wednesday, figures in black began walking in, nodding to the guard, and taking the elevator to the fifth floor.
They passed through bare gray corridors lined with the locked, brightly painted corrugated doors of ministorage units.
Their destination: the 7-by-8 foot locker-turned-gallery of Caroline Nathusius, a German art dealer.


Berlin Hotels Bracing For a Christo Invasion
HOTEL managers here are accustomed to surges of visitors who come to attend conferences and cultural events, but the pressure will be especially intense this summer.
Three million to five million visitors are expected as the artist Christo wraps the historic Reichstag building, once and future home of the German Parliament, in 807,000 square feet of silver polypropylene fabric.
"All hotels will be full, and we have not ruled out the possibility of taking special steps like using school gymnasiums and other facilities to house visitors," said Ulrich Roloff-Momin, a senior city official.


Votes in Congress
Tally Last Week in Connecticut, New Jersey and New York  House
1.
Tax Cuts: Vote on a proposal sponsored by Democrats that would provide $32 billion in tax cuts over five years.
Rejected 313 to 119, April 5.
2.
Tax Cuts: Vote on a Republican plan that would cut taxes by $189 billion over five years.
Approved 246 to 188, April 5.
1
2
Connecticut
1. Kennelly (D)
Yea
Nay
2. Gejdenson (D)
Yea
Nay
3. DeLauro (D)
Yea
Nay
4. Shays (R)
Nay
Yea
5. Franks (R)
Nay
Yea
6. Johnson (R)
Nay
Yea
New Jersey
1. Andrews (D)
Yea
Yea
2. LoBiondo (R)
Nay
Yea
3. Saxton (R)
Nay
Yea
4. Smith (R)
Nay
Yea
5. Roukema (R)
Nay
Yea
6. Pallone (D)
Yea
Yea
7. Franks (R)
Nay
Yea
8. Martini (R)
Nay
Yea
9. Torricelli (D)
Yea
Yea
10. Payne (D)
Yea
Nay
11. Frelinghuysen (R)
Nay
Yea
12. Zimmer (R)
Nay
Yea
13. Menendez (D)
Yea
Nay
New York
1. Forbes (R)
Nay
Yea
2. Lazio (R)
Nay
Yea
3. King (R)
Nay
Yea
4. Frisa (R)
Nay
Yea
5. Ackerman (D)
Yea
Nay
6. Flake (D)
Yea
Nay
7. Manton (D)
Yea
Yea
8. Nadler (D)
Yea
Nay
9. Schumer (D)
Yea
Nay
10. Towns (D)
Yea
Nay
11. Owens (D)
Yea
Nay
12. Velazquez (D)
Yea
Nay
13. Molinari (R)
Nay
Yea
14. Maloney (D)
Yea
Nay
15. Rangel (D)
Nay
Nay
16. Serrano (D)
Yea
Nay
17. Engel (D)
Yea
Nay
18. Lowey (D)
Yea
Nay
19. Kelly (R)
Nay
Yea
20. Gilman (R)
Nay
Yea
21. McNulty (D)
Nay
Nay
22. Solomon (R)
Nay
Yea
23. Boehlert (R)
Nay
Yea
24. McHugh (R)
Nay
Yea
25. Walsh (R)
Nay
Yea
26. Hinchey (D)
Yea
Nay
27. Paxon (R)
Nay
Yea
28. Slaughter (D)
Yea
Nay
29. LaFalce (D)
Nay
Nay
30. Quinn (R)
Nay
Yea
31. Houghton (R)
Nay
Nay
KEY: (A) Absent or did not vote; (P) Present.


Destination: Spring; 5 Restless Writers Head Outside And Report Back On What They Found There
Whatever the calendar says, spring really begins with the first irresistible urge to head outside.
Our senses quickened more by instinct than the outward signposts of the season, we shed the deadness of winter and we get going.
Barely greening trails, muddy as often as not, are blazed anew by the first hikers of the year.
Roads and pathways fill with runners and cyclists sharpening their skills for a long race or rally, or just airing out their lungs at long last.
Shore towns, shut down tight just yesterday, begin to primp for a summer that's still months away.
At nurseries and garden stores, long lines form at cash registers as suburban farmers dream of harvesting the perfect tomato.
Weekday road warriors get into their cars, roll down the windows, hopefully, and just drive, heading nowhere but away.


Learning From Luxury
There's something to be said for the gilt-and-marble excesses of the robber baron era.
They left a legacy of exceptional workmanship that craftsmen are rediscovering.
The new furnishings on these pages range from the lavish to the lean.
But, as the crown chair above suggests, even opulence now has a sense of humor.
Luxury isn't about wealth, but a wealth of details.
The formal gardens at Vizcaya, a 1916 Italianate villa in Miami, provide a suitable backdrop for luxe contemporary lighting.
The candelabrum's patina is a 17th-century touch, but the serpentine shape lends a 1990's cartoon spin.
With its sleek neck and bulbous base, the silvery lamp at right is a minimalist's vision of the Baroque.


Smith Receives a Vote of Confidence (Uh-Oh)
Just in case anyone is wondering, Neil Smith is welcome to return next season as president and general manager of the Rangers.
"Absolutely," said Dave Checketts, Smith's boss and president of Madison Square Garden.
"It's not a question with me."


Foreign Affairs; Porgy, Bess &amp; NATO
Secretary of State Dean Acheson, in his memoir "Present at the Creation," tells the story of the day in 1949 when the founding countries of NATO gathered in Washington to sign the NATO treaty, obligating them to come to one another's defense if attacked by the Soviets.
Even as he initialed the treaty, though, Mr.
Acheson wondered whether the allies' willingness to sign in Washington would be matched with a willingness to fight together in Europe.
Was this treaty worth the paper it was written on?
He wrote: "The signing ceremony was dignified and colorful" but "the Marine Band added a note of unexpected realism as we waited for the ceremony to begin by playing two songs from the currently popular musical play 'Porgy and Bess' -- 'I've Got Plenty of Nothin' ' and 'It Ain't Necessarily So.' "


Nets Win With a Makeshift Lineup and Mirrors
The Nets thought about it for a while, throwing up awkward shots in the first quarter and letting yet another of the league's poorer teams steal from them in the backcourt.
It had all the earmarks of another trip to the corner store, dollar in hand, lucky numbers swimming in their heads.
But Sleepy Floyd noticed a subtle change early on.


Miss Pelosi And Mr. Prowda
Nancy Corinne Pelosi, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Paul F. Pelosi of San Francisco, was married there yesterday to Theodore Jeffrey Prowda, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Theodore J. Prowda of Sherrill, N.Y.
The Rev.
Bruno Segatta performed the ceremony at the Roman Catholic Church of St.
Vincent de Paul.
Mrs.
Prowda, who is called Nancy Corinne, is the director of group sales at the Fairmont Hotel in San Jose, Calif.
She graduated from Mount Vernon College.
Her mother, Nancy Pelosi, a Democrat, is a member of the United States House of Representatives.
The bride's father is the president of Financial Leasing Services, a venture capital company in San Francisco.


When Your Hat Has Hair of Its Own
WHEN is a hat a hairstyle? When the hair is the hat.
Using lengths of braided hair, both human and synthetic, Daisy Curbeon fashions hats in a multitude of colors, shapes and sizes at the Curbeon Look, her hair-weaving and wig salon at 45 East 42d Street in Manhattan.


Michele D'Adamo, William Gartland
Michele Lorraine D'Adamo, an associate at the New York law firm of Skadden, Arps, Slate, Meagher &amp; Flom, was married yesterday to William Henry Gartland, an associate at Lehman Brothers, the investment bank, in New York.
The Rev.
Salvatore B. Matarazzo performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at the Church of St.
Thomas More in New York.
Mrs.
Gartland, 30, graduated from Georgetown University and received her law degree from Fordham University.
She is the daughter of R. Raleigh and Mary Anne D'Adamo of New Haven.
The bride's father, who was formerly the Transportation Commissioner of Westchester County, is now a transportation consultant with the STV Group, an engineering and construction company in New York.
Her mother, now an educational consultant, retired as an outreach coordinator at the Yale Center for International and Area Studies in New Haven.


C. R. Andrew And R. K. Rogers
Catherine Robb Andrew, a daughter of Janet and Robert Andrew of Stamford, Conn., was married yesterday to Roland Kirkor Rogers, a son of Elizabeth Kirkor Rogers and John S. Rogers, both of New York.
The Rev.
Kenneth O. Jones officiated at the Fifth Avenue Presbyterian Church in New York.
Mrs.
Rogers, 27, is a law clerk to Judge Thomas C. Platt of the United States District Court for the Eastern District of New York, in Uniondale, L.I.
She graduated cum laude from Colby College and received her law degree from Brooklyn Law School.
Her father is the founder and chairman of Storage Solutions, a manufacturer of computer products in Stamford.
Her mother is a vice president and the treasurer of the company.


Sports of The Times; BAL and SF Make Heart Pump Faster
AM I a stooge?
Am I a shill?
Am I a pushover?
I ask these questions in all sincerity as I find myself contemplating the 1995 baseball schedule with some degree of -- dare I utter the word? -- anticipation.
Hmmm.
Boston's in early.
Good grief.
The Mets are opening with a night game.
Hey.
Ripken in mid-May.
What's this?
No Cubs or Cardinals for the Mets in September?
The whole thing's upside down.


How Bad Is Route 3? Not as Bad as It Looks
The rush-hour drive through the Hackensack Meadowlands on Route 3 can be torture in the best of times, a long slow crawl from the inner suburbs of Bergen and Essex Counties to the Lincoln Tunnel and back.
And last spring, when things couldn't get much worse, the state began a $32 million, two-and-a-half-year project to widen more than a mile of the road from six lanes to eight and to replace the crumbling bottleneck called Berry's Creek Bridge, just west of Giants Stadium.
Traffic at peak hours creeps, stops and creeps again through narrow lanes created by concrete barriers that funnel vehicles across the bridge.
The highway, which runs through fields of marsh grass and patchy islands of commercial buildings, has no side roads to detour around the holdups.


Wendy Gwirtzman and Andrew Lane
Wendy Gale Gwirtzman, a medical student at the University of Pennsylvania, is to be married today to Dr.
Andrew Peter Lane, a resident in otolaryngology at the University of North Carolina Hospitals in Chapel Hill.
Rabbi Steven Bayer is to perform the ceremony at the Maplewood (N.J.) Country Club.
The bride, 26, is to become a resident at the U.N.C.
Hospitals in June.
She graduated magna cum laude from Penn, where Dr.
Lane received his medical degree.
She is the daughter of Ellen and Arnold Gwirtzman of Millburn, N.J.
Her father is a vice president of the Bankers Trust Company in New York.


Ms. Donovan, Mr. Scarangello
Roxanne Donovan, a daughter of Dr.
Toby Tamarkin of Bloomfield, Conn., and David Tamarkin of New Britain, Conn., was married yesterday to Thomas Zarro Scarangello, the son of Frank Scarangello of Yonkers and the late Edith Scarangello.
Justice Harold Silverman, an acting justice of the State Supreme Court in the Bronx, officiated at the ceremony at the Plaza in Manhattan.
The bride, 30, graduated from Syracuse University.
She owns Great Ink Communications, a public relations firm in New York.
The bridegroom, 37, graduated from Manhattan College, from which he also received a master's degree in civil engineering.
He is a structural engineer and senior associate at Thornton-Tomasetti Engineers in New York.


G.O.P. Blitz of First 100 Days Now Brings Pivotal Second 100
Pundits and politicians are still debating the significance of the first hundred days of this 104th Congress, but there is little dispute over the next hundred: they will matter, immensely.
Exhausted House Republicans, who began a three-week recess this weekend, have set the stage for a fundamental re-ordering of the Federal budget and a sweeping reconstruction of 60 years of social welfare policy.
How many of their proposals will actually make it through the Senate this summer -- and ultimately past the Presidential veto -- is one of the great unknowns.
Critics note that only two House Republican initiatives, both of them among the most modest, have actually been signed into law so far.


Excess Identities
NATIVE SPEAKER  By Chang-rae Lee. 324 pp. New York: Riverhead Books. $22.95.


Did Jeffrey MacDonald Murder His Family?
To the Editor:
Fred Bost and I are glad that our book "Fatal Justice: Reinvestigating the MacDonald Murders" convinced your reviewer, Joe Sharkey, that "the Mac Donald trial was a sorry spectacle of gross legal ineptitude" (March 19).
But in taking us to task for "courtroom advocacy" that is not, he insinuates, "painstakingly honest," Mr.
Sharkey then proceeds to get the facts (major and minor) wrong, and he seriously misrepresents our book.


A New Look, With Historic Touches
The ornate, 60-year-old Penn Station in Newark is about to enter the first phase of a four-year, $21 million face lift.
When the project is complete, the station will have a new concourse, a new restaurant and other improvements.
Ty Dickerson, project manager for New Jersey Transit, said a timetable for the renovation -- actually six separate projects -- has not been determined, but it is expected to be completed by mid-1999.


A Turn of the Screw: Masters Gets Even Tighter
The Masters got wound a whole lot tighter today.
On a perfect spring afternoon, with the Augusta National golf course bathed in light and with roars rolling across the greensward like waves on a shoreline, the tournament took a historic turn.
In classic Masters fashion, a story line for the ages emerged from the shadows.
The most obscure player in the field, Brian Henninger, who got here on the basis of a victory in a rain-shortened, 36-hole tournament, is tied for the lead with one of the most popular Masters champions ever -- Ben Crenshaw.


Golden Oldie
To the Editor:
In his essay "When Pols Didn't Worry About the 'Character Issue' "  [ March 26 ] , Richard Brookhiser says that the 1797 scandal concerning the married Alexander Hamilton and the married Maria Reynolds has not been made into a movie.
I refer Mr.
Brookhiser to the 1931 movie "Alexander Hamilton," wherein he will indeed find a screen version of the scandal.
LESLIE R. EPSTEIN  Verona, N.J.


New York, Lost and Found
WHEN Mayor Robert F. Wagner signed a bill 30 years ago this month to create the New York City Landmarks Preservation Commission, he intended to stop, or at least slow down, New York's notorious tendency to sell off its greatest architectural works for a mess of pottage.
If the law could have assured no more disasters like the demolition of the old Pennsylvania Station in 1963, its framers would have been happy.
But the law has done much more than keeping the wreckers away from famous buildings -- so much more that it may be the single most influential piece of legislation affecting land use in New York since the first zoning laws went on the books in 1916.
The law, which decreed that buildings important to the city's "cultural, social, economic, political or architectural history" be preserved unless a compelling legal case could be made for their demolition, has changed the nature of planning and architecture in the city and in the whole country.
It has been copied by cities and towns around the nation, and it has been the legal platform on which a whole culture of historic preservation has been built.


Megastore Wares Include Worries As Well as Jobs
Megastores are coming to the College Point Corporate Park in Queens, the Economic Development Corporation announced last week.
Unsurprisingly, residents are worried about noise and traffic and, above all, the possibility that small merchants may not survive.
But development corporation officials say that if the site is fully developed, it will bring 1,000 new jobs and take in $200 million worth of business a year that would otherwise be lost to suburban stores.


A Pataki Trim Could Fire Up Old Water Wars
After decades of water wars and costly legal fights that twice reached the United States Supreme Court, New York, New Jersey, Pennsylvania and Delaware finally reached an agreement in 1961 to prevent future squabbling over precious drinking water from the Delaware River.
Now, in a move that would save New York $481,500 out of its $5 billion deficit, Gov.
George E. Pataki is threatening to disrupt the peace.
He wants to withdraw New York's funding from the four-state Delaware River Basin Commission, which drafts rules on water allocation, conservation, pollution, flood control and drought management.
The commission's budget for the next fiscal year is $3.3 million.


They Play Drums. They Vacuum Late at Night. They Kill Chickens. What Do You Do, When You Have The Neighbors From Hell!
PHILIP TURNER, a book editor, moved into an apartment on the Upper West Side four years ago.
It had everything he and his wife wanted, like spacious rooms and that prewar cachet, and something that they didn't: a problem neighbor.
A neighbor from hell, to be precise.
According to a court complaint, first there were the cockroaches and gnats that infiltrated Mr.
Turner's apartment from Apartment 2B, four floors directly below, where the problem neighbor lived and hoarded stacks of newspapers, bags of garbage and other questionable collectibles.
Then the stench: a very bad odor, somewhat fermented in nature, "so that it makes you cringe," Mr.
Turner said.
Then, a month ago, Mr.
Turner's apartment ceased to have hot water -- because a pipe had broken in 2B and the tenant would not allow workmen inside to fix it.


WHAT, US WORRY?
Leave it to Cuomo to point the finger of blame for his defeat at such things as changing social attitudes, the international economy, Japanese manufacturing skills, etc. -- everywhere but where he should.
He was a mediocre governor who gave us higher taxes, loss of jobs, lower bond ratings, budget failures and government inefficiency.


A Silent Message To Baseball
To the Sports Editor:
I wanted to find a way for baseball fans to show their disdain toward both the owners and players.
My plan would take place on opening day in every baseball city, after the national anthem is played, and all fans would remain standing and turn our backs to the field for the first inning.
This would show our feelings to the players and owners.
No booing, just our backs and silence.
DAVID B. NUSS  Atlanta


Versatile Asparagus for Spring Dishes
ASPARAGUS is now available year round, so we have come to take it for granted.
But for me, it is still a food associated with spring.
It is at its peak in April and May when it is plentiful and inexpensive.
Steamed asparagus, dipped in melted butter and eaten by hand, is one of the delights of the season.
But there are many other ways to prepare this versatile vegetable.
It makes a delicious soup: served plain or laced with a dollop of goat cheese or a quenelle made from crab meat or a sprinkling of small shrimp with basil.
It is also good stir-fried with scallops and sesame seeds to go with rice or sauteed with shiitake mushrooms as a sauce for pasta.


Cutting Taxes and Causing Heartburn
AS if more than a year of rising interest rates hasn't made investing enough of a challenge, the tax bill passed by the House last week would add a brand new dimension to financial decision-making.
A little-noted facet of the tax-cutting bill, which Republicans have called the crown jewel of their Contract With America, indexes capital assets for inflation so you no longer pay taxes on phantom profits, those that just maintained -- and did not enhance -- your buying power.


What A Concept
THE BOOKMAKERS By Zev Chafets. 261 pp. New York: Random House. $21.


FOUNTAIN HEADS
Don't ignore the spigot.
Indeed, faucets nowadays can be as original as art, as expressive as a Brancusi or shapely like Noguchis.
Sometimes these stylish fixtures hardly seem like plumbing at all.


Corrections
The Practical Traveler column on March 26, about renting a car in Europe, misstated the price of a Kemwel car rental in Europe booked before March 31.
Kemwel's smallest model in Italy cost $205 a week, including the theft liability waiver.


Rockies Open Their Wallet For Two Stars
Jerry McMorris of the Colorado Rockies has served recently as the lead negotiator in the baseball owners' effort to place a serious drag on player salaries.
Today McMorris's Rockies erupted in the most extravagant spending spree of their three-year history.
In the face of hefty free-agent unemployment and severe salary slashes for many players who have found jobs, the Rockies joined their high-revenue, big-spending brethren by committing $35.15 million worth of contracts to the free agents Larry Walker and Bill Swift.


The World; U.N.: Reason, in Small Doses, May Stop Genocide
THE Security Council paused for a moment of silence on Thursday to mark the date a year ago when the Presidents of Burundi and Rwanda died in a plane crash, setting off 100 days of genocidal violence in Rwanda that took hundreds of thousands of lives.
When the minute ended, the Council quickly moved on to its next order of business: a formal valedictory on Somalia, a somber statement about lessons learned in a peacekeeping operation gone awry.
In Somalia, Rwanda, Liberia, Mozambique, Angola twice -- and now, again, Burundi, where some kind of international intervention may be necessary to save a moderate center from both Hutu and Tutsi extremists -- the United Nations is accumulating a lot of experience in failing to head off grotesque little wars.


Trouble in the Air, and Its Pink
The new $800,000 pinkish-red neon logos that ring the top of One Penn Plaza are getting bad reviews from some residents of Chelsea's north-facing apartments.
Like George Shea, a public relations executive: "I hate it and I bet a million other people hate it. It actually casts a shadow on my venetian blind that's pink." Roxanne Donovan: "The sign is a nightmare. It's in my eyes when I go to bed." Bruce Cohen, a spokesman for One Penn Plaza, said he thought the sign was too far from neighbors to cause hardship.
But Mr.
Shea says it's more than a hardship.
It's an insult.
"It's porno-store neon, and it's a blemish next to the Empire State Building," he said.
"Maybe if they had done a blue or something." JENNIFER KINGSON BLOOM


Roosevelt's Disability An Issue at Memorial
For much of his life, Franklin Delano Roosevelt struggled to play down the fact that he could not walk unaided.
For four decades, his relatives and admirers have worked to create a monument here to his memory.
Now, construction is well along, but the monument is suddenly caught up in controversy over its builders' decision to continue to veil the disability Roosevelt tried to disguise.


Emergency Phones for the Parks
Bergen County officials say theirs is the first county in the state to provide emergency phones in its parks.
The phones, mounted on pedestals, will soon be installed in remote corners of county parks that are half a mile or more from any public building.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Good Housekeeping drops a celebration of new traditions and goes back to promoting the old ones.
GOOD HOUSEKEEPING is finally brooming out a contentious, twice-changed campaign celebrating the "new traditionalist" traits of its readers.
A replacement seeks to polish the old traditions associated with the editorial content of the magazine.
In print advertisements beginning today, Good Housekeeping, published by the Hearst Corporation, asserts that it is "the magazine America trusts" by promoting the Good Housekeeping Institute, the testing center founded in 1900, and the Good Housekeeping seal, awarded to advertisers whose products meet the institute's standards.


A New Book Press to Help Internet 'Surfers' Catch a Wave
As cyberspace grows, so does the stack of old-fashioned print books needed to help navigate it.
That paradox is the basis of a new venture to be announced today by Macmillan Computer Publishing USA, which is owned by Viacom.
While several companies already publish books on a broad range of computer topics, Macmillan's venture, called Sams.net, will be the first imprint dedicated solely to publishing titles about the Internet.
George Bond, a longtime editor of computer technology magazines, has been named publisher.


Market Place; In a bottom-line economy, will temporary staffs be permanent?
TEMPORARY staffing companies like the Olsten Corporation have attracted more interest from some investors as American companies continue to try to cut costs by substituting part-time workers for permanent ones.
In fact, Olsten's stock has risen more than 12 percent since March 20, closing Friday at $35.50.
But the stock has been volatile this year, trading between $31.125 and $38.875.


Treasury to Auction Only Bills
The Treasury's schedule of financings this week is confined to today's regular weekly auction of three- and six-month bills.
By the close of the New York cash market on Friday, traders said, the rate on the outstanding three-month bill was 5.66 percent and a six-month bill was 5.81 percent.


Homeless Man Charged in Rape
For more than a decade, Edward Johnson lived on the streets.
Until last week, he was regarded as little more than a nuisance who accumulated arrests on charges of indecent exposure and shoplifting.
On Friday, Mr.
Johnson, 48, was charged with grabbing a 12-year-old girl on her way home from school on Thursday, pulling her into a building and raping her.
He was jailed in lieu of $250,000 bond on aggravated sexual assault charges.


More Budget Pain for the City
Faced with a likely shortfall in the budget savings he had sought from Albany, Mayor Rudolph Giuliani has ordered yet another round of cuts and revenue increases to close the city deficit.
This time he asked for $300 million, but in all probability he will soon require three times that amount.
The task of closing a deficit now estimated at $3 billion is so daunting that he needs to accelerate labor negotiations to win further cuts immediately.
He also needs to reconsider the wisdom of reducing taxes.
The Mayor's initial round of budget cuts in February laid out a harsh and difficult challenge to the city and its battered work force, which is struggling to keep city services from deteriorating further.
Included in that package were $1.2 billion in anticipated welfare and Medicaid savings that could only be achieved by enactment of legislation in Albany.
But such deep cuts in health and income-assistance programs for the poor were too much even for Gov.
George Pataki to swallow.
He and the State Legislature are still fighting over the state budget, but it is already clear that Mr.
Giuliani will have to replace much of his hoped-for Medicaid and welfare savings with $1 billion in new cuts in city services, beyond those announced in February.
The $300 million just announced is only a down payment on that amount.


Added Worry Facing CBS: Gaping Holes In Fall Lineup
After a collapse in prime-time ratings that has seen the network lose ground every night of the week, CBS is likely to find itself with an extraordinary number of holes to fill in its program schedule next fall -- more new programming, a senior CBS executive conceded, than any network can realistically introduce at once.
The network's fortunes, in sharp decline since September, have fallen further and faster in recent weeks as a batch of new programs introduced last month have fared even worse than the programs they replaced.


2 Publishing Houses Sold
U.S.
Media Holdings Inc., a newly formed San Francisco company, has acquired two New York publishing houses: Stewart, Tabori &amp; Chang and Smithmark Publishers Inc.
Stewart, Tabori &amp; Chang was acquired from Brant Publications, which owns the magazines Interview, Art in America and Antiques.
Smithmark was owned by the Tass Capital Corporation.
Both publishing companies will remain in New York.


'Jefferson': Turning a Dubious Premise Into Fact
Nobody is immune, it seems, to the politics of race and sex, not even the drafter of the Declaration of Independence and our third President, Thomas Jefferson.
This, at least, seems to be one of the lessons of "Jefferson in Paris," the new movie by the celebrated team of Ismail Merchant, James Ivory and Ruth Prawer Jabhvala, which depicts scenes from Jefferson's life in Paris as the American Ambassador in the years immediately after the creation of the United States.
"Jefferson in Paris" has received mixed reviews from the movie critics, and it seems to be getting mixed reviews from historians as well, given that it does what most historical movies do: mixes fact and fiction in such a way as to make one indistinguishable from the other.


Fujimori Is Well Ahead in an Election Exit Poll in Peru
President Alberto K. Fujimori appeared poised to win a second term in Peru's elections today, according to an early and unofficial survey of voters leaving polling places, but rival candidates continued to charge that the voting had been compromised by fraud.
A national exit poll by the Apoyo group, Peru's leading polling organization, indicated that Mr.
Fujimori had won 61 percent of all votes, thus avoiding a second round of balloting.
Final results will not be known until Monday.


Manila Panel Faults Singapore Hanging
A commission assigned to investigate the hanging of a Filipino maid in Singapore last month says the evidence it has gathered suggests that Flor Contemplacion was probably innocent of the murder of another Filipino domestic helper and a four-year-old Singaporean boy.
The seven-member commission, formed by President Fidel V. Ramos to defuse widespread anger over Mrs.
Contemplacion's execution, urged Mr.
Ramos to ask the Singaporean Government to reopen the case.
But it did not recommend that Manila sever diplomatic relations with Singapore, which Mr.
Ramos had vowed he would do if the commission thought it necessary.


Crenshaw Pays Triumphant Homage to a Master
The most mystical Masters of all came to a fitting conclusion today when Ben Crenshaw put the last lesson to good use.
He did exactly what his teacher, Harvey Penick, told him to do, just before he passed away at age 90 last week.
He took dead aim, to use Penick's best-known phrase, and putted his way to victory.


A Big Hitter Aims for a Video Homer
Frank Thomas swung hard, a nasty uppercut unleashed against a blank green studio backdrop.
No ball took flight.
On this chilly day in February, he was not at spring training in Sarasota, Fla., preparing for the season.
He was on strike, with the rest of the major league players, and so was playing himself in the Frank Thomas "Big Hurt" baseball video game.
The swing completed, he turned his massive six-foot-five-inch body slowly toward a camera and a group of technicians, unfurled his magnetic smile and asked, "Can you beat that?"


Sprucing Up a Lion's Grave
Bryan Monty wants to spruce up the grave of Leo, the first Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer lion, so he has offered to buy the 13-acre farm where the animal is buried next to the home of his trainer, Volney Phifer.
"The place is the biggest eyesore in Long Hill Township," said Mr.
Monty, a landscaper.
"You wouldn't be able to find it if you walked the property."


Cup Teams Show Off Their Weird Science
Like any good secret, the most tantalizing part is in finding out.
Such was the case today when the five finalists for the America's Cup lifted the skirts on their multimillion-dollar yachts.
Underneath were appendages that looked more like cartoon characters than showpieces of technology.
Although the struts were similar -- 13-foot fins with giant lead ballast bulbs at the bottom -- wing-like attachments added a Disney dimension to their costly purpose.
The keel and its bulb keep the boat upright and prevent it from being blown sideways.


INSIDE
Waiter, Hold the Nicotine
Rules that severely limit smoking in New York City restaurants go into effect today, making the cigar-studded power lunch a thing of the city's past.
Page B1.
Big Investor Gets Involved
The nation's largest pension fund is using its clout to pressure companies in its $66 billion stock portfolio to make fundamental changes in how they operate.
Page D1.
Clean on Paper, but . . .
While New York City counts most streets as "acceptably clean," visual inspections don't always bear that out.
Metro Matters, page B1.
End to a Life in Brooklyn
Rachel Neufeld survived Nazi concentration camps and Allied bombings.
Yesterday, a city bus took the Brooklyn woman's life.
Page B1.


This Year, Devil Fans Do All the Partying
More than two hours before the Rangers played the Devils yesterday, the New Jersey fans were in full tailgate mode outside the doors of Byrne Meadowlands Arena.
There are more of them these days, and their bodies were cloaked in red-and-black Jersey jerseys they wore like Sunday vestments.
The fans' vans, some spray-painted with Devil boasts and Ranger taunts, blared Springsteen music -- "Jersey Girl" from one, "Born to Run" from another -- as grown-ups drank beer and kids shot plastic balls with plastic hockey sticks.


Tremors in China
Chinese leaders declare the looming succession to Deng Xiaoping as China's paramount leader a nonevent.
Mr.
Deng has already retired, they say.
His successor, President Jiang Zemin, is already in place, surrounded by a collective leadership team.
Few serious China watchers take these declarations seriously.
Judging by their actions, neither do the Chinese leaders who make them.
Behind the facade of collective leadership, they are already positioning themselves for an uncertain future.


Internet Audio Minus the Delays Is Set to Start on the Web Today
New software that makes it much easier for visitors to cyberspace to listen to news, music and other audio programs through the global Internet is expected to be introduced today.
The new program, which is called Real Audio Player, enables computer users navigating the Internet using the graphical environment known as the World Wide Web to choose audio clips from a menu and begin listening to them immediately.


Gingrich Warns Perot Supporters That Third Party Could Keep Clinton in White House
Speaker Newt Gingrich courted Ross Perot's supporters at every turn today, embracing their causes but warning them that forming a third party could allow President Clinton to stay in office.
Mr.
Perot's restive followers, hardly placated by the Republican Party's Contract With America, are holding meetings around the country to consider organizing a new party for the 1996 elections.


Shaw's Mrs. Warren Again, Now Shorn of Wickedness
Kitty Warren's singular views on motherhood and Victorian trickle-down economics are hardly shocking anymore.
But it can still be a diverting evening hearing them debated by Shaw's fin de siecle happy hooker and her daughter, the prototype for the 20th-century feminist.
As its last offering of the season, the Pearl Theater is presenting a lighthearted revival of "Mrs. Warren's Profession" that provides a nostalgic look at what was once a scandal on two continents.


Jijiaying Journal; On the Farms, China Could Be Sowing Disaster
Sitting in a bean field outside this village of 4,000 farmers, 31-year-old Kou Ying expressed skepticism about efforts by China's leaders to mobilize the country in support of agriculture this year.
"The price of fertilizer is skyrocketing and we have no electricity to pump the water to irrigate the fields," Mr.
Kou said, "so I don't know what kind of policy this is to assist agriculture."


1950's Paris, And So On
There is a moment in "April in Paris," a featherweight two-character musical at Rainbow and Stars, when the story of a young American's chance encounter with an older Frenchwoman in a Paris cafe threatens to turn into "The Roman Spring of Mrs. Stone" as re-imagined by Colette.
Fortunately, it takes a much less pretentious route.
Conceived and directed by Joel Silberman and featuring Liliane Montevecchi and David Staller, the show uses the encounter as an excuse for trotting out nearly two dozen standards, several of which describe the charms of the City of Light.
Three songs are by Cole Porter.
There is a bittersweet Charles Aznavour ballad.
Numbers like "Just a Gigolo" and "Boulevard of Broken Dreams" exalt a 1950's ideal of Continental sophistication, though the show is set in the present.


Accounts
*
Providian Corp., Louisville, Ky., to J. Walter Thompson Atlanta, a unit of the WPP Group, as the first agency to handle advertising for the financial services company's insurance, credit and annuity products.
The billings were estimated at $7 million. *
Advanta Corp., Horsham, Pa., to Devon Direct Marketing and Advertising, Berwyn, Pa., to handle direct marketing for its consumer financial services business unit, previously at Gillespie, Princeton, N.J.
The billings were not disclosed.


DANCE
From One Performer, A Cast of Many  Linda Gold Clark Studio Theater
Linda Gold divided her program on Thursday night into halves, each with its own title.
"Liaisons," the first part, included three works; "Ka," the concluding segment, offered one.
A program note said "Ka" was "derived from the sound of Sanskrit words and English folklore," an explanation that explained nothing.
It was best to forget titles and focus instead on the dramatic stage presence of Ms.
Gold, who directs the Dance Program at Santa Monica College in California.


Jeremiah O'Callaghan, 80, Hibernian Chief
Jeremiah O'Callaghan, a past president of the Ancient Order of Hibernians and a prominent Jersey City lawyer and political figure for four decades, died on Saturday at Bayonne Hospital in New Jersey.
He was 80.
Relatives said Mr. O'Callaghan died after a long illness.


Alton Meister, 72, a Biochemist Who Advanced AIDS Research
Alton Meister, a biochemist whose research became part of the battle against AIDS and other diseases, died on Thursday at the Mediplex rehabilitation center in Stamford, Conn.
He was 72.
His wife said the cause was the combined complications of a stroke he suffered last year in New Zealand and infections he picked up during interim treatment at New York Hospital, where her husband had been chief biochemist for many years.


Turkey Fights to Protect Democracy
To the Editor:
"Washington and the Kurds" (editorial, April 4) is, unfortunately, more concerned with when Turkish armed forces will withdraw from northern Iraq than the merits of the problem confronting Turkey and the real and justified motives of the operation.
Unfortunately, it was perhaps the fault of Turkish officials that the reasons and targets for the operation were not stated clearly and unequivocally at the start.
But to assume that a force of 35,000 was sent into northern Iraq just to kill the terrorists is an insult to the ability of the Turkish General Staff.
This exercise's success should not be measured in Vietnam-like body counts.


Between a Hacker And a Hard Place
Matt Blaze, a researcher for the AT&amp;T Corporation, had never thought of himself as an arms exporter.
But just before he was to fly to Europe recently on business, Federal Customs agents at Kennedy International Airport in New York detained him for more than an hour while they puzzled over the "munitions" device in his carry-on bag.
When the head Customs official was summoned to the room where he was being questioned, Mr.
Blaze realized the Orwellian scope of the Federal export laws governing technology that safeguards international business communications.


Mountain Bikes Carve Up Fragile Park Terrain
To the Editor:
Re your April 3 news article on the clash between hikers and mountain bicyclists:


In Bleak Newark Neighborhood, Sculpture as Symbol of Rebirth
The delicate smell of spring was enough to improve spirits today, but people who ventured down South Orange Avenue discovered another simple pleasure: a flower-shaped sculpture, its jagged petals reaching toward the sun.
The flower was among four steel sculptures unveiled in the disheveled Central Ward today as dozens of residents looked on.
Leather-clad teen-agers and women in Easter hats, elderly nuns and toddlers all strolled from site to site, welcoming the latest effort to brighten Newark's landscape.


In Landmark Fires, Answers Prove Elusive
To the Editor:
New York City's designated landmarks and would-be landmarks have been going up in smoke, with little accountability: the suspicious fire in Luchow's at Union Square, the suspicious fire in the Arthur Hammerstein mansion in Queens and now the suspicious fire at the Fulton Fish Market in the South Street Seaport Historic District.


How Dirty Is Clean? Trash Behind the Numbers
NEW YORK CITY is dirty.
And every candid New Yorker knows it.
Officially, it's clean, of course.
The Mayor's latest Management Report, City Hall's own report card, claims that 74.4 percent of the city streets are "acceptably clean," about the same as last year and the year before.
But since the report only covers streets, curbs and sidewalks, that's like saying a 2-year-old with a freshly scrubbed face is clean, even though his hands are grimy from making mud pies.
New York City, from Jerome Avenue to Richmond Terrace, is loaded with mud pies -- with trash in vacant lots, along highways, in parks, behind schools.
Sections of every borough are filthy despite Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani's commitment to improving the quality of life in New York, despite a labor agreement that promises more productive sanitation workers, despite the efforts of businesses and community groups to do their own cleanups.


Jackpot Rises to $21 Million
After five straight drawings without a top prize winner, the New Jersey Lottery Pick-6 jackpot will be $21 million for the next go-around today.
That's a four-month high, but still far short of the record $44.3 million on April 20, 1992.


Transactions
Baseball  American League
BALTIMORE ORIOLES -- Agreed to terms with and Kevin Brown, Joe Borowski, Russell Brock, Jimmy Haynes, Doug Jones, Scott Klingenbeck, Rick Krivda, Jesse Orosco, Billy Percibal, Brian Sackinsky, pitchers; Paul Carey, first baseman; Alex Ochoa, Jim Wawruck, outfielder; and Gregg Zaun, catcher, on one-year contracts.
Placed Mark Eichhorn, pitcher, on the 15-day disabled list.
Shifted Eichhorn from the 15- to the 60-day disabled list.


Muller Finally in Islander Frame of Mind
The hangover from being traded, so to speak, seems to have finally passed for Kirk Muller.
Muller joined the Islanders today, four days after he balked at the idea of leaving his captaincy in Montreal as part of a blockbuster five-player deal that sent Pierre Turgeon to the Canadiens.


Correction
An article on March 8 about Gov.
George E. Pataki's signing the death penalty into law misstated the relationship between Carol McCauliff, who attended the ceremony and had appeared in a campaign advertisement for Mr.
Pataki, and the murder victim whom she discussed in the ad.
The victim, Thomas McCauliff, was Mrs.
McCauliff's stepson, not her son.
The same error appeared on Oct. 12, Oct. 20 and Oct. 28 of last year in articles that mentioned the ad, in which Mrs.
McCauliff criticized Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo's positions on crime.


A Program of Tharp For Ballet Theater
American Ballet Theater will celebrate Twyla Tharp in its spring gala on May 1 at 7 P.M. at the Metropolitan Opera House.
The all-Tharp program is to feature three new works.
Two of the dances, set to music by Wynton Marsalis and an anthology of American music, are to be performed only at the gala.
The program is also to include "How Near Heaven," which received its world premiere at the Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts last month.


No Headline
"A woman with two kids and an 11th-grade education isn't going to get a $12-an-hour job. She's going to get a $4.50-an-hour job. And guess what: She's still poor, and she's still on welfare." -- HAWLEY RIDENOUR, San Diego welfare official.  [ B10:1. ]


Premieres by Nascent Choreographers
The dances presented on Friday night at the Theater of the Riverside Church by Ballet Inc., an ad hoc organization that encourages new choreography, suggested that all but one of the choreographers had neither trusted their own instincts sufficiently nor seen enough innovative work by others.
Almost all of the dances, which were premieres, had flashes of individuality but needed authority, polish and probably more choreographic practice.
Gail Gilbert's "Final Page," danced to music by Copland, began with interesting themes but ran out of steam in a welter of symbolism having to do with pieces of white paper.
It was performed by Piper Albert, J Hammons, Theresa McCullough and Todd Williams.
"In the Garden of Misunderstanding," choreographed by Charles Anderson to music by Thomas Wilbrandt, was a duet for lost lovers.
It was danced by Lisa Goldin and Mr.
Anderson, who needs to lose weight for this role.


California's Democrats Avert Split Over Affirmative Action
With President Clinton leading the way, the Democratic Party of California managed to avoid a public split here this weekend over what to do about affirmative action.
It adopted a "yes, but . . . " approach to the issue, vowing to hold the line on special economic and education programs, yet pointedly stating that affirmative action "does not mean quotas or arbitrary preferential treatment."


Ranger Fans Whispering, '1994, 1994'
The Devils and the Rangers, who treated hockey fans to such an epic playoff series late last spring, are headed in different directions this spring.
The Devils are setting shutout records and climbing toward the top of the Atlantic Division, while the Rangers are fighting to stay in the playoff race just a year after winning the Stanley Cup.
The Devils made the Rangers' position more precarious this afternoon with a 2-0 triumph at Byrne Meadowlands Arena that left the defending champions with just 2 victories in their past 12 games.
The Rangers are 2 points behind Hartford for the eighth and final playoff spot in the Eastern Conference, and in a tie with Montreal and Florida.


Lingering Shortage Of Air Controllers Plagues New York
Fourteen years after most of the nation's air-traffic controllers were dismissed for striking, the office that handles New York's three major airports is still so understaffed that controllers work mandatory six-day weeks and officials are drawing up contingency plans to cut flights during the anticipated summer rush.
Federal Aviation Administration officials say they believe the agency will opt to pay even more overtime, rather than resort to what they call a "ground delay program," which would inevitably lead the airlines to cut flights in and out of Kennedy, La Guardia and Newark airports.


Cosmetics Makers In Agency Shifts
Two fragrance and cosmetics companies have made changes in their media agency rosters.
The four United States operating subsidiaries of Joh.
A.
Benckiser G.m.b.H. in Ludwigshafen, Germany -- Benckiser Consumer Products U.S.A. in Danbury, Conn., and Coty Inc. and Lancaster Group U.S.A., both of New York, and Private Portfolio in Chicago -- have named Robert J. Geller &amp; Associates in New York to handle the consolidated media planning and buying assignments on their accounts, with combined billings estimated at $100 million.


Speaker Shows Moderation On 2 Issues Dear to the Right
Speaker Newt Gingrich today supported the availability of federally financed abortions for poor women who are victims of rape or incest and expressed opposition to organized school prayer, positions that are at odds with some Republican conservatives.
Asked in an interview on the CBS News program "Face the Nation," whether he agreed with Republicans who oppose Federal abortion payments in cases of rape or incest or to protect the life of a mother, Mr.
Gingrich said: "No. First of all, I think you should have funding in the case of rape or incest or life of the mother, which is the first step."


Rains Bring a Windfall
Filming of a traffic jam scene for the movie "Bogus," starring Whoopi Goldberg, was delayed on Saturday because of rain.
That was annoying for the cast and crew, but a real boon for the city's homeless.
The steaks, chickens, pork loins and fresh fruits prepared for the cast and crew were donated to St.
Rocco's homeless shelter.
Filming was to resume today, weather permitting.


California City Requires Ammunition Buyer Check
In an effort to stem a growing trend of violence, Pasadena has become the first city in the nation to pass an ordinance requiring anyone who wants to buy ammunition to fill out a registration card and show a driver's license.
Proponents say the ordinance, which takes effect this month, will accomplish at least two things: make sellers check the identification of minors who are prohibited by law from buying ammunition and scare away would-be criminals whose names will be on file at gun stores.


Rains Bring a Windfall
Filming of a traffic jam scene for the movie "Bogus," starring Whoopi Goldberg, was delayed on Saturday because of rain.
That was annoying for the cast and crew, but a real boon for the city's homeless.
The steaks, chickens, pork loins and fresh fruits prepared for the cast and crew were donated to St.
Rocco's homeless shelter.
Filming was to resume today, weather permitting.


Bridge
The Vanderbilt Knockout Team Championship ended here Saturday night in a victory for one of America's most famous veteran players.
Bill Root of Boca Raton, Fla., who at 71 looks back on a lifetime of teaching bridge to thousands of players, won his 13th major team title.
Many of those have been with Richard Pavlicek of Fort Lauderdale, Fla., who was his partner here and is also a bridge teacher.
Their teammates were Marc Jacobus of Las Vegas, Nev., and Michael Polowan of Manhattan, who formed an impromptu partnership just before the start of the event six days ago and won their first major title.
The Root team built up a lead of 42 imps before the final 16 deals and held on to win a well-played final by 28.
The losers were George Steiner of Seattle, Joe Silver of Montreal, Ron Gerard of White Plains and Michael Kamil of Teaneck, N.J.
They list as their nonplaying captain Edgar Kaplan, who was sidelined by surgery.


Sports Publishing Venture
Hearst Magazine Enterprises and ESPN Enterprises have agreed to publish four special-interest sports magazines this year.
The magazines will cover professional football and basketball, N. C. A. A. basketball and a year-end roundup of sports events.
Editorial content will be produced jointly by the two companies, which are aiming at a distribution of 500,000.
The Hearst Corporation has a 20 percent interest in ESPN Inc., which is a subsidiary of Capital Cities/ABC Inc.


Conventions
Unlike New York City's tourism industry, which has turned around as the city inched out of the recession, the convention business has yet to bounce back.
The Jacob K. Javits Convention Center, the premier site for large shows, has been trying for years to reverse a decline in attendance; the number of events dropped by a third from 1989 to 1993.
And in 1994, the center saw increases in shows and attendance.
Center officials say they are finally beginning to crack the stubborn issues that have hobbled the hall since it opened: high costs, tough union rules, mob intrusion and thefts.
And now, with the improved economy, officials expect to see the city's convention business follow the upswing of the tourism industry.


A Resolute Clinton Begins the Long March Out From a Republican Shadow
In the Bible, whose rhythms Bill Clinton has known since childhood, the standard period of flood and wandering is 40 days and 40 nights.
The President has now endured more than twice that penance and emerged from the Republican Congress's first 100 days if not on dry land, at least in sight of a shoreline with something of a compass intact.
In two peppery speeches that began a swing of appearances around the country in the coming weeks, Mr.
Clinton served notice that what Vice President Al Gore today called "this forced march in the House of Representatives" was over.
From now on, the President said, cooler hands and cooler heads -- in the Senate and at 1600 Pennsylvania Avenue -- will have their day.


Time to Rethink the Benefits of Chemotherapy
To the Editor:
In your April 6 report on breast-cancer treatment an expert is quoted as saying that while chemotherapy prolongs survival it does not necessarily cure the disease.


In Casting a Lolita for the 90's, Still Looking for Lipstick on Her Lollipop
"She was Lo, plain Lo, in the morning, standing four feet ten in one sock. She was Lola in slacks. She was Dolly at school. She was Dolores on the dotted line. But in my arms she was always Lolita." -- Humbert Humbert
There aren't many mythic young girls in American life, but Lolita, the child-woman, the innocent seductress created by Vladimir Nabokov in his 1955 novel, is surely one.


Accounts of Calculated Cruelty in a Bronx Gang
For more than seven years, the C &amp; C gang reigned over a six-block piece of the South Bronx with calculated cruelty and murder, controlling not only the heroin trade but also such mundane aspects of life as where residents could park or even urinate.
To show his power in a Mott Haven neighborhood of stifling poverty, the gang's founder, George Calderon, an impulsive, quick-tempered man with a cocaine habit, would sometimes throw fistfuls of cash into the air just to watch the poor scramble after the bills.


Experience Says Welfare Cuts Lead to Poverty
To the Editor:
Re your news article (April 3) comparing Ohio's welfare cuts and Gov.
George E. Pataki's proposal to slash New York's Home Relief program by limiting benefits for so-called "employables" to 90 days:


3 Girls Die and Mother Is Badly Burned in Fire
Three girls were killed and their mother was severely burned in a fire that swept through their apartment early this morning.
It took nearly 50 firefighters to bring the fire under control, said officials of the Jersey City Fire Department, who said that the blaze began about 4:50 A.M. in a 24-unit, four-story apartment building at 229 Academy Street.


DANCE
Whimsical, Playful And Scientific Inspirations  Geulah Abrahams Danceworks Merce Cunningham Studio
Geulah Abrahams examined turbulent relationships, child's play as a form of learning and scientific chaos theory in "Now and Then," a program to taped music by Paul Lansky that Geulah Abrahams Danceworks offered on Friday night.
Ms.
Abrahams, a Princeton-based choreographer, avoided ponderousness in her treatment of mighty themes, but she was often self-consciously cute instead.


Joseph W. Tansey, Ex-Journalist, 87
Joseph W. Tansey, a journalist who spent 30 years at The New York Times before retiring as assistant national news editor in 1978, died yesterday near his home in Dallas.
He was 87.
A son, James, said Mr. Tansey had suffered a heart attack while taking a walk.


New Shop Formed In Los Angeles
Two agencies based in Los Angeles, Coen/Kalis and the Savage Advertising Group, have merged to form Kalis &amp; Savage Advertising.
The terms of the agreement were not disclosed.


Eileen O'Casey, 95; Actress and Author
Eileen O'Casey, an actress and the author of three books about her husband, the playwright Sean O'Casey, died yesterday at Denville Hall, a theatrical retirement home in London.
She was 95.
The former Eileen Carey met O'Casey in Dublin when she auditioned for a role in his play "The Plough and the Stars" in 1926.
The play caused an uproar because of its unsparing treatment of Dublin tenement life.


Simon Times 4, and Off Broadway, Yet
At this point in his remarkable career, Neil Simon is locked into a virtually no-win situation.
Like Siamese twins, he can't get away from himself, being forever in competition with the playwright nearest and dearest to him.
If a new Simon comedy is funny, the odds are that it can't be quite as funny as some previous Simon comedy.
If the new play is a smash hit, the next work must be even better.
The stakes keep going up.
Poor man.
It's significant that these thoughts swam into mind during "London Suite," the collection of four new Simon one-acts that opened last night, not on Broadway where the playwright has a theater named for him, but at the Union Square Theater, off Broadway.
There, at least, the financial stakes are less formidable.


TV Stars Defeat Politicians in Tokyo and Osaka Governor Races
Voters jolted the Japanese political establishment today by choosing television personalities not affiliated with any party to lead the nation's two most important cities.
The outcome of the local elections was a stunning rejection of traditional politics and traditional politicians.
The result will be added pressure on Prime Minister Tomiichi Murayama and on a political system undergoing a major realignment.


The Price Is Right as Talent-Hungry Clubs Snap Up Free Agents Cheap
Starting last summer, they fought over a salary cap or some other system (S.O.S.) that would let baseball club owners regain control of player salaries.
One mammoth strike later, the owners didn't get what they wanted, but they have what they wanted.
In two days of frenzied contract signing, operating without any imposed or negotiated constraints, clubs clearly showed they are capable of exercising self-control without the aid of an artificial control.
The most stunning example of their efforts can be seen in the drastic pay cuts 17 free agents accepted in signing Friday and Saturday.


Rethinking Welfare: Work Requirements -- A special report.; Jobs Program Participants: Still Poor and in Need of Aid
Araceli Cobarrubias, a 23-year-old single mother of three with a ninth-grade education, still struggles with English.
But in the past three weeks, while politicians in Washington have been making speeches about people like her, who are on public assistance, she has been using a vocabulary that would gladden the hardest-line anti-welfare crusader.
"I have to market myself," said Ms.
Cobarrubias, whose only job was as a part-time saleswoman in a clothing store nine years ago.
"I don't want my kids to be on welfare."


Seagram Puts the Finishing Touches on Its $5.7 Billion Acquisition of MCA
The Seagram Company and the Matsushita Electric Industrial Company said last night that they had agreed that Seagram would buy 80 percent of the entertainment giant MCA Inc. for $5.7 billion in cash.
Matsushita, which paid $6.6 billion for MCA in 1990, will retain a 20 percent interest.


For Dole, Acting Senatorial May Not Look Presidential
Bob Dole, Senate majority leader, is a confirmed deficit hawk, a believer in the old-fashioned conservative proposition that you do not cut taxes when the Federal deficit is barely under control.
Bob Dole, Presidential hopeful, needs a different approach.


Tartabull, Player and Actor, Glides Into Another Season
The news that Danny Tartabull would not be conducting interviews during the strike was delivered through his agent.
Tartabull was supposedly perturbed with the New York news media because one columnist had suggested the outfielder might become a strikebreaker.
Tartabull upset?
It sounded unlikely.
He has rarely seemed angry while playing for the Yankees and has rarely displayed negative emotions.
Tartabull has adeptly maneuvered around the minefields of playing in New York and for George Steinbrenner.
He has been the Teflon player.


Big Investor Talked, Grace Listened
The board room shake-up at W. R. Grace &amp; Company, effected with stunning speed last month, has not yet run its course.
But the effort by dissident shareholders to force change at the $4 billion specialty chemical and medical services company is already seen as a watershed in the annals of corporate governance.
The Grace episode has raised eyebrows across the country, not only because the company agreed to make sweeping changes, but because the fight was led by a shareholder -- TIAA-CREF -- that in most respects was more than satisfied with its investment and that in the past had tended to prefer private diplomacy to a public fight.


Let's Require Child Safety Seats in the Air
To the Editor:
In our pursuit to make flying safer for everyone -- adults and small children -- the National Transportation Safety Board takes issue with statistics cited by the Federal Aviation Administration in "Jet Crash Revives Debate About Child Safety Seats" (news article, April 6).


Sudden Death for Woman Who Survived So Much
On Saturday night, at the Brooklyn intersection she crossed on her way home every evening after twilight, Rachel Neufeld went down under the right front wheel of a city bus and was crushed to death.
She was 70 years old, and a woman unknown in a city where fame and riches are the ordinary measure of a life.
The details of the accident at Avenue J and Bay Parkway in Midwood were hazy and under investigation, the police and the Transit Authority said, though the driver was on probation for reasons that were unclear yesterday, so no one was able to say precisely how or why Mrs.
Neufeld had been killed.


CHRONICLE
The name of the program, "The Cait and Ali Show," may sound familiar, but it is brand new, having made its debut late last month on Crown Cable, a local access channel in northwestern Connecticut.
Cait and Ali are sisters from New Milford, Conn., CAITLYN WELLER , 9 years old, and ALIECE WELLER , 12.
They appear on a weekly show produced by their parents, FRANK and LISE WELLER .


Software Author Focus of U.S. Inquiry
Phil Zimmermann, the creator of a popular encryption-software program called Phil's Pretty Good Privacy, hardly appears to be a threat to national security.
Soft-spoken, slightly rumpled and almost always smiling, the 41-year-old computer security consultant from Boulder, Colo., hardens only when he contemplates what might happen to his family if he is sent to prison.
It is not idle speculation.
For two years, the United States Attorney's office in San Jose, Calif., has been investigating Mr.
Zimmermann for a possible violation of Federal export controls on munitions.
The supposed crime: placing a copy of his data-encryption program, widely known as P.G.P., on a computer connected to the global web of computers known as the Internet.


Patents; Trying To Establish a U.S. Flat-Screen Market With a More Efficient Technology for Cathodes
SOMEDAY computer screens will offer pictures as clear as those on a television.
At least that is what software developers and computer manufacturers hope, and it is what consumers would like to see.
Already, sales of the flat-panel displays used with laptop and hand-held computers generate about $5 billion a year.
And experts predict that by the end of the century, with growth in those markets and the development of new ones -- like flat-panel television screens that hang on the wall like a picture -- the industry will be worth about $15 billion a year.
Today the screens' sales are dominated by manufacturers outside of the United States, mostly in Japan.
A Texas company is hoping a new patent will help it capture some of that lucrative market for the United States.
SI Diamond Inc. says its technology solves the need for high use of energy.


A New Job for a Teacher
Today is the last day at Academy Street School for Christina Gordon, the teacher who was so determined to run the Boston Marathon that she resigned when the school refused to let her take next Monday off for the race.
Tomorrow, she begins a new teaching job at Hopatcong High School.
"We're thrilled to have her," said Paul De Franco, principal of Hopatcong High.
"She'll be an inspiration for our kids. What she did was courageous. She gave up a lot for what she believes in."


Theodore Ellenoff, Who Fought For Jewish Civil Rights, at 70
Theodore Ellenoff, a founder of the New York law firm of Squadron, Ellenoff, Plesent, Sheinfeld &amp; Sorkin and a former president of the American Jewish Committee, died yesterday at Westchester County Medical Center.
He was 70 and lived in Manhattan and Westchester, N.Y.
He suffered a heart attack, said his daughter, Debra Ellenoff.


CLASSICAL MUSIC
Audience Joins Procession But Not the Flagellation  I Giullari di Piazza Cathedral of St.
John the Divine
To say that the Cathedral of St.
John the Divine presented something new and unusual for the season seems flabby and redundant; it usually does.
But here, over the weekend, was something truly different: a lavish passion presentation called "Stabat Mater: Donna de Paradiso," in which audience members, carrying lighted candles, joined hooded penitents in a procession through the Stations of the Cross.


CLASSICAL MUSIC
Premiere Helps the Needs Of a Particular Generation  Tabea Zimmermann, violist Weill Recital Hall
Any smart composer nowadays would do what Gyorgy Ligeti recently did: write a showcase work for viola.
Tabea Zimmermann, who gave the American premiere of Mr.
Ligeti's Sonata for Solo Viola on Friday evening, is part of a remarkably gifted young generation of violists in need of a broader, more rounded solo repertory.


Mysteries, of Course, But Ruth Rendell Also Sees Real Evil
On the occasion last fall of Ruth Rendell's 30th anniversary as a mystery writer, her British publisher, Random House UK, gave a party to show its appreciation for her work (and for all the money she has brought in over the years).
The house also presented Mrs.
Rendell with the bookends of her productive career so far: special-edition copies of her first novel, "From Doon With Death" (1964), and her latest one, "Simisola" (1994).
The first marks the debut of her Chief Inspector Reginald Wexford of the town of Kingsmarkham, in the case of a strangely dull murder victim with one intriguing, and fatal, secret.
And the latest catches up with him, after many years, investigating the disappearance of a young black woman in a Kingsmarkham racked by unemployment, racism and hopelessness.


First-Rate Second String Keeping the Nets Alive
Rick Mahorn was using his substantial frame to back John Salley into the post on Saturday night, just as he used to when the two were battling for minutes on a world championship team in Detroit.
He was hollering, colliding with bodies and comically backpedaling downcourt, as if it were an Olympic sport.
At the buzzer, he was laughing.
It occurred to the 36-year-old reserve center, as the Nets showed how resourceful they can be in a 103-93 victory over the Miami Heat, that this is how the game should be played by a team on the brink of playoff elimination.


The Blessing of the Palms


Essay; Gambling Fever
At the age of 14, I was standing on a landing in the stairwell at Joan of Arc Junior High School in Manhattan, watching a crap game, when I felt the heavy hand of a teacher on my shoulder.
My protest that I didn't even have a bet down was unavailing; four of us, all seniors, were branded as gamblers.
The shaming punishment: though permitted to be graduated, I was refused a place at commencement and denied a diploma.


Master of the Masters


Topics of the Times; Wetland Politics
In the waning months of the Bush Administration, William Reilly, then Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency, devised a clever strategy to head off Vice President Dan Quayle and others who wanted to turn over millions of acres of valuable wetlands to developers and oil companies.
He acknowledged that nobody could agree on which wetlands, ranging from prairie potholes to huge tidal estuaries, were truly worth preserving.
So he ordered up a definitive study from the National Academy of Sciences.
That study, over two years in the making, is nearly complete.
But the House Transportation and Infrastructure Committee has chosen to ignore it.
Last week, the committee approved a bill that would weaken many of the basic protections provided by the Clean Water Act of 1972, recognized by experts in both parties as a major environmental success story.
The bill includes the committee's own definition of what a wetland is -- a political contrivance so narrow that it would expose millions of acres to exploitation.
This bodes well for real estate and energy interests, and will surely please Mr.
Quayle.
But it insults the academy and ignores the important functions wetlands serve.


CLASSICAL MUSIC
A Church That Excites The Devotion of Music Lovers  'St.
Matthew Passion' Church of St.
Ignatius Loyola
Kent Tritle continued his good work in the Sacred Music in a Sacred Space series on Wednesday evening with Bach's "St. Matthew Passion." Quite simply, St.
Ignatius has become one of the most exciting churches in New York in which to hear indigenous forces.


RESULTS PLUS
AUTO RACING  Victory for Earnhardt  Dale Earnhardt emerged from the shadows cast by Jeff Gordon's early-season success to win the first Winston Cup event of the season yesterday, the First Union 400 at North Wilkesboro, N.C.
Gordon has driven his Chevrolet Monte Carlo to victory in three of the first six races and taking four poles -- including the front spot at the .625-mile North Wilkesboro Speedway.
But yesterday he finished second. (AP)


J.R. McDermott, 66, Publishing Executive
John R. McDermott, a former reporter, editor, publishing executive and documentary filmmaker, died on Friday in Hilton Head, S.C.
He was 66 and lived in Hilton Head.
The cause was cancer, his family said.


CHRONICLE
When the actress KT SULLIVAN steps onto the stage of the Lyceum Theater tonight as Lorelei Lee in the second act of "Gentlemen Prefer Blondes," she will be wearing $2.8 million worth of diamonds.
"I can't believe it," Ms.
Sullivan said the other day after a trip to Van Cleef &amp; Arpels to try on the jewels.
"I had on earrings worth $500,000 and I was told they weren't big enough for Lorelei. All together I had more than 400 carats on my body. It gives you the most powerful feeling. I got a diamond high."


Abroad at Home; Israel: A New Voice
Imagine a hard-nosed Chicago politician transplanted to Israel and thriving there in its exotic political mix of ideologies and sects.
That would be something like Haim Ramon.
Not much known in the outside world as yet, Mr.
Ramon is very much on the minds of Israelis.
If the cards fall right, he could be the next leader of the Labor Party.
And he has a way of making the cards fall right.


More Rules, Less Smoke For Diners
Ian Duke lighted a Marlboro and explained that new smoking regulations going into effect today in New York City are costing him $40,000 in renovations to his Upper East Side restaurant, Drake's Drum, which will now have a lounge just for smokers.
Serge Raoul, the owner of Raoul's in Soho, said his normally smoke-filled haunt is not spending any money, but smokers will be relegated to a small room behind the kitchen.
"We should protest in the streets like they do in France," Mr.
Raoul said.


6 ISRAELIS KILLED IN GAZA BOMBINGS BY ARAB MILITANTS
Palestinian suicide attackers killed 6 Israelis and wounded at least 45 in two car bombings today in the Gaza Strip, casting fresh doubts on the future of the self-rule accord between Israel and the Palestine Liberation Organization.
Two Muslim militant groups, Hamas and Islamic Holy War, took responsibility for the attacks.
Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin warned that unless the Palestinian Authority cracked down hard on the militants in its territory, expansion of Palestinian self-rule throughout the West Bank was in serious question.


Jackpot Rises to $21 Million
After five straight drawings without a top prize winner, the New Jersey Lottery Pick-6 jackpot will be $21 million for the next go-around today.
That's a four-month high, but still far short of the record $44.3 million on April 20, 1992.


Dividend Meetings
Following is a partial list of dividend meetings this week:  MONDAY  Phillips Pete Co TUESDAY  AAR Corp WEDNESDAY  Shelby Williams Inds Supervalu Inc Walgreen Co WPL Hldgs THURSDAY  Adams Express Co Niagara Mohawk Pwr Parker Hannifin Corp Petroleum &amp; Res Corp Reliastar Finl Corp Universal Foods Corp


Bonner Braces Himself For an 8-Game Mission
Anthony Bonner was more spectator than participant during much of the Knicks' post-season run a year ago.
After starting each of the first seven playoff games, he did not see any action in 12 of the last 17.
That is why the Knicks' remaining eight regular-season games are as important to Bonner as any that he has played all season.
They represent the final opportunities for him to prove worthy of inclusion in the eight- or nine-man rotation Coach Pat Riley plans to utilize in the playoffs.


A Fast-Paced Series For an Art-Loving City
The idea of television using the bustling arts scene that so vividly defines New York has been around for a long time, from the early days of shows like "Camera Three" and "Omnibus" to short pieces celebrating a single institution.
Now, putting hard-to-get money into a brand-new series, WNET is feverishly and joyfully venturing forth with a weekly half-hour magazine called "City Arts." Initial efforts suggest a concept in search of a personality, but the spirit already vibrates promisingly.
Most programs will include a couple of feature stories supplemented by short items on what's happening around town.
The premiere opens with a tour of the Whitney Biennial, conducted alternately by Klaus Kertess, the curator, and the artist Frank Stella.
There is, among other things, a 10-ton "cloud" of mattresses.
The exhibition is described with an unmistakable touch of pride as "the show everybody loves to hate," although younger artists are said to consider it a terrific career move.
One can almost hear Hilton Kramer, the curmudgeonly art critic, sharpening his ax offstage.


Is the U.N. an Equal Employer? Women Say No
When the United Nations Charter was written 50 years ago, it included a farsighted promise of equality for women within its system.
The document pledged "no restrictions on the eligibility of men and women to participate in any capacity and under conditions of equality."
Half a century later, the United Nations trails many other large institutions in this area and has been unable to live up to its own promises.


Clinton Said to Look At Panel to Examine Affirmative Action
President Clinton, who ordered a review of Federal affirmative-action programs in February, may decide to have the issue studied further by a bipartisan panel, a White House official was quoted as saying in The Washington Post.
"It is important to at least give consideration to a high-level commission that can look at all these issues," the White House chief of staff, Leon E. Panetta, told reporters traveling with Mr.
Clinton in California today.


Unfathomable Pataki May Find Personal Distance Puts Goals Out of Reach
He ran as an unknown, a man whose most compelling qualification was that he was not the well-defined incumbent.
Now two images are emerging of the farmer, lawyer and once-obscure suburban lawmaker who promised a new start for New York State.
The first is George E. Pataki of the harsh budget, the unfeeling ideologue who would kick the poor off welfare, make college tuition unaffordable, strand the elderly without care in their homes.
He is the man, in an image groomed with millions of dollars from the budget's opponents, who would make New York a meaner, less hospitable place.


Sprucing Up a Lion's Grave
Bryan Monty wants to spruce up the grave of Leo, the first Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer lion, so he has offered to buy the 13-acre farm where the animal is buried next to the home of his trainer, Volney Phifer.
"The place is the biggest eyesore in Long Hill Township," said Mr.
Monty, a landscaper.
"You wouldn't be able to find it if you walked the property."


Clark Accepts Increased Bid From Ingersoll
Less than two weeks after snubbing a hostile bid for $1.34 billion by the Ingersoll-Rand Company, the Clark Equipment Company yielded yesterday and accepted an improved offer of $1.46 billion.
The merger, approved by the boards of both companies, would create an industrial giant with combined sales of nearly $5.5 billion and more than 40,000 employees.


CARE Looks Homeward, With Books for Poor Boston Children
For 50 years, CARE packages filled with food, books, seeds and tools have formed a lifeline from American donors to hungry and poor people ravaged by wars abroad.
But now, because of pressing needs in the United States, CARE has decided to make its presence felt in this country by helping poor American children develop better reading skills.
To do so, CARE has begun a pilot program here to encourage parents with children up to the age of 6 to get into the habit of reading with them at home and to help them build a library.


A New Job for a Teacher
Today is the last day at Academy Street School for Christina Gordon, the teacher who was so determined to run the Boston Marathon that she resigned when the school refused to let her take next Monday off for the race.
Tomorrow, she begins a new teaching job at Hopatcong High School.
"We're thrilled to have her," said Paul De Franco, principal of Hopatcong High.
"She'll be an inspiration for our kids. What she did was courageous. She gave up a lot for what she believes in."


Butler Interest Is Lukewarm
Fred Wilpon, a Mets' owner, said today that he might be willing to exceed his budgeted payroll if the right player came along, but Wilpon and other club executives steadfastly insisted that they have shown no more interest in Brett Butler, the free-agent outfielder, than in any other player on the market.
Addressing a report that the Mets were interested in Butler, Gerry Hunsicker, the Mets' assistant vice president of baseball operations, said today that the Mets "will not be acquiring any $3 or $4 million baseball player." He did say, however, that the club would be interested in Butler if he were willing to take a substantial pay cut from last season's $3.5 million salary.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Press Notes; Defying conventional wisdom, young people seem to be finding something to read in newspapers.
FOR as long as newspaper editors have been worrying about the future of their publications (which is a long time), one fact has been assumed: young people do not read newspapers.
Now comes the suggestion that adolescents may be more or less like everyone else; that is, they read newspapers even as they complain about them.


Equity Issues Set for This Week
The following equity and convertible debt offerings are expected this week:
Aid Auto Stores Inc., Westbury, L.I., an initial public offering of 1.8 million shares and 1.8 million warrants.
Whale Securities.


Suit Is Filed Over Days Off
Police Officer Carmen Caponegro has filed a complaint accusing the town of forcing him to work on his day off, but the issue is not that simple.
Mr.
Caponegro says that he works at a family-owned gas station when he is not on duty, and that on many occasions officers came to the station and ordered him to report for duty.
Last July 27, according to his lawyer, Joseph J. Bell, Mr.
Caponegro had been drinking beer and was in no shape to wear a weapon when a police sergeant appeared.


Trimmed Schubertiade With a Compensation
Ever since the 92d Street Y reconsidered its Schubertiade, dropping its plan to present all of Schubert's music chronologically in favor of more hit-driven thematic programming, constriction has been a driving force of the series.
Of necessity, themes have been chosen that eliminate from consideration much of Schubert's work, but even so, the Y's spare schedule can hardly accommodate thorough investigations of the chosen subjects.
This year's theme was music that was performed or published in Schubert's lifetime, a topic well beyond the scope of the three concerts the Y allotted to it.
This skimpiness must be especially disappointing for the baritone Hermann Prey, who brought the Schubertiade to the Y after presenting a full-fledged version in Austria.
But Mr.
Prey has gamely remained with the project both as artistic consultant and as principal draw.
When he closed this year's series with a recital on Saturday evening, a full house was on hand.


Orioles Watch the Skies
The Baltimore Orioles are interested in making a trade with the Cleveland Indians -- a May series for a September series.
But the Indians aren't interested.
Baltimore wants to make sure that shortstop CAL RIPKEN would be playing at home if he breaks Lou Gehrig's record for consecutive games played.
If things go as scheduled, Ripken would break the record Sept. 6 at Camden Yards.
The Orioles then go to Cleveland for a weekend series.


Budget Battle Heats Up in Albany as Legislative Leaders Trade Harsh Words
The war of words over the state budget became even more contentious today when Assembly Speaker Sheldon Silver compared the State Senate majority leader, Joseph L. Bruno, to the former Ku Klux Klan leader David Duke and accused Gov.
George E. Pataki of colluding with Mr.
Bruno to inject race into the welfare debate.
In a day of dueling news conferences, Mr.
Bruno later called on Mr.
Silver, a Manhattan Democrat, to stop "dealing in this Lower East Side gutter politics, statements that serve absolutely no purpose."


Besieged Settlements: Are They Worth Keeping?
Before the lethal explosions near two Jewish settlements in the Gaza Strip today, many Government ministers had asked a difficult but basic question: What are those Israelis doing there in the first place?
The settlements that were attacked by Islamic radicals, Kfar Darom and Netzarim, are both small, isolated, heavily fortified outposts in intensely hostile territory.
Living there requires dedication.
The several hundred settlers in the two communities, nearly all Orthodox Jews, say that whatever the hardships, they are carrying out a Zionist imperative to inhabit part of the biblical Land of Israel.


A Met Surprise in '94, Brogna Belongs in '95
The call came early in the off season, and Rico Brogna, the starting first baseman for the Mets, was still enough of a rookie to be wowed by it.
A car dealer in Waterbury, Conn., wanted to give Brogna the use of a red Corvette convertible in exchange for Brogna's commercial endorsement.
Brogna, who has driven used cars all his life, nearly dropped the phone.
"This isn't exactly what I thought I'd be driving," Brogna said.
"I mean, it just wasn't something I'd ever thought about."


Beaten Holmes Exits With a Parting Jab
Were you listening, Mike Tyson?
A serene Larry Holmes, having just lost a close but unanimous decision to Oliver McCall in a heavyweight title fight, bowed out in championship style Saturday night.
He retired at age 45.


Seagram Deal Buys Glamour And a Cash Cow Called Music
After weeks of hectic negotiations, yet another wealthy company, Seagram, has put billions of dollars on the line to get into one of the hottest and fastest growing businesses in the world -- music.
Music?
Isn't MCA Inc., the entertainment conglomerate that Seagram is buying control of, all about movies, with its Universal Pictures producing huge hits like "Jurassic Park"?
Well, yes and no.


Milwaukee Players Are Still in Selig Fan Club
He has what Judge Kenesaw Mountain Landis, Bowie Kuhn and Peter Ueberroth never had: a team.
Not many would be proud to claim the Milwaukee Brewers as their own, but Allan (Bud) Selig signs their paychecks in his spare time.
He is the first commissioner/owner in major league baseball history, although his timing could be better; both his sport and his team are coming off last-place finishes.
There are worse second jobs than being an owner, but Selig -- known nationally as the man who swiped the World Series -- now has 25 of his own players to appease.


How Belly Puts Fame In Its Place
"This is an old song," announced Belly's bassist, Gail Greenwood, on Saturday night at Roseland before the band played "White Belly," from its 1993 debut album, "Star." Two years shouldn't make a song old, even for a new band like Belly.
But a lot has happened between 1993 and Belly's second album, "King" (Warner Brothers).
The group was nominated for two Grammy Awards; the single "Feed the Tree" became a hit, and "Star" sold more than 800,000 copies.
"King" is typical of the way alternative-minded artists follow up a hit: with an album that, in part, attempts to deal with the success of the previous one.
On Saturday night, Tanya Donelly, the group's singer, guitarist and songwriter, dedicated the gently psychedelic pop song "Super-Connected" to the music-industry insiders watching the show.
The song, which includes the line "Are there heartstrings connected/To the wings you got strapped on your back?," seemed to be Ms.
Donelly's way of separating herself from stars whose humanity takes a back seat to their ambition.


JAZZ
New Ways to Present An Idiom in a Concert Hall  Carnegie Hall Jazz Band Carnegie Hall
The first half of the Carnegie Hall Jazz Band's concert on Thursday night had a moment when it seemed as if the music might just go beyond craft.
The trumpeter Lew Soloff played the melody of Jon Faddis's ballad "The Best I've Found," clipping some notes or letting them spread out.
All his manipulations of time and texture added up to the equivalent of emotion, and a sense of regret and loss infused the music.


Suit Is Filed Over Days Off
Police Officer Carmen Caponegro has filed a complaint accusing the town of forcing him to work on his day off, but the issue is not that simple.
Mr.
Caponegro says that he works at a family-owned gas station when he is not on duty, and that on many occasions officers came to the station and ordered him to report for duty.
Last July 27, according to his lawyer, Joseph J. Bell, Mr.
Caponegro had been drinking beer and was in no shape to wear a weapon when a police sergeant appeared.


Studies Find Big Benefits in Marriage
Single people may simply not know what's good for them, a recent group of studies suggests.
A body of demographic research presented at the conference of the Population Association of America here today indicates that marriage offers dramatic emotional, financial and even health benefits over the single life and cohabitation.


People
*
William B. Perkins, managing director at Lord, Dentsu &amp; Partners, New York, a joint venture of Dentsu Inc. and Young &amp; Rubicam Inc., was promoted to president and chief operating officer, responsible for the New York and Los Angeles offices.
He succeeds Len Pearlstein, who left in June.


Giants Sign Hill
The San Francisco Giants reached agreement yesterday with the free-agent outfielder GLENALLEN HILL on a one-year contract.
The deal includes a $500,000 base salary and incentives that could total $300,000.
Hill hit .297 with 10 homers and 38 runs batted in last season with the Cubs.
Right-hander JAIME NAVARRO and the Chicago Cubs agreed to an $850,000, one-year contract that gives him the chance to earn an additional $650,000 in performance bonuses.
Navarro was 4-9 last season with the Milwaukee Brewers.


And on the 101st Day


An Alternative View of New York


Connecticut's Death Penalty Bills Would Ease Way to Executions
The State of Connecticut has put six murderers on death row in recent years under a penal code with roots in the harsh doctrines of the 1630's.
But there has not been an actual execution here since the closing days of the Eisenhower Administration.
Now a package of bills -- approved by both the State House and Senate and nearing Gov.
John G. Rowland's enthusiastic signature -- would make it significantly easier for juries to impose the death penalty and the state to carry it out.


Orthodox Judaism Doesn't Lack Vision
To the Editor:
Thomas L. Friedman takes much of the American Jewish community to task in "Mischief Makers" (column, April 5) for what he views as sabotaging the Arab-Israel negotiations.
He is certainly entitled to his interpretation of events, and his understanding of what is good for Jews.
He is not, however, entitled to cast gratuitous slurs at any segments of any population group, and here I take umbrage.


The Executive Computer
AS the first clones of the Macintosh begin to reach customers in the coming months, Apple Computer Inc. may be learning there's wisdom in the old adage, "Be careful what you wish for because you just might get it."
In November, Apple began handing out licenses to its crown jewel, the Macintosh operating system, and acknowledged that it should have done so years earlier.


Sports of The Times; The Pupil, His Professor and the Lessons That Count
WALKING across Augusta National's 18th green in the Masters' golden twilight, Ben Crenshaw was saying to himself, "If you can get through this foot-and-a-half putt, you can go ahead and cry."
He did, and he did.


METRO DIGEST
CHRONIC SHORTAGE OF AIR CONTROLLERS
Fourteen years after President Ronald Reagan dismissed most of the nation's air-traffic controllers, the office that handles New York's three major airports is still so understaffed that controllers work mandatory six-day weeks and officials are drawing up contingency plans to cut flights during the summer rush.


Homeless Man Charged in Rape
For more than a decade, Edward Johnson lived on the streets.
Until last week, he was regarded as little more than a nuisance who accumulated arrests on charges of indecent exposure and shoplifting.
On Friday, Mr.
Johnson, 48, was charged with grabbing a 12-year-old girl on her way home from school on Thursday, pulling her into a building and raping her.
He was jailed in lieu of $250,000 bond on aggravated sexual assault charges.


The Edgar Transactions: A Skillful Brewing of Deals
Call them the Edgar transactions -- the Seagram Company's purchase of 80 percent of MCA from the Matsushita Electric Industrial Company for $5.7 billion, completed late yesterday, and the sale of Seagram's 23 percent share of the Du Pont Company for $8.8 billion announced late last week.
Several people involved in these two deals credited Edgar Bronfman Jr. yesterday with conceiving and pushing through the transactions to build Seagram, his family's liquor and beverage company, into an entertainment giant as well.
In particular, they said, Mr.
Bronfman succeeded in developing a close enough relationship with Matsushita's managers to insure that Seagram secured an exclusive mandate to acquire the majority of MCA.


Emergency Phones for the Parks
Bergen County officials say theirs is the first county in the state to provide emergency phones in its parks.
The phones, mounted on pedestals, will soon be installed in remote corners of county parks that are half a mile or more from any public building.


Spurs Win 15th Game In a Row
Spurs 101, Lakers 87
David Robinson had 26 points and 18 rebounds yesterday as San Antonio won its 15th straight game, 101-87 over the Los Angeles Lakers in Inglewood, Calif.
Robinson barely missed his first triple-double of the season, getting 8 blocked shots in the Spurs' club-record 26th road victory.


50 Years Later, a Visit With Buchenwald's Ghosts
With a solemn and highly emotional gathering at the site of the former Buchenwald concentration camp, Germany today began a month of ceremonies to remember the victims of the Nazi horror.
Fifty years ago this week, American troops marched into Buchenwald, the first major concentration camp in Germany to fall into Allied hands.
In the following weeks, Allied forces liberated other camps whose names have become symbols of evil, among them Sachsenhausen, Ravensbruck, Bergen-Belsen and Dachau.


A New Job for a Teacher
Today is the last day at Academy Street School for Christina Gordon, the teacher who was so determined to run the Boston Marathon that she resigned when the school refused to let her take next Monday off for the race.
Tomorrow, she begins a new teaching job at Hopatcong High School.
"We're thrilled to have her," said Paul De Franco, principal of Hopatcong High.
"She'll be an inspiration for our kids. What she did was courageous. She gave up a lot for what she believes in."


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-9  BOMBINGS IN GAZA
Palestinian suicide attackers killed 6 Israelis and wounded at least 45 in two car bombings near Jewish settlements in the Gaza Strip.
A1  Some Israelis question the wisdom of hard-to-protect settlements.
A9  NEW PLUNGE BY DOLLAR
The dollar fell to a postwar low of 80.15 yen, down more than 4 percent from Friday's level.
It then recovered modestly after Japan's central bank bought dollars.
A1  WOMEN AT THE UNITED NATIONS
The United Nations Charter included a farsighted pledge of equality for women.
Fifty years later, the organization has failed to live up to its promises.
A6  BUCHENWALD MEMORIAL
With a gathering at Buchenwald, Germany began a month of ceremonies to remember the victims of Nazi concentration camps.
A3  MYANMAR'S DRUG WAR
A drug lord responsible for much of the heroin in the United States is facing a wave of attacks by Burmese troops.
A5  ELECTION SURPRISE IN JAPAN
Voters in Tokyo and Osaka jolted the political establishment by choosing television personalities unaffiliated with a party.
A7  HOW MUCH REFORM IN GUATEMALA?
The agency that spied on, and sometimes killed, Guatemalans is still in business under another name, diplomats and others say.
A8  FUJIMORI AHEAD IN PERU
Exit polls showed President Alberto Fujimori had enough votes to avoid a run-off for re-election.
A8  Maid hanged in Singapore probably was innocent, a panel said.
A7  Jijiaying Journal: Discontent in China's countryside.
A4  National A10-13, B9-12  GETTING SOME OFF WELFARE
A San Diego program to help people on welfare get jobs is widely praised by experts, but its successes have been modest.
Only a few welfare recipients receive the job assistance.
A1  MCA DEAL IS WRAPPED UP
Seagram and Matsushita announced the completion of a deal yesterday for Seagram to buy 80 percent of MCA from Matsushita for $5.7 billion.
A1  A DILEMMA FOR DOLE
On the eve of his announcement that he is running for President, Senator Bob Dole is again wrestling with the differences between Congressional and campaign politics.
This time it's over the tax bill the House sent to the Senate.
A1  REGULATING THE SALE OF BULLETS
Pasadena, Calif., passed an ordinance requiring a buyer of ammunition to fill out a registration card and show a driver's license.
A10  ROOSEVELT'S WHEELCHAIR
Throughout his political career, Franklin Delano Roosevelt studiously hid the fact that he could not walk, but now the disabled are upset that a memorial in Washington to the former President fails to acknowledge his handicap.
A10  CLINTON IN FROM THE DESERT
After spending 100 days in the shadow of the House Republicans, the President is making a show of force, threatening to veto the legislation inspired by Republican campaign promises.
B11  PEROT CASTS A NEW SHADOW
Speaker Newt Gingrich appealed to supporters of Ross Perot not to form a third party, warning them that such a move would help the Democrats.
B9  DEMOCRATS SHOW UNITED FRONT
California Democrats managed to avoid a public split over affirmative action by promising to defend their programs, but stating that they were not endorsing quotas or preferential treatment.
A13  LIFE DOESN'T IMITATE SITCOMS
Demographers went over all the data and kept arriving at the same conclusion: married people are healthier and happier.
A10  CHARITY LOOKS TO HOME
The international relief agency CARE has started a program to encourage American parents to read to their young children.
A11  Metro Digest B1  SHORTAGE MAY HAMPER AIR TRAVEL
The Federal Aviation Administration office that handles New York's three major airports is so understaffed that controllers work mandatory six-day weeks and officials are drawing up contingency plans to cut flights during the anticipated summer rush.
A1  MAKING EXECUTIONS EASIER
Connecticut has a death penalty law, but it hasn't been used since the 1950's.
Now, lawmakers and the Governor want to make it easier for juries to impose the death penalty and the state to carry it out.
A1  Obituaries B14  Alton Meister, biochemist.
George C. Edwards, former Federal appeals judge.
Arts/Entertainment C9-14  An interview with Ruth Rendell.
C9  Theater: Simon's "London Suite." C9  Music: Belly at Roseland.
C12  Y's Schubertiade ends season.
C14  Dance: Ballet Inc.
C12  Books: Critic's Notebook C9  "Shrouds of Glory." C13  Television: "City Arts," on WNET.
C14  Business Digest D1  Sports C1-8  Baseball: Selig's fans.
C5  Brogna belongs.
C5  The free-agent fire sale.
C6  Basketball: Bonner on bubble.
C3  Boxing: Holmes' farewell.
C8  Columns: Anderson on Norman's Masters.
C4  On Hockey.
C2  Golf: Crenwhaw wins Masters.
C1  Hockey: Devils zip Rangers.
C1  Muller joins Islanders.
C2  Racing: Filly in the Derby?
C8  Sports People C8  Editorials/Op-Ed A14-15  Editorials  More budget pain for the city.
Tremors in China.
Topics: Wetland politics.
Letters  William Safire: Gambling fever.
Anthony Lewis: Israel -- a new voice.
Phyllis Hwang: Taiwan for the Taiwanese.
Steven D. Gold: What tax cut fever?
Bridge C14  Chronicle B12  Crossword C13


Hasid Is Stabbed In Crown Heights
A Hasidic man was stabbed and seriously wounded during a robbery attempt in the Crown Heights section of Brooklyn yesterday, the police said.
The man, Noah Alexander, 32, of 1751 Union Street, was stabbed three times as he was walking near the corner of Albany Avenue and St.
John's Place just after 7 P.M., said Officer Arek Tarih, a Police Department spokesman.


JAPAN INTERVENES
The dollar crashed to a postwar low in trading this morning and recovered modestly only after the central bank swept in to support it.
After closing in New York trading on Friday at 83.82 yen, the dollar plunged this morning to 80.15 yen, a startling drop of more than 4 percent.
In late afternoon trading, the dollar was at 82.90 yen.


U.S.O.C. Is Making a Move to Let China Know It Is Still Welcome at the '96 Games
After China's top Olympic official abruptly canceled a trip to North America this week, the United States Olympic Committee sent conciliatory signals today in an attempt to insure Chinese participation at the 1996 Summer Games in Atlanta.
In the wake of seven recent failed drug tests, Chinese swimmers have been banned from an important pre-Olympic competition to be held in Atlanta in August.
U.S.O.C. officials are scrambling to distance themselves from that prohibition instituted by swimming federations from the United States, Canada and Australia.


The Last and Greatest Might-Have-Been of the Civil War
Tom Corcoran SHROUDS OF GLORY From Atlanta to Nashville: The Last Great Campaign of the Civil War  By Winston Groom  Illustrated. 308 pages.
The Atlantic Monthly Press. $23.
Winston Groom is best known for writing such novels as "Better Times Than These," "As Summers Die" and "Forrest Gump," among others.
So what inspired him in his latest book, "Shrouds of Glory," to switch from fiction to a historical account of the last major campaign of the Civil War?


Secret Guatemalan Military Unit, Linked to C.I.A., Dies and Is Born Again
The following article is based on reporting by Clifford Krauss in Guatemala City and Tim Weiner in Washington and was written by Mr.
Weiner.
The enormous building under construction on Seventh Avenue in downtown Guatemala City is supposed to be an icon of reform -- the headquarters of a new civilian intelligence service.


Economic Calendar
Listed below are the scheduled release dates for major economic indicators this week.
Monday  None  Tuesday  Producer Prices . . .
March  Wednesday  Consumer Prices . . .
March  Thursday  Retail Sales . . .
March  Weekly Jobless Claims  Friday  Industrial Production . . .
March  Capacity Utilization . . .
March  Inventory-Sales Ratio . . .
Feb.


Topics of the Times; A Vindictive Cut
When House Republicans packed a 10 percent funding cut for the Federal Election Commission into their $17 billion rescissions package last month, the motive was revenge.
The small, underfunded agency had aroused bipartisan anger by approving new rules limiting the ability of lawmakers to use their campaign treasuries for personal expenses.
Rather than openly defend the abuses, House Republicans retaliated with a cowardly, backdoor repeal of the new rules.
They slashed funding so the agency will be hard-pressed to keep up with routine policing chores much less enforce the new curbs on personal use of campaign money.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Dollar Plunges Again; Bank of Japan Intervenes
The dollar crashed to a postwar low in trading this morning, falling more than 4 percent to 80.15 yen before the Bank of Japan swept in to support it.


Burmese Military Steps Up Drive Against Major Drug Trafficker
Khun Sa, the Asian drug baron who is responsible for much of the heroin on the streets of the United States, is facing a wave of attacks by the Burmese Army intended to destroy his rebel army.
The military Government of Myanmar, the country formerly known as Burma, has massed thousands of soldiers along the vast stretches of northeastern Myanmar controlled by Khun Sa and his well-armed 20,000-man army.


Pettitte Might Be A Familiar Name
Andy Pettitte has a 5-month-old son and a wife living with his in-laws in Deer Park, Tex.
He would love to buy his own house so Josh could have a backyard and Laura could have a picket fence.
First, Pettitte must build a pitching career with the Yankees.
There is scant competition for jobs this spring training because the Yankees are secure at almost every position, but the 22-year-old Pettitte is one player here who is wrestling for a roster spot.
The Yankees have not yet christened Sterling Hitchcock, the strong favorite, as the fifth starter, and they also need a left-handed reliever, so Pettitte is pursuing either role and the $109,000 salary that would come with it.


COMPANY BRIEFS
DOFASCO INC., Hamilton, Ontario, a steel concern, said it planned to spend $144.5 million to build a furnace and casting machine at its plant in Hamilton.
HEALTH FITNESS PHYSICAL THERAPY INC., Minneapolis, which operates fitness centers and physical therapy clinics, completed acquisition of Fitness System, Los Angeles, for about $7 million in cash and stock.
INTEGRATED HEALTH SERVICES INC., Owings Mills, Md., a health care services provider, agreed to acquire Integra Care Inc., in a stock merger valued at more than $29 million.
MICRON TECHNOLOGY INC., Boise, Idaho, completed the merger of Zeos International Ltd. into two Micron units: Micron Computer Inc. and Micron Custom Manufacturing Services Inc.
The new company will be called Micron Electronics Inc.


After a Crenshaw Coup, Visions of a Grand Slam
Since it's spring, flights of fancy are permitted, especially in the wake of Ben Crenshaw's victory, the most romantic Masters result since Jack Nicklaus's improbable victory in 1986.
With the wisteria, dogwood and azaleas still fresh in our minds, let's ponder a question you probably never thought would be asked: can Ben Crenshaw win the Grand Slam?
Before jumping to the easy -- many would say most logical -- conclusion and dismissing the notion out of hand, let's examine it further.
The possibility exists that Crenshaw could, at age 43, just now be getting his second wind.
And if history and passion for the game, and motivation and the ability to draw inspiration from classic venues mean anything at all, then the idea at least merits scrutiny.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
9.00
9.00
6.25
DISCOUNT RATE
5.25
5.25
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
6.00
5.94
3.41
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.70
5.66
3.63
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.84
5.81
4.03
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.11
7.10
6.90
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.39
7.39
7.23
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.26
8.26
8.06
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.29
6.29
6.40
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills 8


Gingrich Takes Presidents, Not Predecessors, as Model
At the end of his first 100 days as Speaker of the House, the question is no longer whether Newt Gingrich is big enough for the job, but whether the job is big enough for Newt Gingrich.
Can he become the kind of overarching national figure with whom he invites comparison, someone who can lead the social transformation he so urgently preaches?
Or will the flaws that he has shown in the last three months prevent him from living up to the great expectations that he has raised for himself?


Lifetimes of Frustration In 'Family Business'
In one of the most engaging scenes in "The Family Business," a theater piece by Ain Gordon and David Gordon, the elderly aunt around whom the show evolves is in a hospital room going over her medical bills with her great-nephew.
Everyone in a white coat who has entered her room, including a psychiatrist who apparently wandered in by mistake, has sent a bill to Medicare demanding payment for treating her.
That scene and another in which the aunt faces the frightening ineptitude of a modern hospital's emergency room offer a humorously caustic dissection of the nation's health-care system.
There might even be a one-act play in it.


U.S.-Mexico Environment Needs Bailout
To the Editor:
Mexico, after having imposed tough austerity measures at home and set aside oil revenues to secure loans that make up the United States portion of the peso rescue package, must be discouraged by efforts in the United States Congress to back out of the commitment altogether (front page, April 2).


Market Place; Weighing Goldman, Sachs's role in the Rockefeller Center trust.
INVESTORS in Rockefeller Center Properties Inc., a real estate investment trust, might want to think twice about approving a proposed amendment to its charter.
The management of the trust is recommending that shareholders discard a provision of the charter that prohibits any entity from beneficially owning a stake larger than 9.8 percent of the total shares outstanding.


Where Questioning Graduate Admissions Tests Will Get You
To the Editor:
"S.A.T. With Familiar Anxiety but New (Higher) Scoring" (news article, April 2), on the Scholastic Assessment Test, the nation's most widely used college entrance exam, touches on ritual that doesn't end for many once they go to college.


Love at the Busy Intersection of Public and Private
THE BLUE AFTERNOON  By William Boyd  367 pages. Alfred A. Knopf. $23.
From the very start of his precocious career, William Boyd demonstrated all the hallmarks of a natural storyteller.
Although highly derivative of Kingsley Amis and Evelyn Waugh, his first novel, the uproariously funny "A Good Man in Africa" (1982), displayed a remarkably assured sense of comic timing, combined with a talent for creating a memorable gallery of eccentrics, twits and self-deluded fools.
His next novel, "An Ice Cream War" (1983), extended his emotional range to embrace compassion and moral seriousness, as well as satire and farce.
And while such later novels as "The New Confessions" (1988) and "Brazzaville Beach" (1991) suffered from a certain schematization, they also pointed up Mr.
Boyd's ambition and broadening vision, his determination to examine the intersection of public events with private lives.


CBS Profits Off 68% in Quarter; Weakness in TV Lineup Is Cited
CBS Inc. reported yesterday that its earnings fell 68 percent in the first quarter, as viewers tuned out many of its prime-time television programs and coverage of the O. J. Simpson trial disrupted daytime programming.
The company earned $21.9 million, or 32 cents a share, about half of what many Wall Street analysts had expected.
According to Zacks Investment Research, the mean earnings estimate had been 67 cents a share.


Corrections
An article yesterday about new smoking regulations for New York restaurants referred incorrectly to the position of Bradley Reynolds at the "21" Club.
He is the vice president of operations; the restaurant is owned by Marshall S. Cogan.


Now Officially, Dole Is Making A Run for '96
Senator Bob Dole opened his third bid for the Republican Presidential nomination today in what may be the last chance for the World War II generation to hold the White House, pledging to limit the reach of Federal Government and to restore to the nation the prairie spirit and values of his home state.
"We need a President who will do more than say no to every spending cut, no to every attempt to return power and money to the states," Mr.
Dole told about 4,000 ebullient supporters at the Kansas Expocenter's Landon Arena, which is named after Gov.
Alf Landon, the Republican nominee in 1936.
"We need a President who shares our values, embraces our agenda and who will lead the fight for the fundamental change America chose last November."


U S West to Issue Class of Stock for Cable
U S West announced yesterday that it would issue a new class of stock for its mushrooming cable and wireless businesses, setting the stage for a series of possible changes in the ownership structure of Time Warner Inc.
Richard D. McCormick, chairman and chief executive of U S West, said the new stock would be aimed at investors who were willing to forgo the annual dividend payments -- and safety -- of a telephone stock in return for the faster growth prospects of a cable stock.


Judge Upholds 'Megan's Law'
Another judge, this one in Federal District Court, has upheld the "Megan's Law" requirement that sex offenders register with the police.
But the judge, John W. Bissell, declined to rule yesterday on whether the police must then tell the community, noting that the provision was already under review in other courts.
The ruling came in the case of a man identified only as Robert Roe.


Latest Films for $ 2: Video Piracy Booms in Russia
Oscar fever does not usually run too high in Russia, but Aleksandr Boitsov is an enterprising man in a tough market.
For the month or so before the Oscar ceremony last month, instead of just displaying the usual "Rocky" and Sharon Stone films, he pushed videocassettes of the year's major Academy Award nominees.
For a little more than $2 apiece, shoppers at the mammoth outdoor software and video market here can choose among "Pulp Fiction" (loosely translated as "Criminal Reading Material"), "Forrest Gump," "Nell" and many other video titles that are not even available yet in the United States.


Man Is Held in a Killing Spree
Hugh Miller killed his former girlfriend and then his best friend, prosecutors say.
After confessing to his mother, the authorities say, he shot her, too.
Mr.
Miller, 30, of Burlington Township, was ordered held on $2 million bail yesterday, charged with going on a six-hour killing spree that started Friday night.


Former Governor Carey Endorses Pataki's Budget
With state budget talks mired in name-calling, Gov.
George E. Pataki celebrated his 100th day in office today by picking up a cross-party endorsement of his deep-cutting budget from former Gov.
Hugh L. Carey.
Mr.
Carey, a Democrat, said that Mr.
Pataki, a Republican, was doing the right thing to cut state spending and taxes to avoid a recurrence of the fiscal crises he repeatedly faced during his two terms from 1975 to 1983.


CHRONICLE
The audience at ELLY AMELING 's New York farewell concert in Alice Tully Hall on Sunday afternoon simply refused to let her go.
For encore after encore, her admirers in the sold-out house leaped to their feet demanding more from the Dutch soprano, who is retiring from the concert stage.
Only when the doors at the side of the stage were locked did they give up.
"I felt very moved at the beginning of the concert, when I got a very warm and prolonged welcome, as well as at the end," Ms.
Ameling said yesterday.
"I remember vividly that this also happened when I did my first recital at Alice Tully Hall in 1970 and I didn't understand at all what was happening. I thought maybe they liked my dress."


NEWS SUMMARY
"Arresting people will not solve the problem. The Israelis have tried that before. The P.L.O. is doing the same thing now and getting the same reception. When they show up at homes to arrest our people, their cars are stoned and children spit at them." -- MAHMOUD ZAHAR, a senior member of Hamas.  [ A10:4. ]


Microbe DNA Seen as Alien By Immune Cells
DEMONSTRATING vividly that the immune system is cleverer than the people who study it, researchers have discovered an entirely new facet of the body's genius for detecting microbial intruders.
The discovery, once it is confirmed and better understood, could have broad implications for the development of vaccines and stimulants for the immune system, as well as for treatments against autoimmune disorders and other medical therapies.
Reporting in the current issue of the journal Nature, Dr.
Arthur M. Krieg of the University of Iowa College of Medicine in Iowa City and his colleagues have learned that the immune system recognizes bacteria and viruses not only by telltale features of their protein coats, as scientists have long known, but by simple yet distinct patterns in the microbes' DNA.
The patterns are very different from the genetic codes found in the cells of humans and other mammals, and thus offer an easy opportunity for the immune system to know that there are alien life forms lurking about and that it had better get busy.


Pistons to Fire Chaney &amp; Co., Report Says
Detroit Pistons Coach DON CHANEY and his staff will be fired after the season, The Detroit Free Press reported yesterday.
The Free Press, citing unidentified sources, also said the Pistons will not renew the contract of BILLY McKINNEY, the vice president of basketball operations.
The Pistons trail Boston by four and a half games in the race for the final playoff berth in the Eastern Conference.
The Pistons' president, TOM WILSON, has maintained that no decisions would be made until the end of the season. (AP)


Penny-Pinching H.M.O.'s Showed Their Generosity In Executive Paychecks
The nation's big for-profit health maintenance organizations had a banner year in 1994 by doing what they are set up to do: squeezing every penny possible out of the fees charged by doctors and hospitals.
But as they put pressure on health care providers to cut costs, the H.M.O.'s were rewarding their chief executives with sizable pay packages.
The cash and stock awards to the chiefs of the seven biggest for-profit H.M.O.'s averaged $7 million in 1994.
"These are monstrously large grants, among the highest we have seen in any industry," said Graef Crystal, an executive compensation expert at the University of California at Berkeley.


Come, Watson! The Game's Afoot!
YOU have a wonderful idea for a computer game.
A private detective's partner is killed and ensuing events lead to a beautiful woman, a couple of villains and a search for a priceless statuette.
It's the stuff dreams are made of, no doubt, but you are not a programmer.
Now you do not have to be a programmer to create a game.
It can be done with Klik and Play, a Microsoft Windows program from Maxis of Orinda, Calif., and dogged patience.


CHRONICLE
Once again, SYLVESTER STALLONE is planning to march down the aisle.
The actor has announced his engagement to ANGIE EVERHARDT , an actress and model, The Associated Press reported.
"We are very much in love, and we couldn't be happier," they said in a statement.


Now, Democracy for Peru
In his first term as Peru's President, Alberto Fujimori orchestrated a military-backed coup against democracy.
He also defeated the deadly Shining Path guerrilla movement, tamed hyperinflation and transformed one of Latin America's sickest economies into one of its most energetic.
Peru's voters rewarded this mixed performance Sunday by overwhelmingly electing Mr.
Fujimori to a second term over former United Nations Secretary General Javier Perez de Cuellar.
Although the defeated candidate alleges irregularities, Mr.
Fujimori's victory looks convincing.
But it is no great triumph for Peruvian democracy.
Three years ago he shut down Congress and courts, contending, without justification, that they were obstructing his counterinsurgency and recovery programs.
Under pressure from the hemisphere's democracies, he then agreed to permit the election of a more acquiescent legislature.
He also pushed through an amended Constitution that let him seek a second term.
Mr.
Fujimori has continued to offend democracy by shielding his military allies, notorious for abuse of human rights, from accountability before civilian courts.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; The world according to Leo Burnett: A new book offers bite-sized advice from an adman.
NO one would ever confuse Leo Burnett, the hard-nosed adman from Chicago, with Forrest Gump, the soft-headed shrimper from Alabama, or Harvey Penick, the sure-handed golfer from Texas.
But now Mr.
Burnett, founder of the agency still bearing his name, shares something with them: his adages are the subject of a mini-book.
NTC Business Books is publishing "100 Leo's: Wit and Wisdom From Leo Burnett," a 120-page, pocket-sized collection of aphorisms offered by Mr.
Burnett, who started the Leo Burnett Company 60 years ago and built it into one of the world's largest agencies before his death in 1971.
The book, decorated throughout with the Red Delicious apples that have come to symbolize Burnett, aims to impart sage advice, in bite-sized portions, about advertising, creativity and management.


McDowell Signs 1-Year Pact With Rangers
The Texas Rangers addressed their bullpen problems yesterday, agreeing to a $500,000, one-year contract with reliever ROGER MCDOWELL.
The 34-year-old right-hander, who made $1.25 million with the Dodgers last season, has a 62-65 record with a 3.17 earned run average and 151 saves in 618 games with the Mets (1985-89), Philadelphia Phillies (1989-91) and Dodgers (1991-94).
He can earn an additional $100,000 in performance bonuses.
McDowell was 0-3 with a 5.23 e.r.a. in 32 games last season. (AP)


CUNY Didn't Shift Legal Tactics in Jeffries Case
To the Editor:
News articles and editorials on the case brought by Prof.
Leonard Jeffries against City College for removing him as black studies department chairman repeatedly assert that the defense advanced one argument in the lower court but switched to another on appeal (front page, April 5, editorial, April 6, for example).


Patterns
Designers on Consignment
Some stores are selling clothes they may not actually own.
Several small, high-end designers say they are being asked to give merchandise to some of the nation's top retailers on consignment.
"In the financial world, it's called risk management; in fashion it's called consignment," said James Purcell, who says he was asked to give clothes with the promise of payment only if they were sold.


Faithfull Discovers a Rocker Within Weill
The theme of last weekend's programming by the Brooklyn Philharmonic Orchestra at the Brooklyn Academy of Music was vaguely titled "Paradise Lost," promising to connect Mahler's paean to heaven in his Fourth Symphony, Kurt Weill's cabaret songs and a centennial celebration honoring Hindemith.
But no one could fool the audience, which would have yawned at the prospects of extensive Hindemith, and which rightfully yawned on Friday night during a disjointed reading of the Mahler conducted by Dennis Russell Davies.
Listeners really turned out in force because of the presence of Marianne Faithfull, a singer whose name invokes all the cliches that once attached to the triumvirate of sex, drugs and rock-and-roll.
After surviving a series of addictions, suicide attempts and troubled liaisons, Ms.
Faithfull has become a chanteuse of the post-counterculture years.
The melancholic, bluesy ballads on her 1987 recording, "Strange Weather," have been described as "music to slit your wrists by," and its growly, disturbing presentation of songs of introspective suffering was a prelude to the singer's growing interest in Kurt Weill.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-13  DOLLAR'S DROP OPENS RIFT  The dollar recovered from a rough ride and intensified a bitter round of finger-pointing by Japan and Germany over who bears the responsibility for fixing a problem that threatens economic relationships around the world.
A1


Mets Ready to Make an Offer to Butler
Fewer than 24 hours after saying Brett Butler was "not a guy we are targeting," the Mets stepped up their interest today in the free-agent outfielder.
Fred Wilpon, a team owner, called Butler at home with a personal appeal and club executives were poised to make his agent, Richard Moss, an offer.
According to Gerry Hunsicker, the Mets' assistant vice president of baseball operations, the Mets have completed meetings to determine how much they can offer Butler and stay within their budget.
They expected to make an offer as soon as they were able to contact Moss, who was traveling today.


What to Do With the Coliseum? Giuliani and M.T.A. in Deadlock
Nine months after the Giuliani administration and the Metropolitan Transportation Authority promised to cooperate in getting the most out of the old New York Coliseum, the two sides remain deadlocked over what to do with one of the most valuable pieces of potential development property in New York City.
At the heart of the stalemate is a basic disagreement.
The M.T.A., which owns the site, wants to rent out the building in roughly its current condition and thus quickly begin a flow of cash to the transit system.


Republicans in New York Are Quick to Back Dole
The first Presidential balloons of the season were spotted in New York last night, and they all belonged to Senator Bob Dole.
When they fell in a midtown ballroom, coming early like the rain of a premature spring, they hit the heads of virtually every major Republican in the state.
Kicking off the first major fund raiser for Mr.
Dole, of Kansas, Gov.
George E. Pataki formally declared New York State to be "Dole country." He got no argument from the massed Republican officeholders on the stage at the New York Sheraton.
Each of them, at the behest of Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato, the most powerful figure in state Republican politics, has endorsed Mr.
Dole, all but guaranteeing a hard time to any other candidate in the state primary process next year.


Dykstra Prefers to Take His Swings in the Batter's Box
For a time it seemed as if the majority of major leaguers were about to play serious hardball with Lenny Dykstra, all because he said he wanted to play hardball.
Not surprisingly, Dykstra, as hard as the Nails nickname he answers to, emerged unscathed from a hail of angry words by union activists.
And, as of yesterday, Dykstra was doing what he wanted -- playing for the Philadelphia Phillies, in an intrasquad game, grateful to replace the 234-day strike and its strife with sunshine, sweat and some sweet swings of his bat.


Plan for a Mall in a Marsh
For more than a decade, there have been dreams and even concrete proposals for developing a site in a tidal marsh just north of the Pleasantville toll barrier on the Atlantic City Expressway.
The latest plan is a $60 million factory outlet mall: 400,000 square feet designed to fulfill the dreams of discount hunters.
Frank Abramoff, who owns the 54-acre site, said that it would be the biggest noncasino project in Atlantic County history.


INSIDE
Big Paychecks at H.M.O.'s
Health maintenance organizations rewarded their chief executives with sizable pay packages last year even as they pressured doctors and hospitals to cut fees.
Page D1.
No Smoking (No Kidding)
On the first day of a new statute in New York City to restrict smoking, the table talk in many restaurants was about lighting up: could you or couldn't you?
Page B3.
Questions in Bus Accident
The driver of a city bus that struck and killed a pedestrian on Saturday had three accidents in his first year and should not have passed his probation, officials said.
Page B1.
A DNA Supercomputer?
Computer scientists say that the vast information-handling capacity of nature's genetic machinery could be the basis for powerful new computers.
Science Times, page C1.
A Chinese Leader Dies
Chen Yun, a conservative Communist patriarch who slowed economic reform in China, died yesterday, a Government official said.
Page B7.


Reputed Mob Figure Shot in Manhattan


Holland Tunnel Going Cellular
Once upon a time, talk was cheap in the Holland Tunnel because there was no cellular telephone service.
But yesterday the price went up.
Cellular One, Bell Atlantic, Nynex and the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey announced that cellular phone service is available.
In the Lincoln Tunnel, service was established by Cellular One last October, followed by Bell Atlantic and Nynex on March 2.


Ito Subpoenas Juror Removed in Simpson Case
Apparently determined to find out whether his orders to jurors in the O. J. Simpson case are being violated, Judge Lance A. Ito has subpoenaed Jeanette Harris, the juror he removed from the panel last week.
The subpoena, issued on Saturday, requires Mrs.
Harris to appear in Judge Ito's chambers on Wednesday afternoon.
The judge ordered an investigation last week after Mrs.
Harris told a television reporter that jurors spoke about the case among themselves, as well as with others in unmonitored telephone calls.
The jurors are regularly instructed not to do either of those things.


Managers Fined $1 Million in Co-op Fraud
Three former real estate management executives were ordered yesterday to pay $1 million in restitution to condominiums and cooperatives that they were accused of defrauding.
But they avoided prison terms for their crimes, which involved taking kickbacks from contractors and vendors who served the buildings.
The managers, all former executives of Darwood Management, were among nearly 80 individuals and companies who last June pleaded guilty or were indicted on charges of corrupt dealings involving hundreds of Manhattan cooperatives and condominiums.
The cases arose from a three-year investigation by the office of the Manhattan District Attorney, Robert M. Morgenthau, of racketeering in the residential real estate management industry.


A Mother on Trial
In the trial of a woman accused of killing her five children a quarter-century ago, a pediatrician who treated two of the children testified that there was no medical evidence supporting the mother's admission that she had smothered them.
The trial has affected life in the mother's small town.
Article and column, page B4.


Climb in Technology Issues Lifts Market as Dow Gains 5.53
Despite continued nervous trading of the dollar, the stock market rose yesterday, with technology stocks rising powerfully on expectations of a surge in earnings at Motorola, the cellular telephone and microchip maker that has often led the market in recent months.
The dollar stabilized in afternoon trading in New York, helping also to stabilize bond prices, which turn volatile when the dollar declines.


Smoking Law, on First Day, Draws Critics
Frank V. Mina called one of his regular eating spots yesterday morning to make sure he would still feel welcome there.
The news was good, and lunchtime found Mr.
Mina, a smoker, at the bar of Michael's on John Street near the World Trade Center, sitting with a newspaper, a glass of red wine, a club sandwich and, most pertinently, a cigarette.
On the first day of New York City's stringent new antismoking statute, Mr.
Mina, a civil and personal-injury lawyer, was among many, smokers and nonsmokers alike, who expressed vexation over the new law, the Smoke Free Air Act, which prohibits or drastically restricts smoking in public places, including most city restaurants.


Raiders Reluctantly Face the Fact That They Are No Longer Feared
These are among the traits that have made the Los Angeles Raiders in their 35-year history one of pro football's most successful franchises: strong college drafts; physical, nasty and intimidating play; the deep pass; a driven, cunning and controlling owner in Al Davis, and a way of doing business that is cloaked and clouded in secrecy.
The Raiders have wrapped themselves in this homespun blanket of security.
For the Raiders, it is us against the world.
Us against the league.


Russian Soprano Joins A Long Line of Lucias
The production of Donizetti's "Lucia di Lammermoor" that Tito Capobianco staged for Beverly Sills in 1969 has been a trusty standby in the New York City Opera's repertory ever since.
Solidly traditional, it seeks neither to dazzle with fresh insight nor to provoke with quirky reinterpretation; rather, it offers a suitably bleak backdrop against which the singers enact Sir Walter Scott's tragedy of inter-clan squabbling in 17th-century Scotland.
It is, to put it differently, a production that must rise, fall or merely float on the efforts of the singers.
The first performance of the season bobbed along competently -- rarely more or less -- at the New York State Theater on Sunday afternoon.


Two Routes From Japan Into European Tradition
Like their political ancestors of the last century, modern Japanese composers struggle to adapt their ancient and isolated musical culture to an all-embracing foreign one.
The two men featured at Saturday night's Continuum concert at Alice Tully Hall have approached the West in different ways.
Toshiro Mayazumi is not about to surrender his heritage; the first piece on the program, "Bunraku" for solo cello, made that clear.
A discursive conversation with a number of topics, "Bunraku" introduced sliding, insinuating pitch relationships and blunt percussive strokes to a European instrument not really intended to receive them.
Mr.
Mayazumi's skill rises above mimicry.
Here, Western music was given instruction on how it might expand existing techniques.
David Eggar, the player, seems to have learned the lesson well.


Give Nutrition Advice With Food Stamps
To the Editor:
Re "Kool-Aid, Not Soda: Living on Food Stamps" (front page, April 5): Food budgeting on a limited income is indisputably not easy or fun, but food choices could be better prioritized.
Neither potato chips nor Kool-Aid should be the alternative to Doritos and soda, but rather boiling potatoes and real juice, milk or fruit.


Israeli Ambassador at the Palace in Jordan


Jerkens Wins Races, and Respect
"If we drafted horse trainers like basketball teams," said Chick Lang, the longtime racing official, "you'd start with Allen Jerkens."
He searched his mind, and added: "There's almost a divinity about him. A greatness. The key to his success is he cares for his horses. They're not just a tool. He'll never use or abuse a horse. He really gets inside a horse's head."


Morarji Desai Dies at 99; Defeated Indira Gandhi to Become Premier of India
Morarji Desai, a crusty puritan who sprang from obscurity and imprisonment to become the Prime Minister of India's first non-Congress Party Government in 1977 and to usher in some of the country's most momentous political changes, died today in Bombay.
He was 99.
Mr.
Desai was a member of a tiny community of Brahmans in western India.
He was feared for his acerbic tongue and unflinching refusal to compromise.


SOCCER REPORT
Women's World Cup
A basketball-style timeout will get a tryout during the final stages of the women's World Cup tournament in Sweden in June, FIFA, soccer's world governing body, announced yesterday in Zurich.


International Briefs; In Brief
*
A joint venture between the Mitsubishi Corporation and Perusahaan Otomobil Nasional Berhad of Malaysia has received permission to assemble light trucks in Vietnam.
The venture, the Vinastar Motors Corporation, is building a plant near Hanoi and expects to begin production next month, assembling up to 360 trucks a year from imported parts.
*
GEC Alsthom has won a contract worth as much as $792 million to lease 106 trains to the London subway system for its Northern Line.
GEC Alsthom is a joint venture of Alcatel Alsthom S.A. of France and the General Electric Company of Britain,which is not related to the General Electric Company of the United States.


At Masters, CBS Hits All the Greens Except the 19th
You sat for three hours watching CBS's telecast of the Masters' final round.
You watched Ben Crenshaw drop his putter, his cap and his composure, as he bowed to cry, knowing he could hang a second tacky green blazer in his closet.


Fujimori Wins 5 More Years At Peru Helm
With the official vote count nearing completion, President Alberto K. Fujimori decisively increased his lead today in Peru's presidential elections.
His independent party also appeared to gain a majority in Congress, consolidating the President's control over the Government for five more years.
The National Election Board said today that with 45 percent of the 12.5 million votes counted, Mr.
Fujimori had 64 percent, compared with 22 percent for his nearest rival, Javier Perez de Cuellar, the former Secretary General of the United Nations.


Mighty Mary's Crew Takes a Major Step
It's a $4 million boat, but a roll of duct tape was the only thing handy today to fix a broken mast fitting on Young America during its first finals race against Mighty Mary.
The quick fix wasn't enough.
In the end, the resilient Mighty Mary defeated Young America by 48 seconds in an important race for the mostly women's crew, which had beaten Young America only twice before in six matches.


Public Gives Congress Good Marks, but Is Mixed on Gingrich
If the latest parade of opinion polls is any gauge, much of the public is enthusiastic that Republicans are getting more done in this Congress than Democrats did before.
But at the same time, they say they have reservations about parts of what the aggressive new Congress is doing.
And their feelings toward the architect of the party's agenda, Speaker Newt Gingrich, are emphatically mixed.
Most of those trends appear in three surveys conducted in late March and early April for The New York Times and other news organizations.
They suggest that Mr.
Gingrich's brisk manner and attack-dog speaking style do not wear as well as the party he has lately come to symbolize.


Creative Fire: Designers Can't Fake It
There were a lot of New York designers faking a little Chopin this season.
That is, faking a little Chopin the way Jack Nicholson did, in "Five Easy Pieces." Asked by Catherine, the object of his lust, to play the piano, he ridicules her for being moved by his selection.
"I picked the easiest piece that I could think of," he said.
"I faked a little Chopin, you faked a big response."


Palestinians Seize 100 Militants Who Oppose Talks With Israel
The Palestinian police announced today that they had arrested more than 100 members of Hamas and Islamic Holy War, the militant groups that took responsibility for two anti-Israeli bombings on Sunday in the Gaza Strip.
The death toll among victims of the bombings rose to eight, when an Israeli soldier and an American student died today.


N.H.L. Job for Mullen
The former Islander Brian Mullen is expected to leave his position in the team's front office to take a post with the National Hockey League as the league's director of off-ice programs, a league official confirmed last night.
On Wednesday, Mullen and his older brother Joe, a forward for the Pittsburgh Penguins, will be presented with the 1995 Lester Patrick Award.
The brothers grew up in the Hell's Kitchen neighborhood in Manhattan.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League  CHICAGO WHITE SOX -- Agreed to terms with Chris Sabo, third baseman, on a one-year contract.


Man Is Charged in Death of Queens Girl, 4
At first, when Raychelle Ortiz, a 4-year-old Queens girl, disappeared last May, the man who had been caring for her told the police that he last saw her after leaving the girl outside a Brooklyn pizza parlor while he bought a slice.
Three days later, after a widespread, widely publicized hunt, the man, Richard Morales, changed his story, this time telling the police that his girlfriend, Raychelle's mother, had killed the girl.


Officially Speaking, Agassi Is No. 1
ANDRE AGASSI's push to the top began last July at the Canadian Open when he was stuck at No. 20, an imposing 4,061 points behind the leader PETE SAMPRAS.
In those days, Yesterday, Agassi got the payoff, moving past Sampras to claim the No. 1 ranking on the ATP computer for the first time.
He becomes just the 12th player in the 22-year history of men's computer rankings to hold No. 1 and ends Sampras's 82-week grip on the top spot. (AP)


CHRONICLE
Being overweight can be a positive experience, or so says DELTA BURKE , the television star.
The actress, a former beauty queen, said that after her weight began escalating in the late 1980's, "I went through great emotional changes." She added, "It was a real journey learning to accept and not be down on myself."
As fans began to admire her candor, she said the other day, "I found that putting on weight gave my life wonderful things." She continued: "People began to listen to me rather than look at me, to appreciate my work. That gave me a voice for myself, and I began to become a voice for others."


Who's in Charge, Governor?
Back when Joseph Bruno was just another grumpy, ideology-spouting State Senator, it did not really matter what he said or how he said it.
But now that he has become Senate majority leader with Gov.
George Pataki's blessing, New York State and its chief executive have reason for alarm when he runs amok.
Mr.
Bruno's comment to Newsday last week that Democrats opposing welfare reform were beholden to blacks and Hispanics, "the people that got their hands out," was offensive enough.
His unrepentant "apology" and counterattack have further poisoned the atmosphere and hurt the chances of getting a state budget approved.
To his credit, Mr.
Pataki criticized Mr.
Bruno for injecting race into the welfare debate, but the Governor's comments have been far too tepid.
He seems to think it adds to his leadership stature to remain above the fray.
In an ideal world that might be true, but we are talking about a Senate leader who clearly aspires to be the Capitol bully.


Wishing Away a Baby-Murders Case
NOTHING ever happens here except the weather.
It snowed over the weekend -- not a lot, just enough to crust the grass and keep the table talk flowing at the Coffee Break Family Restaurant.
Rumor has it more snow will fall before winter is through with April and that next month will get a lot of rain.
People say that for real news, you have to look beyond Newark Valley, even beyond Owego, the Tioga County seat, where the antique shops and bookstore bring in more tourists than trouble.
The big city, Binghamton, about 20 miles away -- now that's where the police blotter gets interesting.


Chess
Gary Kasparov has called the Linares International the "tournament world championship," in deference to the extraordinarily strong fields that the sponsor, Luis Rentero, puts together every year at Linares, Spain.
Of course, that's just an honorific.
The world championship is determined by a head-to-head match, no matter whether the Professional Chess Association or the International Chess Federation is sanctioning it.
But this year, Kasparov did not participate: rumor has it that he is unhappy about criticism in the Spanish press over his supposedly taking back a move last year in a game with Judit Polgar.
Moreover, Viswanathan Anand and Gata Kamsky had to miss the tournament, too, because it overlapped their P.C.A. qualification match.
Nevertheless, at this year's running of the event, which took place last month, there was another illustrious turnout.


Theodore Ellenoff, 70, Jewish Civil Rights Leader
Theodore Ellenoff, a founder of the New York law firm of Squadron, Ellenoff, Plesent, Sheinfeld &amp; Sorkin and a former president of the American Jewish Committee, died on Sunday at Westchester County Medical Center.
He was 70 and lived in Manhattan and Armonk, N.Y.
He suffered a heart attack, said his daughter, Debra Ellenoff.


Climate Talks Enter Harder Phase of Cutting Back Emissions
WHEN 120 countries decided in Berlin last Friday to hold talks for the first time on reducing emissions of heat-trapping industrial waste gases like carbon dioxide, they opened a new and vastly more difficult phase in the world's continuing effort to cope with the uncertain threat of climate change.
Industrialized countries have been obligated under a treaty signed three years ago at the Earth Summit in Rio de Janeiro to place a ceiling on emissions of the so-called greenhouse gases at 1990 levels by the year 2000.
Now, in their first meeting, the parties to the treaty have agreed to undertake negotiations, to be completed within two years, on actual reductions in emissions after 2000.


St. John's Lopez Comes Under Focus
St.
John's is apparently looking into a published report that last season's star freshman, FELIPE LOPEZ, played in two nonsanctioned games last week in his native Dominican Republic.
Yesterday, The New York Post, citing unidentified sources, said St.
John's officials first learned that Lopez had played in the games last week when it was reported in New York's Spanish-language newspaper, El Diaro.
Athletic director, JACK KAISER, then notified the Big East, the Post said, which turned the information over to the National Collegiate Athletic Association. (AP)


Did Maya Doom Themselves by Felling Trees?
The collapse of the Maya civilization in approximately A.D. 800 may have been caused by a self-imposed ecological disaster, a research archeologist says.
Speaking to a group of 500 specialists in ancient Maya civilization gathered here from around the world this weekend, Dr.
Richard D. Hansen, a research archeologist at the University of California at Los Angeles, said that in their zeal to create magnificent architecture the Maya leveled forests to fuel the fires with which they converted limestone into lime stucco.
The process requires intense heat.


Rethinking Welfare: Deterring New Births -- A special report.; State Aid Is Capped, but to What Effect?
At 16, Naikeya Haley decided to have a second child despite the state law that denied her extra welfare benefits because she was already receiving aid.
"It was a planned pregnancy," said Ms.
Haley, who is now 17.
The law that kept her from collecting $102 more a month "doesn't make any difference to me," she said flatly, other than to make it that much harder to provide for her family.
She and her two daughters live on $322 a month, and stay with friends.


New Thriller: Will Ovitz Go to MCA?
Michael Ovitz, who helped to create the Creative Artists Agency more than a decade ago and has overseen its remarkable growth into a behemoth that represents superstars like Tom Cruise, Michael Jackson and Sylvester Stallone, is the source of considerable speculation as the choice of the Seagram Company to run the entertainment giant MCA Inc., which Seagram bought on Sunday.
Mr.
Ovitz, who is 49 and has moved into advertising, corporate finance and the convergence of entertainment, information and communications, is a close friend of Edgar Bronfman Jr., the chief executive of Seagram, the Canadian liquor giant, and was one of the brokers in the MCA sale.


Flesh-Eating Illness Confirmed as Cause of Death
New York City health officials confirmed yesterday that a 71-year-old woman had died last month of invasive Group A streptococcus, the same infection that has been tentatively blamed for the death of an 8-year-old Queens boy last week.
The officials stressed, however, that two cases in one month of this rare but serious infection in a city the size of New York is entirely normal and that there was no indication of an outbreak.
In its most serious form, the infection can cause toxic shock syndrome and necrotizing fasciitis, the so-called flesh-eating disease.


By Design; The Shirt Redux
From oversize shirts to shrunken T-shirts to polo shirts and back to classic shirts.
That's how fashion goes round and round.
The newest look in shirts is close to the body, like those Cacharel shirts women in the 70's used to preshrink to the right body-hugging configuration.
The new body shirts fit right into the late-60's mod trend that surfaced in many fall shows and is already in stores.
Saks Fifth Avenue has MAG Magaschoni's white cotton shirt ($92), Donna Karan's pique shirt ($225) and a sleeveless version in a viscose-nylon blend by Parallel ($88).


Devils Win Everything Except The Game
This is how an undefeated streak ends.
A hot team goes on the road.
It outhits and outskates the home team and outshoots it by 43-21.
The Devils did all this to the Montreal Canadiens tonight at the Forum but the Canadiens won the game, 2-1.


CUNY Didn't Shift Legal Tactics in Jeffries Case; Not in Harlem
To the Editor:
Your April 5 news article on the Leonard Jeffries case places City College in Harlem.
As someone who trudged up the steep slopes of Hamilton Heights to study geography under C.C.N.Y.'s legendary Prof.
John Hastings, I deplore this error.


Of Rhinos, Elephants and Humans
There were about 1.2 million elephants in Africa in the late 1970's.
Today there are about 600,000.
The African black rhino population has dropped by 95 percent since 1970; there are now fewer than 2,000 on the whole continent.
A fragile population of around 5,900 white rhinos lives in South Africa, where they are relatively safe, but they have virtually disappeared everywhere else.
These magnificent animals are still at risk despite a worldwide ban on elephant and rhino products.
Poaching persists and the ban is unevenly enforced.


Grading G.O.P. Freshmen In House: High in Ambition, Low in Humility
In January, Linda Smith and 72 other Republican freshmen in the House of Representatives descended on Washington like sailors on a four-hour leave, determined to turn Congress on its ear.
A hundred days later, after racing through dozens of bills to fulfill their Contract With America, the political manifesto on which the freshmen and scores of Republican incumbents campaigned last fall, Mrs.
Smith and her colleagues are ready to send the next wave of change crashing into Washington.


Three Newly Discovered Viruses May Cause Unexplained Hepatitis
A blood specimen kept frozen for more than three decades and tested with techniques developed only in the last few years has led to the discovery of three previously unknown hepatitis viruses.
Studies to determine how often the viruses make people sick, which groups of people are most affected and how the viruses are transmitted have been started in recent weeks by scientists at Abbott Laboratories in Chicago who discovered the viruses.


Who Is Unburying Grant's Tomb?


Sabo Gets the Call From the White Sox
CHRIS SABO got some surprising news when the telephone woke him up yesterday morning.
His agent told him that he was wanted by the team that trains where he lives, the Chicago White Sox.
Sabo, out of work as a free agent, wasn't about to be picky.
He agreed to a $550,000, one-year contract yesterday to be the White Sox's designated hitter.
He can earn another $550,000 in performance bonuses.
"To be honest with you, I didn't have much of a choice; I wanted to go back to the National League but it didn't work out," said Sabo, arriving to take batting practice less than an hour after agreeing to terms.


Queensville Journal; Jailed in Killing, He's Guilty Only of Being a Misfit
"It's scary," said Heidi Chapman, picking up milk at the Queensville General Store with her two little children in tow.
"Like my kids are out playing on the road and stuff, and the guy could be living across the street."
Mrs.
Chapman was referring to the killer of 9-year-old Christine Jessup.
After school on Oct. 3, 1984, Christine came into this store and bought a pack of bubble gum.
She left the store and vanished.
Nearly three months later, the girl's remains, bearing stab wounds and signs of sexual molestation, were found on wooded land about 15 miles away.


Bolivia Shakes, and So Does Theory on Deep Quakes
EXPERTS thought they had a pretty good idea of what caused deep earthquakes.
These upheavals, which occur 200 to 400 miles below the earth's surface, are puzzling in that they ought to be impossible.
The pressures and temperatures at that depth are so great that rock should undergo no frictional sliding, the mechanism of garden-variety earthquakes near the surface.
So most geologists came to believe that the crushing pressures and increasing heat below a certain depth squeezed the rock into forms that were suddenly denser, creating huge cracks that developed into big temblors.
No more.
An extraordinarily big earthquake 395 miles beneath Bolivia last June not only shattered records by jolting cities as far away as Toronto but also left the squeeze theory shaken.


Ruling by Court Sets Back Prosecutors in a Test Case on Medicaid and Medicare Referrals
In a major test case, a Federal appeals court ruled today that health care businesses that rewarded doctors for the referral of Medicare or Medicaid patients could not be punished unless the Government proved that they knew such rewards were illegal and offered them anyway.
The decision, by the United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit, in San Francisco, is a setback for Federal law-enforcement authorities.
The case was a centerpiece of the Government's effort to prevent doctors from making profits by sending patients to laboratories, clinics and other health care businesses in which the doctors had invested.
Federal law says it is a felony to offer or receive any direct or indirect remuneration for the referral of business under Medicare or Medicaid.


Science Times E-Mail
Science Times has an electronic mail address for comments from readers about published articles and suggested areas of coverage:
scitimes@nytimes.com.


On My Mind; You Are Palden Gyatso
In the elevator, somebody asked whether that was the Dalai Lama -- the man in the maroon robes I had escorted to the door of the Times building after his visit.
No, he was just a plain Buddhist monk from Tibet. This is his story.
My name is Palden Gyatso.
I have spent three decades of my 64-year-old life in Chinese prisons and labor camps in Tibet.
I became a monk when I was 10 years old.
At age 29, in 1959, after the Chinese invasion of Tibet, I was arrested, accused of being a reactionary element and sentenced to a seven-year term at a prison previously a monastery.


70's Dreams, 90's Realities; Renewable Energy: A Luxury Now. A Necessity Later?
It was a vision from the energy-short 1970's that seemed on the verge of coming true in the boundless 80's: harnessing the wind, the sun and hot water from the bowels of the earth to produce electricity without pollution and without end.
But that dream has foundered in the bottom-line 90's.
Now, with costs still high and a new era of competition roiling the long-protected energy business, alternative sources of power are fighting for their lives.
These so-called renewable sources may well survive only as window dressing for utility company annual reports, many industry experts say.


Q&amp;A
Limits of Growth
Q.
A friend of mine grew several inches after graduating from high school.
Is that normal?
How long can a person keep growing?


Defense Begins for Mother in Sudden Deaths of 5 Children
A pediatrician who cared for two of Waneta E. Hoyt's five children a quarter-century ago and wrote of their deaths as textbook cases of crib death testified today that there was no medical evidence supporting Mrs.
Hoyt's admission last spring that she had smothered them.
Mrs.
Hoyt, who has since recanted her confession, is on trial on charges of murdering her three sons and two daughters from 1965 to 1971.
The comments of the pediatrician, Dr.
Alfred Steinschneider -- who built a national reputation as an expert on Sudden Infant Death Syndrome based, in part, on his study of Mrs.
Hoyt's children -- came as the defense opened its case.


Utility's Nuclear Depot at Issue
Should Jersey Central Power and Light Company be permitted to build a storage depot for used nuclear fuel rods near its Oyster Creek nuclear power plant here?
A Superior Court judge in Ocean County is scheduled to rule on the issue on Thursday.
The township board gave its permission a year ago, precipitating a court challenge.
Jersey Central and its parent company, General Public Utilities Corporation of Parsippany, argue that the Oyster Creek plant will be forced to close if it does not get a storage solution soon.


Bhutto Renews Demand for Delivery of Jet Fighters or a Refund
On the eve of a meeting with President Clinton, Prime Minister Benazir Bhutto of Pakistan today renewed her demand that the United States deliver jet fighters purchased by her country or refund the money, and Administration officials said they were searching for ways to soften the effects of the Congressional ban that has held up the deal.
Pakistan has paid for more than $1 billion in military equipment, including 28 F-16 fighters, but delivery has been barred by law since 1990, after the Bush Administration could not certify that Pakistan did not have a nuclear device.


Changes Sought in Brokers' Pay Policies
In an attempt to address public concern about the ethics and practices of retail stockbrokers, the Securities and Exchange Commission released a report yesterday urging changes in compensation policies for brokers.
The 22-page report, prepared by industry leaders at the request of the S.E.C. chairman, Arthur Levitt Jr., said, "The perception is strong that compensation practices create conditions that foster abuse."


Senator Faster Than a Train
Senator Frank R. Lautenberg has two words for the new, state-of-the-art, $18 million Senate subway system: "It stinks." Mr.
Lautenberg, a Democrat of New Jersey, delivered his assessment to Roll Call, a Capitol Hill newspaper, after his subway car stalled while he was en route from a Senate office building to a vote in the Capitol last week.
The Senate delayed its vote for five minutes after learning that Mr.
Lautenberg was on the way -- jogging.
LAWRENCE VAN GELDER


A Hospital Inspection in Queens


John Hazard, 86, Law Professor And a Top Sovietology Scholar
John N. Hazard, one of the foremost authorities on the legal system of the Soviet Union and a teacher at Columbia University for 48 years, died on Friday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 86.
The cause was cancer, relatives said.


3 Accidents Tied to Driver In Bus Death
The driver of a city bus that struck and killed a 70-year-old pedestrian as she crossed an intersection near her Brooklyn home Saturday night had three accidents in his first year on the job and was mistakenly allowed to pass his one-year probation last fall, Transit Authority officials said yesterday.
The authority also revised its original accident report in a way that suggested the victim, Rachel Neufeld, a survivor of the Nazi death camp at Auschwitz who lived at 1134 East Second Street, had crossed in front of the bus before being hit from behind and crushed to death under its right front wheel.


Ten Years Later, Coca-Cola Laughs at 'New Coke'
So, America, did you think that new Coke had made the dishonor roll of world class blunders, along with the Edsel, the Hubble telescope, the Susan B. Anthony dollar and the state-of-the-art baggage-shredding system at the Denver International Airport?
Think again.
The introduction of new Coke in 1985 was not an embarrassing consumer-products disaster, but the best thing that ever happened to Coca-Cola, according to the chairman and chief executive of the company, Roberto C. Goizueta.
"Today we are in the best shape as a company in many decades, and our stock price and our earnings are at an all-time high," Mr.
Goizueta said today during an unusual meeting to mark the 10th anniversary of the new Coke fiasco.


Haiti Murder Investigation: Avenues With Few Answers
Two weeks after the assassination of a prominent right-wing critic of President Jean-Bertrand Aristide caused strains with Washington over accusations that the Interior Minister may have been involved, investigators say they are still in the dark about who did it.
This much is certain: The white Subaru in which the victim, Mireille Durocher Bertin, was riding was blocked on a busy street in broad daylight.
Gunmen in a red Mitsubishi jeep shot up the front tire on the driver's side, got out and raked the windshield with automatic weapons, firing from both sides of the car.
Then they disappeared.


The Knicks Are Good; Can They Be Great?
The Knicks will take on the Miami Heat Tuesday night at Madison Square Garden and a victory would be a milestone for the franchise.
By defeating the Heat the Knicks would improve to 50-25, giving them 50 or more victories for the fourth straight season for the first time in franchise history.
Not even in the glory seasons of 1968-69 through 1972-73 did the Knicks win at least 50 games in four consecutive seasons.
They were 48-34 in 1971-72, when they reached the National Basketball Association finals.


Titles in Bridge Tourney
One major title went to a team with Canadian roots and another to some top female players as the American Contract Bridge League's Spring Nationals ended here on Sunday night.
The Open Swiss Team Championship was won by Ralph Cohen of Memphis, Billy Cohen and Peter Nagy of Las Vegas, Nev., George Mittelman of Toronto, Hugh Ross of Oakland, Calif., and Martin Sklar of Northridge, Calif., all of whom developed their bridge skills in Montreal.


Latvian to Lead Pittsburgh Symphony
Mariss Jansons, the Latvian conductor whose recordings with the Oslo Philharmonic have brought that ensemble into the international spotlight, has been appointed music director of the Pittsburgh Symphony Orchestra.
He is to succeed Lorin Maazel at the start of the 1997-98 season, the orchestra announced yesterday.
The 52-year-old Mr.
Jansons will be the 10th music director of the Pittsburgh Symphony, which is celebrating its centenary this season.
He will retain his directorship of the Oslo Philharmonic, as well as his positions with the London Philharmonic, where he is principal guest conductor, and with the St.
Petersburg Philharmonic, where he is associate principal conductor.
His three-year contract requires him to spend 10 weeks a year in Pittsburgh.


Coca-Cola Broadens Its Agency Lineup
The Coca-Cola Company said yesterday that it had broadened its agency roster by naming Fallon McElligott Berlin in New York, a unit of Fallon McElligott in Minneapolis, to handle the creative portion of its Diet Sprite brand account, and Hill, Holliday, Connors, Cosmopulos in Boston to handle a promotional project for its Caffeine Free Diet Coke brand.
Bob Bertini, a spokesman for Coca-Cola in Atlanta, confirmed reports of the changes this week in Advertising Age and Adweek.
Fallon McElligott Berlin, whose parent handles various assignments for Coca-Cola, was awarded the Diet Sprite assignment without a review.
The assignment, for which billings were not disclosed, was previously handled by Lowe &amp; Partners/SMS in New York, a unit of the Interpublic Group of Companies, which continues to handle creative duties for the much larger Sprite brand and media services for both brands.


No Need to Show Pity for the Padres
Their paychecks will not bounce, their lineup will not be underaged and their stadium will not echo.
They are, out of the blue, baseball's model franchise: the San Diego Padres.
The rest of the small-market clubs are in the midst of a rummage sale, which proves only that the Padres were two years ahead of their time.
Montreal and Kansas City are purging their millionaires by the hour -- and may be tempted to turn off their phones to avoid an angry mob of season-ticket holders -- and all Tony Gwynn could say this weekend was, "Been there."


Sports of The Times; Double Edge Of Loyalty In Baseball
"AIN'T no loyalty in sports no more." It is not an uncommon observation in these times, an opinion heard and accepted widely, and decorous usage be damned.
Much of the contemporary viewpoint derives from the aspect of free agency in baseball, which began with the elimination of the reserve clause nearly 20 years ago, when the players got the muscle as well as the illuminating notion that, well, loyalty must be a two-way street.
In other words, pay me what I'm worth, boss, or I'm outta here.
The street has currently become a boulevard, clogged like an open-air marketplace by people with bats and gloves and baseball shoes selling not their equipment, but their abilities, and others in suits and vests selling the players, as in days of old, whether they like it or not.


Chen Yun, a Chinese Communist Patriarch Who Helped Slow Reforms, Is Dead at 89
Chen Yun, a conservative Communist Party patriarch whose revulsion to Western capitalism was an important brake on the pace of economic reform in China during the last 16 years, died yesterday afternoon, a spokesman for the State Council, or cabinet, announced early today.
The cause of death was not disclosed, but the spokesman said China's official media would report details later today.
Mr.
Chen was 89.


Father Says U.S. Victim Loved Israel
A recurring theme in the remembrances for Alisa M. Flatow yesterday was her devotion to Judaism and to Israel.
Her dedication was reflected in her studies, her travels and her volunteer work at Brandeis University, where she was a junior.
"Alisa loved the Jewish people, the Torah and the land of Israel," her father, Stephen, said in a statement issued at the American Embassy in Jerusalem.
"She believed in the good inherent in all people. She believed she was safe in Israel and no one could dissuade her from that belief."


Corrections
An article in Business Day on Saturday about the tax strategy used by the Seagram Company in selling most of its stake in E. I. du Pont de Nemours &amp; Company misstated the name of a journal that published an article on such strategies.
It is the Journal of Taxation of Investments, not the Journal of Taxation and Investments.


RESULTS PLUS
N.B.A.
Hornets Stop Celtics  Alonzo Mourning scored 25 points and Hersey Hawkins had 23 last night as the Charlotte Hornets rebounded from a poor outing for a 119-95 victory over the visiting Celtics, ending Boston's five-game winning streak.
The Hornets, who lost to Indiana by 97-68 on Sunday, shot 60.8 percent on 48-for-79 shooting last night.


Saying No to School Bus Drivers
Prodded by Mayor Rudolph Giuliani, New York City Schools Chancellor Ramon Cortines wants the Board of Education to help break the stranglehold of school bus drivers.
Like Mr.
Giuliani's effort to push the board into a better contract with school custodians, this is a laudable attempt to change the culture of labor relations in the city.
The board should not back down, even in the face of a threatened strike by the drivers' union.
About 150,000 of the city's one million schoolchildren are transported on buses each day, at an annual cost of $280 million.
The board contracts with 78 companies to take schoolchildren, mostly special-education students and students who live on Staten Island, along 3,800 routes throughout the city.


A Blood Sport Gets in the Blood; Fans of Cockfighting Don't Understand Its Outlaw Status
Ever since he moved to New York City, Jose Pantojas has had to sneak in and out of empty warehouses, cellars and other clandestine spots just to enjoy a pastime he practiced openly in his native Puerto Rico.
He is a cockfighter, and his fanaticism runs so deep that he has paid as much as $300 a month just to stash dozens of his fighting roosters at out-of-the-way farms in Pennsylvania, New Jersey and upstate New York.


New Viruses From Old Blood
THE story of the discovery of three previously unknown hepatitis viruses began in the early 1960's when a 34-year-old surgeon in Chicago, identified only as G.B., turned yellow from hepatitis and was sick for four weeks before recovering.
Dr.
Friederich Deinhardt, then a virologist in Chicago and later head of the Max Pettenkoffer Institute in Munich, collected samples of G.B.'s blood and sent them to several experts.
At the time, G.B.'s blood was injected into four tamarins, which developed increased amounts of the liver enzyme ALT, or alanine aminotransferase.
But efforts to isolate a virus failed, and experts considered the presumed agent a contaminant of no significance.


Accord Is Reached on a Common Security System for the Internet
The three largest consumer on-line information systems and two major Internet software companies said today that they had agreed to adopt a common technology for protecting commercial transactions on the Internet from hackers, thieves and eavesdroppers.
The agreement, announced before Tuesday's opening of the Spring 1995 Internet World Trade Show here, is expected to hasten the development of on-line shopping services and other commercial uses of cyberspace.


A New Rule: Do Touch That Dial
WE comfort our friends, loved ones, and lawyers at their homes and offices.
We answer desperate phone calls at inappropriate hours.
We keep America's hardware and software humming.
We are America's unpaid computer consultants.
And we shudder when we discover that our clients have failed to master basic but unobvious techniques we insist on calling simple.
Software and hardware manufacturers pay lip service to "usability testing," but in the real world very intelligent people fail to grasp some of the simplest ways to improve the hardware and software they use every day.
The reason is that the hardware and software remain devilishly difficult to use, and the manuals can be exquisitely stupid.


Trading Is Quiet Ahead of Price Reports
Prices of Treasury securities were mixed yesterday in quiet trading on a weaker dollar and investor caution ahead of new economic reports this week.
Traders said the early drop in the dollar against the Japanese yen caused concern among some market participants that foreign investors might be prompted to sell dollar-denominated securities to protect the value of their investments.


Higuera Hooks Up With Padres
TEDDY HIGUERA and the San Diego Padres agreed yesterday to a minor league contract and the pitcher was invited to spring training as a nonroster player.
Higuera, 36, will get a $75,000 signing bonus and a $200,000 salary if he makes the team.
He could also earn $300,000 in bonuses based on innings. (AP)


A Shooting On East Side Tied to Mob
A 55-year-old man, described by law enforcement officials as a senior member of the Gambino crime family, was shot three times and critically wounded yesterday evening outside Lenox Hill Hospital on the Upper East Side in what investigators said may have been an attempted mob hit.
Detective Mark Patterson, a police spokesman, identified the victim as Jack Giordano of Staten Island.
State and Federal officials have described Mr.
Giordano, whose given name is John, as a capo or captain in the Gambino crime family under John Gotti Sr.


Two Companies Join A Subway Program
The Gannett Outdoor unit of the Gannett Company is signing two additional national marketers for a fledgling advertising program in the New York City subway system.
The Sony Corporation of America and the Prescriptives cosmetics line of Estee Lauder Inc. will join the national marketers previously signed, like Levi Strauss and Nike, in advertising their products inside special subway cars being called "brand trains."


Aid Cutoff Feared By Some In Arts
Many of New York's smaller arts organizations were scrambling yesterday to organize a response to what they believed was a new city proposal to eliminate their grants from the Department of Cultural Affairs.
The organizations, more than 400 that make up what is known as the program group, were allotted $12.5 million in grants in the 1995 fiscal year.


Observer; The Prattle Deluge
Progressive people scoff at my refusal to accept faxes and use electronic mail.
They think it a pose, an effort to portray myself as a colorfully quaint character like Titus Moody.
It was Titus Moody, you recall, who, when asked by Fred Allen what he thought of radio, replied, "I don't hold with furniture that talks."


Unicef Can Do Better In Search for Director
To the Editor:
Secretary General Boutros Boutros-Ghali has soon to decide who will be the United Nations Children's Fund's next executive director, not an easy task.


Armenian Apostolic Church Picks a New Supreme Patriarch
The Armenian Apostolic Church has chosen a new leader for its more than six million members around the world.
The new Supreme Patriarch and Catholicos of All Armenians, 131st in a line of leaders stretching back to the 4th century, will be known as Karekin I.
The election, which took place last Tuesday, may also heal a schism that has divided the church in the United States and elsewhere for more than 60 years.
The new leader is a native of Syria named Neshan Sarkissian.
He has been Catholicos, or bishop, of the see of Cilicia, located in Antelias, Lebanon, near Beirut, since 1977.
While the church's ancient headquarters at Echmiadzin, Armenia, were under Soviet Communist control, the see in Lebanon became a rival point of authority.


Lorelei Lee Re-embarks for Paris
Though the revival of "Gentlemen Prefer Blondes" started life in November at the Goodspeed Opera House in Connecticut, it now looks as if it spent the last year walking home from Alaska.
It's desperate, skinny and exhausted, down to its last few pennies.
It wears nothing that wouldn't fit into a backpack.
Presented by the National Actors Theater in association with the Goodspeed, the show opened last night at the Lyceum.
It's a major mistake.


G.O.P. Gains in South Spread to Local Level
There was a time when Bob and Sylvia Cornett served up heaping portions of political gossip and philosophy along with the fried catfish, hush puppies and shrimp at their Ark Restaurant here.
But that was when St.
Clair County was a one-party segment of a one-party state; practically everybody, regardless of their views, was a Democrat.


Mets' Big Three Work Out
In less than half an hour today, the Mets' three top pitchers -- Bret Saberhagen, John Franco and Pete Harnisch -- threw live batting practice on the main field at the spring training complex.
The surprise was Harnisch, the newest Met pitcher, who was said to be behind his teammates in his workouts and was expected only to throw on the side.
But he asked Greg Pavlick, the pitching coach, for a chance to throw batting practice, and the results were eye-opening.


Digital Set to Introduce Machines In Tandem With Oracle Software
The Digital Equipment Corporation is expected to introduce a series of new work stations today that it says run faster than most mainframe systems when combined with new data base software by the Oracle Corporation.
Based on the latest version of Digital's Alpha microprocessor, the new hardware and software combination would thus eliminate the advantage that traditional mainframe computers have had over microcomputers, making the smaller, less expensive machines much more attractive to large corporations.


AS DOLLAR FALLS, ECONOMIC POWERS BLAME EACH OTHER
The dollar recovered today from a terrifying ride, and the market gyrations intensified a bitter round of finger-pointing by the United States' main economic rivals about who bears responsibility for fixing a problem that threatens to reshape financial relationships around the world.
The dollar, which had plunged in Tokyo this morning to a postwar low of 80.15 yen, rebounded to settle at 84.02 yen in New York trading late in the day, up from 83.82 yen Friday.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Dollar Recovers as Officials Argue Over Responsibility The dollar recovered to 84.02 yen in New York after one of its most sharp declines in modern times earlier in the day, falling 4 percent to 80.15 yen.
The drop intensified a bitter round of finger-pointing by America's main economic rivals about who bears the responsibility for fixing the problem.


There's Always Bridge
To the Editor:
Your April 5 Living section article on young people's beginning to take up the game of bridge again should have mentioned Somerset Maugham's advice.
"I would have children taught bridge as a matter of course," he said.
"When all else fails -- sport, love, ambition -- bridge remains a solace and an entertainment." HOWARD PURCELL  Amagansett, L.I., April 5, 1995


Former President With a Difference
If "Jimmy Carter: To the White House and Beyond" is any measure of the former President's stock these days, the market is definitely bullish.
As Jack Perkins, the host of Arts &amp; Entertainment's "Biography" series, puts it, the man has gone from "political loser to national asset."
This affectionate hourlong portrait covers the career that began with a down-home boyhood in Plains, Ga. (the toothy smile is already aflash in photographs of the young Jimmy), where he fished, hunted, read "War and Peace," sold peanuts from the family farm and played mainly with black friends until segregated schools divided them.
As Mr.
Carter tells it, his promising career in the Navy was ended when his daddy (described by others as a racist) died and the son returned to Georgia to take over the peanut warehouse and do some politicking.


New Black Series Is Hanging On
The best new family drama of the season, filled with fine performances, is about a black middle-class family living in Seattle.
Created by Thomas Carter ("Equal Justice"), "Under One Roof" was an unsold pilot a year ago.
Then, perhaps because of a flurry of objections to violence on television or maybe because of growing complaints that blacks on television are too often reduced to antisocial rappers or gutter-language comics, the series was bought by CBS and has been running for several weeks on Tuesdays at 8 P.M.
Sadly and frustratingly for anyone concerned about quality television, "Under One Roof" has not gone through the ratings roof.
It lingers, as industry jargon would have it, "on the bubble" that might or might not burst by season's end.
Its demise would certainly put another dent in the spurious argument that public television isn't needed because commercial interests alone can nurture quality.


Stottlemyre Goes to A's Without Anger for Jays
Some tiny part of Todd Stottlemyre would like to say something nasty about the Toronto Blue Jays, would like to express anger and frustration that he has been at a camp for jobless men in Homestead instead of the Blue Jays' camp across the state.
But no part of him, however tiny, can do that, however agonizing the pangs of separation are as he puts the Blue Jays in his past and heads for Oakland, where he will pitch for the Athletics with a $1.8 million salary, $520,000 less than his 1994 salary.


METRO DIGEST
WHAT TO DO WITH THE COLISEUM?
Nine months after the Giuliani administration and the Metropolitan Transportation Authority promised to cooperate in getting the most out of the old New York Coliseum, the two sides remain deadlocked over what to do with one of the most valuable pieces of potential development property in New York City.
A1.
NEW YORK CITY  ANTISMOKING LAW DRAWS CRITICISM
Frank V. Mina called one of his regular eating spots to make sure he would still feel welcome there.
The news was good, and lunchtime found Mr.
Mina, a smoker, at the bar of Michael's on John Street near the World Trade Center, sitting with a newspaper, a glass of red wine, a club sandwich and -- most pertinently, on the first day of the city's stringent new anti smoking restrictions -- a cigarette.
B3.
MANAGERS FINED IN CO-OP FRAUD
Three former real estate management executives were ordered to pay $1 million in restitution to condominiums and cooperatives that they were accused of defrauding.
But they avoided jail terms for their crimes, which involved taking kickbacks from contractors and vendors who served the buildings.
B3.
SECOND DEATH FROM FLESH-EATING ILLNESS
City health officials confirmed that a 71-year-old woman had died last month of invasive Group A streptococcus, the same infection that has been tentatively blamed for the death of an 8-year-old Queens boy last week.
The officials stressed, however, that two cases in one month of this rare but serious infection in a city the size of New York is entirely normal and that there was no indication of an outbreak.
B2.
MAN CHARGED IN DEATH OF A 4-YEAR-OLD
Nearly a year after Richard Morales told the police that his girlfriend had killed her 4-year-old daughter, the authorities have charged him with the girl's murder.
B2.
PLAN TO RID MARKET OF CRIME IS FAULTED
Seafood wholesalers sharply criticized the Giuliani administration's plan to rid the Fulton Fish Market of corruption and organized crime, saying that proposed legislation would subject their industry to unfair regulation.
B5.
REGION  WISHING AWAY A MURDER CASE
Everyone in Newark Valley, N.Y., (population: 5,200, spread across 66 square miles of farm land) knows about Waneta Hoyt.
She would be famous anywhere, a woman accused of murdering her five infant children years ago when everyone believed they died of crib death.
But if Mrs.
Hoyt's case has captured Newark Valley, no one will say so.
Our Towns, B4.
CAREY ENDORSES PATAKI'S BUDGET
With state budget talks mired in name-calling, Gov.
George E. Pataki celebrated his 100th day in office by picking up a cross-party endorsement of his deep-cutting budget from former Gov.
Hugh L. Carey.
And taking a jab at the man whom Mr.
Pataki ousted last year, Mario M. Cuomo, Mr.
Carey said Mr.
Pataki's policies were "an improvement." B5.
BILLS ON CRIME: MEETING THE DEMANDS
The New Jersey Legislature has found little time and less money to spend as it deals with Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman's tax cuts and budget problems.
But when crime is in the news, it comes up with both the ways and the means to take action, even if the details are left for later.
Political Memo, B5.
Chronicle B2


Channel Tunnel Operator Sees a Financial Collapse If Revenues Don't Pick Up
Warning that it faces possible financial collapse later in the year, the operating company of the tunnel under the English Channel said yesterday that it lost more than $600 million in 1994 and that revenues had been so meager that it might not be able to meet its huge payments for debt service this year.
In an announcement that sent the securities of Eurotunnel plummeting, the company that built an engineer's dream -- a 31-mile link between Britain and France -- said revenues for last year totaled only $50 million.


W. R. Grace Discloses '92 Benefits Package Given Retiring Chief
The benefits package negotiated by J. Peter Grace when he stepped down as chief executive of W. R. Grace &amp; Company in 1992 will continue to be paid until the 81-year old executive dies, the company acknowledged yesterday.
Many of the payments for a range of perquisites -- from private nursing services to the use of a Manhattan apartment to access to a Grace corporate jet -- were continuations of benefits Mr.
Grace received before J. P. Bolduc succeeded him as president and chief executive.


Jail Is Going Smoke-Free
Since last year, all Hudson County buildings have been smoke-free except one.
Now the jail, the largest county prison in the state, has begun a six-month program leading toward a ban on cigarettes.
The more than 2,000 inmates have already seen their favorite brands replaced at the commissary by low-tar, low-nicotine Carltons and their purchases capped at 10 packs a week.
By September, the jail will be the third smoke-free lockup in the state, after those in Morris and Ocean Counties.
The public safety director, Glen Cunningham, said that a smoke-free jail just might make the streets safer, too.
"There may be people out there who think that if going to jail means no cigarettes, they'll think twice before committing a crime," he said.


Political Memo; Bills on Crime: Meeting the Demands
The Legislature has found little time and less money to spend as it deals with Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman's tax cuts and budget problems.
But when crime is in the news, it comes up with both the ways and the means to take action, even if the details are left for later.
Time and again this session, the lawmakers have read the headlines and written the law.
Their crime bills range from "Megan's Law," in shocked response to the murder of a little girl, to a demand this week from a shore-area legislator for tougher animal-cruelty penalties after vandals killed several animals in a pet store break-in.


Double Portrait of a Man on Trial Astounds Friends
For 15 years, Thomas J. Petrizzo was a vital force in fashioning the skyline of New York.
Major contractors and developers lionized him for his acumen in shaping and delivering the steel frames for the Jacob K. Javits Convention Center, Battery Park City, the new Federal courthouse in Foley Square and numerous Manhattan skyscrapers.
But while Mr.
Petrizzo projected a gentle, grandfatherly glow in conferences and lunches with construction industry executives and lawyers, Federal prosecutors and agents say there was also a darker side to him.
At the same time that he ran four companies based in Keasbey, N.J., the authorities assert, Mr.
Petrizzo was a Colombo crime family capo, plotting murders and rigging multimillion-dollar construction deals for New York's Mafia bosses.


Water, Water Nowhere Lately
Only twice in the last century has New Jersey had a drier half year than it did from October through March.
David Robinson, a state climatologist and a professor of meteorology and geography at Rutgers University, said that precipitation was only 68 percent of normal; the only years when that period was drier were 1947 and 1985.


L.I. Nurses Protest Plans to Eliminate Pensions


Giuliani Attacked on Fish Market Crime Plan
Seafood wholesalers yesterday sharply criticized the Giuliani administration's plan to rid the Fulton Fish Market of corruption and organized crime, saying that proposed legislation would subject their industry to unfair regulation.
The business owners testified at a hearing of the City Council, which is considering legislation proposed by Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani that would give the administration the broad authority to license, regulate and investigate all business owners and workers at the Manhattan market.
It would also provide the administration with the right to fingerprint all vendors and conduct background investigations of workers suspected of having ties to organized crime.


A Vat of DNA May Become Fast Computer Of the Future
TO the astonishment of even the most wild-eyed optimists, a promising new avenue is opening in computer science.
Spurred by a paper published a few months ago describing the solution of a difficult mathematical problem using the chemical units of DNA as computing symbols, researchers are planning systems that would use the genetic material for computations that would in some cases thwart even the fastest supercomputers.
One new proposal is for a memory bank containing more than a pound of DNA molecules suspended in about 1,000 quarts of fluid, in a tank about a yard square.
Such a bank would be more capacious than all the memories of all the computers ever made.
The reason is that chemical reactions occur very fast and in parallel, so that if the DNA molecules are synthesized with a chemical structure that represents numerical information, a vast amount of number-crunching is done as the reaction proceeds.


Life on the Powder Keg That Is Gaza
An eerie silence hung today over an empty highway running through this Jewish settlement.
A car-bomb Sunday on the normally bustling road killed seven Israeli soldiers and an American college student.
The attack here, and a second suicide car-bombing by Islamic militants near a settlement at Netzarim, to the northeast, have left this area looking like a battle zone.


The Man Who Put Horace Rumpole on the Case
With John Mortimer, there is a Dickensian breadth to the man and to the work.
An exuberant, portly man, he creates novels, television mini-series, plays and memoirs with a productivity unmatched by any of his peers.
For many years he also had a thriving career as a barrister, and one profession feeds another.
From his days at the bar came Horace Rumpole, whose fictional trials appear in hard cover and then are quickly dramatized by the author and personified on the television screen by Leo McKern.
A new six-part "Rumpole" series begins tomorrow on public television, and it is billed as the last Rumpole.
This, Mr.
Mortimer admitted, is "a bit like advertising 'Dame Nellie Melba's positively last appearance.' " As long as there is a Mortimer (and a McKern), there will be a Rumpole.


Micro Devices Stock Pounded On Chip Delay
Shares in Advanced Micro Devices Inc. dropped sharply today after the company's disclosure late on Monday that it would delay shipping its K-5 chip, a microprocessor comparable to the Intel Corporation's Pentium, by two to four months.
That would delay shipments in volume until next year.
Advanced Micro shares dropped $3.25, to close at $33.50 in New York Stock Exchange trading.
The drop came even as many analysts were raising their earnings estimates today for the company, from about $3.65 a share for 1995 to $3.85.
After the market's close on Monday, Advanced Micro, which is based south of here in Sunnyvale, Calif., reported first-quarter results significantly better than analysts had estimated.


Shanghai Journal; Free Now to Build, China's Biggest City Binges
A new subway system opened here this week, only five years after construction began.
Shanghai, it seems, is eager to play catch-up with the rest of the world.
The subway is just one of several big public works projects under way in Shanghai, part of a building craze that developers say is one of the largest ever undertaken anywhere.


Other Hip Risks Found for Women
HAVING strong bones may not be enough to protect against hip fracture in older women who have other characteristics that increase their risk of breaking a hip.
These include smoking cigarettes and having a mother who broke her hip, a new study shows.
According to the findings, gleaned from a five-year study of 9,516 white women, smoking and a maternal history of hip fracture each double a woman's risk of breaking a hip after the age of 65, even if tests show that the woman's bones are normally dense.


Whitman Administration and Judiciary Accused of Bias
A Hispanic organization today filed a complaint with the State Division on Civil Rights, charging that all departments of the Whitman Administration as well as the judiciary have been practicing "institutionalized discrimination" against Spanish-speaking job seekers.
The organization, the Hispanic Council of New Jersey, which calls itself Hispac, says it represents 1,500 people who have been systematically denied employment with the state.
The council said that, based on its examination of state affirmative-action reports, not one department is meeting hiring goals set by the State Department of Personnel and the State Department of Labor.


COMPANY BRIEFS
ATMEL CORP., San Jose, Calif., a semiconductor company, will acquire a majority stake in closely held European Silicon Structures and will expand its design and manufacturing operations in Aix-en-Provence in southern France.
INTUIT INC., Menlo Park, Calif., said its stockholders had approved the $1.5 billion proposal by Microsoft Corp., Redmond, Wash. to acquire the company.


Transactions
Baseball  American League
BOSTON RED SOX -- Agreed to terms with Erik Hanson, pitcher, on a one-year contract.
Designated Bill Wertz, pitcher, for assignment.


H. L. Ryan, 71, Federal Judge For 13 Years
Judge Harold L. Ryan, a conservative Republican with a love of the Idaho outdoors and a weakness for cribbage, died on Monday at his home in Boise, Idaho.
He was 71, and had spent his 13 years on the Federal District Court bench suppressing his strong personal convictions in a series of important environmental and other rulings.
The cause of death was cancer, his law clerks said.


Book Notes
E-Mail to the Rescue
Michael Chabon's quandary was what he called "snail mail."
After his first novel, "The Mysteries of Pittsburgh," was published in 1988, letters from readers were sent first to his publisher and then forwarded to him in California, where they sat piled up for weeks.


Headquarters Seizes Carpenters' Union Over U.S. Inquiry
The labor union representing carpenters at the Jacob K. Javits Convention Center was seized by its international office earlier this week, in response to rising concern over the local's finances and operations.
Citing activity "detrimental to the welfare of the members," the international president of the United Brotherhood of Carpenters and Joiners of America placed its Bronx-based Local 17 under trusteeship.


Princeton Picks Class of '99
More than 2,000 high school seniors from 50 states and 115 countries have been invited to join Princeton University's Class of 1999.
Princeton said yes to 14 percent of the 14,311 students seeking admission.
The state with the most successful applicants was California, followed by New York and New Jersey.


Wine Sale Hits Nearly $2 Million
TWENTY-ONE oversize bottles of Burgundy wine, owned by Rusty Staub, the former baseball star and restaurateur, were sold for $99,300 at an auction at Christie's in New York.
The lot of 21 methuselahs, each the equivalent of eight regular 75-centiliter wine bottles, was one of the items that brought the total for a daylong wine auction last Saturday to $1,825,818.
Michael Broadbent, the director of Christie's international wine department, who came from London to conduct the auction, said the total was a record for a wine sale held in the United States.


Familiar Milestone For Knicks
The Knicks' 50th victory of the season was one of their most convincing.
They never trailed in the second half, leading by as many as 19 points.
Six Knicks reached double figures.
And Patrick Ewing added to his collection of dominant performances.
With their sixth victory in their last seven games, the Knicks eased to a 112-99 triumph over the Miami Heat last night at Madison Square Garden.


Carter Is Highest-Paid in Viking History
Five years ago, the Minnesota Vikings spent $100 to grab CRIS CARTER off waivers.
Yesterday they agreed to pay him more than any player in the history of the team.
Carter, who set a National Football League record with 122 catches last season, agreed to a contract extension worth $11.5 million through 1998.
That makes him one of the highest-paid receivers in the game and eclipses the five-year, $8.75 million contract the Vikings gave CHRIS DOLEMAN in 1991.


Total System Services Inc.(TSS,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


COLLEGE LACROSSE REPORT
Hofstra
The first season for the Flying Dutchmen in the North Atlantic Conference has brought about at least a tie for the championship, but not such high regard in the Division I rankings.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-17  CLINTON PRESSES PAKISTAN'S CASE  President Clinton vowed to seek Congressional authority to compensate Pakistan for military equipment it has paid for but not received because of a dispute over its nuclear program.
A1  CRACKDOWN IN GAZA STRIP  Yasir Arafat's forces in the Gaza Strip intensified their campaign against Muslim radicals, making dozens of new arrests and warning that unlicensed guns would be confiscated.
A1


Tyson Sets Out to Buy Las Vegas Mansion
MIKE TYSON is buying a 11,000 square-foot mansion in Las Vegas patterned after a French castle, and is reportedly paying $3.7 million for it.
The home, owned by the longtime gambling figure ED DOUMANI, has been on and off the market for several months, and was listed at $5 million at one time.
The home was described by PHYLLIS SCHWARTZ, a real estate agent, as "the best in Las Vegas" and includes seven bedrooms, a wine cellar, an exercise room, a tennis court, a swimming pool and a guest house.
Tyson, released from an Indiana prison March 25 after serving three years for rape, has been staying at the MGM Grand. (AP)


2 Employees Of Con Ed Are Shot In Queens
Two Consolidated Edison workers and an elderly passer-by were shot by a gunman who fired a semiautomatic handgun in broad daylight on a street in Jamaica, Queens, yesterday morning.
The gun used in the morning shooting was recovered after an afternoon gunfight between the police and a suspect in an attempted robbery, a police spokeswoman said.


Campo Electronics Appliances &amp; Computers Inc.(CMPO,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


Too Fast on Communications Reform
Americans have been told that cable, phone and utility companies will soon compete to bring into their homes a fabulous array of video, data and phone services.
But standing in the way are antiquated rules, defended by powerful industries, that keep the major companies out of each other's markets.
Before the Senate left for vacation, chairman Larry Pressler of the Senate Commerce Committee put together a bipartisan compromise that seemed to break the logjam.
The effort was blocked, however, by the Clinton Administration, which worked to keep the bill off the Senate floor.
That can only benefit consumers.
The bill includes several provisions that threaten to jack up prices.


Catching Up To Its Drivers, State Goes 65
New York State lawmakers agreed today to raise the speed limit to 65 miles an hour on roughly 1,000 miles of highways in less populated areas -- roads where officials say 96 percent of drivers ignore the 55 mile-an-hour limit anyway.
Barring any last-minute snags, the agreement by a joint legislative committee would make New York the 43d state to raise its speed limit above 55 since 1987, when Congress gave states the authority to set limits of 65 miles an hour on approved stretches of highway.
The other seven states, mostly in the Northeast, include Connecticut and New Jersey.


Holocaust Teaching Gaining a Niche, but Method Is Disputed
For most of the 50 years since Americans helped liberate Nazi death camps, academic study of the killing of six million European Jews has, some scholars say, been slot to gain a foothold at American colleges and universities.
In the last five years, the situation has begun to change as a handful of independently financed faculty positions, or special endowed chairs, have been created to focus solely on the Holocaust.


Quality Food Centers Inc.(QFCI,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 25


Just Youngsters Having a Drop-Dead Good Time
Fast attaining the status of instant cliche, stories about teen-age thrill killers depend on certain articles of faith.
The murderers were in love when they committed their crimes.
The day of the mayhem was the best day of their young lives.
They slept like babies after their heinous deeds were done.
At least one of the lovers had literary talent, either as a diarist or a poet.
At least one of the victims was a sweet-faced older lady.
She may ("Heavenly Creatures") even have been Mom.
The assumption in such films, from Oliver Stone's "Natural Born Killers" to Rafael Zelinksy's "Fun," which opens today at Film Forum 1, is that the hell-raising innocents are of interest because of their youth and beauty.
And that their stories, implicating indifferent or abusive parents in their children's crimes, are instructive somehow.
Mr.
Zelinsky's "Fun" offers a relatively calm, considered version of those thoughts, but its underlying assumptions are as shaky as the genre itself.


In America; Jobless In Bay Ridge
The "Dear Employee" letters were signed by First Deputy Mayor Peter J. Powers.
Many of them were sent out.
The one that I saw was delivered to a man who lives with his family in the Bay Ridge section of Brooklyn, a stable middle- and working-class enclave about five miles from City Hall and several light years from the seat of Federal power in Washington.
Consisting of four short, devastating paragraphs, the letter is the kind that can leave the recipient disoriented, afraid, sometimes even ashamed.
It begins, "Despite every effort to achieve savings through attrition . . ."


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  *
Carter Holt Harvey Ltd., Auckland, New Zealand, is selling $300 million of debt securities in two parts through CS First Boston.
The first part consists of $150 million of notes due in 2002.
The notes are priced at 99.545 to yield 7.71 percent.
The second is $150 million of debentures due in 2015.
The debentures are priced at 99.85 to yield 8.39 percent.
The noncallable issue is rated Baa2 by Moody's Investors Service Inc. and BBB by the Standard &amp; Poor's Corp.


Kemper Agrees To $2 Billion Takeover Led by Zurich Group
The Kemper Corporation, ending a yearlong effort to sell itself, said yesterday that it had agreed to be acquired by the Zurich Insurance Group and a group of American investors for $2 billion.
As an independent company, Kemper failed to produce the profit that investors hoped would result from the combination in the 1980's of a large mutual fund business, insurance companies and securities brokers.
None of its businesses was stellar in its field, however, and by the 90's, Kemper was in trouble from outsized investments in junk bonds and real estate.


Finding the Social Aspects of Math
A MATHEMATICIAN READS THE NEWSPAPER
By John Allen Paulos
Illustrated. 212 pages. Basic Books. $18.
In his new book, the mathematician John Allen Paulos continues his witty crusade against mathematical illiteracy, as well as what he sees as such related products of scientific ignorance as our susceptibility to fraud, sloppy thinking and excessive credulity.
Mr.
Paulos's first effort along these lines was six years ago.
It was a delightfully fresh book, "Innumeracy: Mathematical Illiteracy and Its Consequences," which managed to make readers feel a bit foolish at their ignorance and to amuse them mightily at the same time.
Then came "Beyond Numeracy: Ruminations of a Numbers Man," with a long alphabetical listing of mathematical topics we all should know more about.


A City's Savior? Not Quite; Did Michael Carlow Rescue Pittsburgh Companies Only to Loot Them?
This city had never seen a hometown hero like Michael P. Carlow.
A charismatic self-made millionaire, Mr.
Carlow began in 1991 what appeared to be a crusade to salvage jobs by purchasing troubled local companies like the D. L. Clark Company, the maker of Clark candy bars for more than 100 years.


Bonar Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 4


Mets Find the Money to Make Butler a Centerpiece
In a bold move, the Mets today stretched their planned 1995 budget to sign Brett Butler, a veteran outfielder whose presence immediately transforms the club from an up-and-comer in the National League East to a legitimate playoff contender.
With their budget supposedly near its limit and all big-ticket free agents out of the question, the Mets reconsidered their options and, in less than a 72-hour period, pursued and won Butler, whose leadoff abilities and center-field skills exactly match a major need on the club.
Butler, 37, agreed this morning to a one-year deal that will pay him $2 million, his commitment coming less than two hours after the Mets made what the club called its first concrete offer.


Other Party to the Contract Isn't Impressed
"How many of you watched Newt?" asked Peter Fletcher, presiding at the Ypsilanti Republicans' regular Saturday breakfast at Max's Deli the morning after the House Speaker was on national television to celebrate his Contract With America.
There were 16 Republicans drinking coffee around a long table.
One person, Bob Kilpatrick, raised his hand.
Sheepish glances were exchanged among the others.
No one else had caught the speech.
They had had other things to do, they said.


Product View Offers Free E-Mail
Product View Interactive, a new company in Cambridge, Mass., plans to offer computer users free electronic mail if they are willing to accept the service being sponsored by advertisers.
Robert A. Young, president of Product View, confirmed yesterday reports of the company's plans in Inside Media and Advertising Age.
The goal is for the service to be offered by the end of the year, he said, so that computers users could perform functions like sending and receiving E-mail messages that include advertising and printing out discount coupons.


Salomon Official to Be New Investment Chief for CREF
Martin L. Leibowitz, director of research at Salomon Brothers Inc., will become the chief investment officer of CREF Investments, the equity investment component of TIAA-CREF, which is the world's largest pension fund and one of Salomon's largest clients.
Mr.
Leibowitz will replace CREF's long-time chief, James Martin, who retired on March 31.


Celebrating a Collaboration in the Best Way
On Sunday afternoon, the violinist Pinchas Zukerman and his regular accompanist, Marc Neikrug, celebrated 25 years of collaboration with a program at Avery Fisher Hall that included Mr.
Neikrug's own Sonata Concertante.
Mr.
Zukerman made a seamless midrecital switch from violin to viola, demonstrating on both instruments some characteristically decisive interpretive ideas.
Like many of Mr.
Neikrug's works, the Sonata Concertante inhabits the world of Berg.
The first movement is an interesting amalgam of march and scherzo elements, unified by fierce announcements of a single tone in sets of three.
Next comes a dark-hued blues piece, then a meditative slow movement, and a rhythmically dense finale.
The idiom is generally atonal, although some ambiguous tonal references recall the method of the Berg Piano Sonata.
I admired the composer's craft but struggled to identify an individual take on a familiar language.
Mr.
Zukerman dug into his difficult violin line with unstinting commitment.


Thorn Apple Valley Inc.(TAVI,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 3


The Devils Lose, but Lemaire Still Likes What He Sees
It isn't often that a coach is satisfied after a loss.
But Devils Coach Jacques Lemaire was so pleased with how his team played against the Canadiens Monday night that he did not even bother to supervise today's optional practice in preparation for the game Wednesday night here against the Washington Capitals.
Washington and the Devils are the strongest challengers to the Flyers for the Atlantic Division title, so the game is a crucial one.
But Lemaire chose to remain at the team hotel with Dennis Gendron, an assistant coach, to review tapes of the Devils' 2-1 loss to Montreal on Monday night, as well as tapes of Philadelphia's 3-1 victory over the Capitals last Saturday.


Aaron Morse, 72, Cosmetics Developer
Aaron Morse, the retired president of Kiehl's Since 1851, a line of natural cosmetics and skin-care treatments based in New York, died on April 4 at Cedars Sinai Hospital in Los Angeles.
He was 72 and had homes in Los Angeles and Manhattan.
He died after a long illness, his family said.


Hearing Asked on Simpson Prosecution
Lawyers for O. J. Simpson charged today that the prosecution, unhappy with the direction the case was taking and fearing that jurors were lining up against it, was seeking either to purge the jury of members it considered pro-defense or to "engineer" a mistrial, an assertion that prosecutors promptly denied.
By law, prosecutors cannot ask for a mistrial.
But Judge Lance A. Ito can, if the number of jurors slips below 12.
That, Mr.
Simpson's lawyers say, is what prosecutors hope will happen, and they contend that the prosecution is conspiring to pull it off with the assistance, witting or unwitting, of the police, the sheriff's department and even Judge Ito or members of his staff.


Housing Inspectors to Get Special Training
City housing inspectors will get special training to better recognize the kind of structural problems that caused the partial collapse of a Harlem building last month in which three people were killed, officials said yesterday.
Under the new policy, which will begin next week, 300 inspectors in the Department of Housing Preservation and Development will receive training from the Buildings Department about spotting structural defects.


A Robust Orchestra For a Trumpet Concerto
The BBC Philharmonic, based in Manchester, is one of the stabler elements in Britain's troubled community of orchestras.
With its French conductor of three years, Yan Pascal Tortelier, and with Peter Maxwell Davies leading two pieces of his own, the orchestra arrived at Avery Fisher Hall on Sunday night.
The Davies enterprises, a Trumpet Concerto and the Symphony No. 5, were surrounded on this program by standard works of the French repertory.
Ravel's "Rapsodie Espagnole" roused potential slumberers at the start.
"La Mer" by Debussy has in my experience raised few roofs, but this was quite the loudest performance of it I have ever heard.


Blount Inc.(BLT.B,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


Richter's Status Shaky
Mike Richter has been firmly entrenched as the Rangers' No. 1 goaltender since early last season, and in that time helped lead the Rangers to their first Stanley Cup championship since 1940.
But 1995 has been anything but a championship-type season for Richter and the Rangers.
With only 11 games remaining in this lockout-shortened season, and with the Rangers having lost 10 of their last 12 games, Richter's hold on that No. 1 position may be in jeopardy.
His record for the season is a dismal 10-15-2.
Today, Coach Colin Campbell would not say who would be in goal for Wednesday night's game against Buffalo at the Garden, either Richter or his backup Glenn Healy.


Guatemala Makes Progress Toward Peace
To the Editor:
Your recent news articles on Guatemala have understandably been dedicated to Representative Robert G. Torricelli's information on possible links among a Guatemalan Army officer, the Central Intelligence Agency and the DeVine and Bamaca cases.
Consequently, an important breakthrough in the Guatemalan peace process was virtually unreported in the United States.


Business Travel; When the ownership of corporate frequent flier miles is at issue, the rumor mill is quick to heat up.
A LEADING carrier, Delta Air Lines, has denied it is considering giving discounts to big corporations in return for eliminating frequent flier miles.
The news was reported in the current issue of Business Travel News, a trade publication, along with the denial by Delta.
But that has not stopped the industry rumor mill from treating it as a virtually done deal.
Such proposals come and go.
Last summer almost 20 companies, including the General Motors Corporation and the Whirlpool Corporation, created a stir when they said they would forfeit free miles in return for lower fares.
But the idea ran into opposition from frequent business travelers and some airlines.


What Better Excuse for Wanderlust Than Exotic Flatbreads?
FROM the thin-crusted designer pizzas that gain cult-like status from devotees in urban restaurants to the corn tortillas sold by women sitting cross-legged in open-air Mexican marketplaces, flatbreads are ubiquitous.
"A flatbread says everything about the people who make it, their land, their history, their resources, their concerns," said Jeffrey Alford, a self-taught baker from Laramie, Wyo.


Harvard Erred in Admissions Reversal
To the Editor:
Re "Woman Who Killed Mother Denied Harvard Admission" (front page, April 8): As an alumnus of Harvard in his 35th reunion year and as a parent of three children, I was appalled to read your article on Harvard's decision to rescind its offer of admission to Gina Grant.


Corrections
A brief report in the Company News column of Business Day yesterday about the proposed purchase of Lightworks Editing Systems by Tektronix Inc. misstated the value of the deal.
Based on the closing price of Tektronix's stock on Monday, the transaction would be worth about $74 million, not $747 million.


Wetlands Take Big Hit In Clean Water Bill
To the Editor:
The April 5 letter of Representative Bud Shuster, House Transportation Committee chairman, should concern us all.
His bill, H. R. 961, would make it impossible to meet the Clean Water Act goals of restoring and maintaining the chemical, physical and biological integrity of our nation's waters.
Mr.
Shuster claims that seven days of hearings were held on the bill.
But nearly half the bill contains new amendments on which no hearings were held.


Corrections
An obituary of Alton Meister, a biochemist, on Monday, and in some editions on Sunday, misstated some dates in his career.
He was chairman of the biochemistry department at the Tufts University School of Medicine from 1955 to 1967, and held the same position at Cornell Medical College from 1967 to 1992.
The obituary also misstated the timing of the stroke that led to his death.
It was in January, not last year.


School Bus Drivers Begin Talks To Avert a Planned Strike
On the eve of a Board of Education vote that appears likely to end lifetime job security for school bus drivers, officials from their union appeared to soften their position yesterday and began talks with city officials to discuss a compromise that would avert a strike that they said was inevitable only two days ago.
Union leaders requested a meeting yesterday with Schools Chancellor Ramon C. Cortines, with whom they met for 40 minutes, and asked for meetings today with City Hall.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
9.00
9.00
6.25
DISCOUNT RATE
5.25
5.25
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
5.94
6.00
3.24
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.64
5.70
3.56
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.77
5.84
3.96
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.07
7.11
6.86
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.37
7.39
7.20
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.24
8.26
8.03
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.27
6.29
6.31
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills 8


Meeting the Nation's Health Goals for the Year 2000


For Poland, Commemorating End of the War Starts a Crisis
For Poland, the 50th anniversary of the end of World War II is turning into a national identity crisis.
Where should Poland be: In Berlin, Moscow or at home?
President Lech Walesa wanted to be in Berlin but was not invited by the German Chancellor, Helmut Kohl.
Instead he was invited to Moscow, where he did not want to be.
He said no to the Russians and announced that he would stay at home.


Joan Baez: Resilient, Romantic, Undiminished
It speaks volumes about pop culture's shift in sensibility over two decades that a rap album by Tupac Shakur should be No. 1 on Billboard's pop album chart, while Joan Baez, the queen of 60's folk music, is not even associated with a major American record company.
Ms.
Baez's absence from the recording scene is not a result of deteriorating vocal powers.
At the Bottom Line on Monday evening, where she was recording a live album for a small English label, the 54-year-old singer was in superb voice.
The album, to be recorded over four evenings, will feature Ms.
Baez with folk-music performers ranging from Mary Chapin Carpenter and Kate and Anna McGarrigle, who sang with her on Monday, to Janis Ian, Mary Black and the Indigo Girls.


Lowly Lightning Closes Out Sweep of Even Lowlier Isles
It was a memorable day for Tommy Salo, the 24-year-old goaltender making his National Hockey League debut, but for all the wrong reasons.
He missed the team bus back to the hotel after a midday practice, then missed the boat tonight as he and the Islanders were beaten, 5-2, by the Tampa Bay Lightning before 18,922 at the ThunderDome.


Farm Fresh Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 25


New Prisons Cast Shadow Over Higher Education
The hulking shape of San Quentin is not quite visible from the heights of the University of California campus on the other side of San Francisco Bay.
But the prison has begun to loom ominously in the minds of professors and students here as they have come to believe that California's binge of prison building is being financed at the expense of the state's proud public university system.
This year, for the first time, California will spend more on prisons than for its two university systems, the University of California and the California state universities, according to Geoffrey Long, the chief consultant to the State Assembly's Budget Committee.


Mr. McNamara's War
Comes now Robert McNamara with the announcement that he has in the fullness of time grasped realities that seemed readily apparent to millions of Americans throughout the Vietnam War.
At the time, he appeared to be helping an obsessed President prosecute a war of no real consequence to the security of the United States.
Millions of loyal citizens concluded that the war was a militarily unnecessary and politically futile effort to prop up a corrupt Government that could neither reform nor defend itself.
Through all the bloody years, those were the facts as they appeared on the surface.
Therefore, only one argument could be advanced to clear President Johnson and Mr.
McNamara, his Secretary of Defense, of the charge of wasting lives atrociously.
That was the theory that they possessed superior knowledge, not available to the public, that the collapse of South Vietnam would lead to regional and perhaps world domination by the Communists; and moreover, that their superior knowledge was so compelling it rendered unreliable and untrue the apparent facts available to even the most expert opponents of the war.


Nerve-Gas Drill Is Held in Subway Station
Just a month after nerve gas brought death to Tokyo's subway system, New York City public-safety departments last night staged a mock nerve-gas attack in the L train station at 14th Street and 1st Avenue in Manhattan to prepare emergency personnel for an attack.
The station was closed to the public and bypassed by trains during the exercise.


A Saudi Prince Fond of High-Profile Investing
Just who is Donald J. Trump's Prince, and why has he come now to buy into the Plaza Hotel?
Prince Walid bin Talal is the Saudi ruling family's most prominent -- and most adventurous -- international investor, with large stakes in Citicorp, Four Seasons Hotels, Fairmont Hotels, Euro Disney and Saks Fifth Avenue, which is controlled by Investcorp of Bahrain.
He is a nephew of King Fahd of Saudia Arabia and a grandson of the Kingdom's founder, King Abdulaziz al-Saud.
The 40-year-old Prince has relished taking high-profile international investments in which he believes his capital, teaming up with superior management, can earn significant returns.
The Prince, backed by a staff of Arab and Western financiers, has concentrated particularly on the international hotel, financial services and entertainment industries, spending hundreds of millions of dollars in a string of headline-grabbing announcements.


AT LUNCH WITH: Omar Sharif; Eternally Romantic
OMAR SHARIF kisses my hand delicately, as if it might break.
"Champagne?" he whispers.


A Modest Easing of Hospital Regulations
Gov.
George Pataki's plan to ease New York State regulation of hospitals and nursing homes is mostly sensible, though some provisions that relax patient monitoring may go too far.
The Governor's 16-part plan would mostly lift or modify rules that do more to shuffle paper than improve anyone's health.
Mr.
Pataki is not proposing broad-scale deregulation, but rather a paring of New York's rules so that they will more closely resemble Federal regulations.
Mr.
Pataki would reduce the excessively frequent and detailed reports that hospitals must submit on emergency room facilities and mechanical breakdowns.
He would cut costly construction delays by ruling on petitions from hospitals to expand facilities within months, not years.
He would give hospitals the freedom to find effective, low-cost ways of serving patients.
For example, he would let hospitals inform patients about their rights with video rather than personal visits.
Under the same deregulatory impulse, hospitals could decide whether to provide social services without incurring the expense of a separate social work department.


METRO DIGEST
PLAZA HOTEL IS SOLD TO SAUDI PRINCE
The Plaza Hotel, long a symbol of grandeur and fashion in New York City and more recently the crown jewel in Donald J. Trump's sprawling but shaky business empire, is being sold to a Saudi Arabian prince and a company based in Singapore.
A1.
NEW YORK CITY


Sports of The Times; Better Late Than Never With Butler
IT'S too late for the Mets to get Nolan Ryan back.
It's too late for the Mets to cancel the Amos Otis trade.
It's too late to hold on to Tom Seaver (the first time, or maybe even the second time).
It's too late to have second thoughts about trading Lenny Dykstra.
Come to think of it, it's also too late to get Brett Butler -- at least the 33-year-old whippet who was available four winters ago, when they went for an artificial-turf specialist like Vince Coleman.
Yesterday it was not too late to sign Butler for the only year that matters -- this year.


CHRONICLE
Nostalgia for a bygone era is sure to prevail at another event this evening.
A party at the Associated Press building at 50 Rockefeller Plaza will celebrate the publication of "Confessions of a Trolley Dodger From Brooklyn," by STAN FISCHLER, a sports broadcaster and former hockey writer who has nurtured a lifelong passion for trolley cars.
The book is published by H &amp; M Productions.
One criterion for an invitation was a strong tie to Brooklyn.
The guest list includes Jerry Stiller, the comedian, and Howard Golden, the Brooklyn Borough President, each of whom wrote an introduction for the book; Bill Mazer and Marv Albert, the sportscasters, and Anne Yearwood, Mr.
Fischler's sixth-grade teacher from Public School 54.
She is mentioned in the book because she kissed Mr.
Fischler in class for giving a correct answer.


New York to Raise Speed Limits to 65
New York State lawmakers agreed to raise the speed limit to 65 miles an hour on roughly 1,000 miles of highways in less populated areas -- roads where officials say 96 percent of drivers ignore the 55 mile-an-hour limit anyway.
Supporters of the switch say the higher limit would put an end to an absurd situation in which practically every motorist on the road is a lawbreaker.
Article, page B1.


E&amp;B Marine Inc. reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Abortion Rights Advocate Is Accused of Threats
Federal prosecutors in Washington State today charged an abortion rights supporter with criminal violations of the Federal abortion clinic access law for making threatening telephone calls to anti-abortion groups.
In a two-count indictment returned by a Federal grand jury in Yakima, in south-central Washington, prosecutors charged that the man made threatening telephone calls to a counseling service that encourages pregnant women to consider alternatives to abortion.


Pacific Forest reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Chrysler Engine Plan Is Sign Fuel May Stay Cheap
Chrysler plans to invest $750 million to build a new eight-cylinder engine plant within an assembly complex here, a sign that it believes gasoline will remain cheap and the light-truck market will keep growing.
The engines would power two of Chrysler's most popular products, the Jeep Grand Cherokee, a sport utility vehicle, and the Dodge Ram pickup truck, company officials said today.
It was not clear if the engines would also be offered in Chrysler's large cars, or in a new, larger sport utility vehicle.


Whitman Denies Ministers
The Black Ministers Council of New Jersey asked Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman yesterday to postpone her third round of tax reductions until it is clear what Federal budget cuts will do to New Jersey, especially programs for the poor.
But the Governor, arguing that the tax cuts would make the state more competitive, said she would go ahead as planned.


Still the Wizard After All These Years
As one walks around the new Busch complex and inhales the sights and sound of baseball, the sense of continuity among the St.
Louis Cardinals is overwhelming.
In the bullpen, Cardinal pitchers, like the recently signed Ken Hill, throw from mounds under the eye of the Hall of Fame right-hander Bob Gibson.


Rubber-Hose Factory Raided
The Immigration and Naturalization Service raided a rubber-hose factory yesterday, seizing 57 workers it described as illegal aliens from Ecuador, Honduras, Mexico and Peru.
The workers face deportation hearings, and the company, Flexon Industries, could be fined $2,000 for each worker.


Suntrust Banks Inc.(STI,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


A Family's Values Endure, Six Generations Later
THIS story, which concerns family values, starts six generations back with Abigail Hopper.
Not many people today can identify Mrs.
Hopper, but when she died in 1893 at age 92, The New York Times ran a front-page obituary eulogizing her as "one of the most remarkable women" of the 19th century.
The daughter of a Quaker tailor, she had been an abolitionist before the Civil War and when the country divided in violence she spent four years tending to the maimed and dying as a nurse.
Later, she opened a school for poor immigrants and established a sanctuary for unmarried mothers.
She campaigned against capital punishment, organized the distribution of free food to the penniless sick and repeatedly expressed her belief in a solidarity of women that overshadowed that of class, race or ethnicity.


Blue Chips Ease as Dow Slips by 11.07
Blue-chip stocks ended lower yesterday as a report showing producer prices were unchanged last month provided further evidence of an economic slowdown, raising concerns about earnings.
"The market took a breather after coming a long way," said Edwin D. Walczak, chief investment officer of Vontobel U.S.A.
"The long-term question is 'Can you have your cake and eat it too?' Can you have the much-desired soft landing at the same time as you have a continuation of above-normal returns on equity."


Next Week: Rothschilds
Among the many lots of wines to be sold at the next Sherry-Lehmann Sotheby's wine auction on April 22 will be nine lots of Chateau Mouton- Rothschild from the cellar of Baroness Philippine de Rothschild, who owns the chateau.
They are all oversize bottles, ranging from double magnums (four bottles) to immense nebuchadnezzars (20 bottles) in vintages from 1970 to 1988.
The auction will be held at Sotheby's, 1334 York Avenue (at 72d Street) starting at 9:30 A.M.
The Mouton-Rothschild wines will be offered during the afternoon session beginning at 2 P.M.
For information: (212) 606-7000.


Treasury Issues Are Higher; Inflation Pressures Steady
Prices of Treasury securities moved higher yesterday, as a Government report showed inflation pressures holding steady at the wholesale level.
But comments by a Federal Reserve official and early rumors in the market that the retail sales reports by Johnson Redbook and Mitsubishi/Wertheim Schroder would be strong helped to touch off selling that pared early gains.
A weak dollar provided a negative backdrop to trading.


Eating Well; Meals Fit for a Skinny King
PEOPLE who patronize New York City's best restaurants have always expected glorious, extravagant food.
But now, many are making an additional demand: low fat.
Dozens of chefs have risen to the challenge.
In the past five or six years, many have eliminated all the cream and much of the butter, replacing them with vegetable-flavored broths, purees, vinaigrettes, Asian spices and herbs.


Yale Says It Sees an Impostor in the Ivy
Lon Grammer boasted top-notch credentials when he transferred to Yale from a California community college two years ago: a nearly perfect college grade-point average of 3.9, a high class rank and laudatory recommendation letters from two college instructors and a dean.
But a month before Mr.
Grammer is to graduate from the Ivy League university with a political science degree, he has been expelled, and is to be arraigned next week on charges that he took $61,475 in educational loans and scholarships under false pretenses.


CHRONICLE
A who's who of folk music assembled Monday evening to sing -- and to sing the praises of PETER, PAUL and MARY.
The trio, who have been together for 35 years, were honored by the Optometric Center of New York at a buffet and performance in the Hudson Theater on West 44th Street.
The center gives an annual award for significant cultural contributions.
Among those who sang and reminisced about their protest days during the 1960's were Fred Hellerman of the Weavers, Odetta, Richie Havens, Tom Paxton, Tom Chapin and Dave Van Ronk.
Each song concluded with much hugging and kissing.


Matsushita Tells Why It Decided to Abandon Hollywood
The president of the Matsushita Electric Industrial Company said today that he had decided to pull his company out of Hollywood because it would have required too much money and rapid decision-making to stay in an industry that was changing in a way the company had not expected.
But the executive, Yoichi Morishita, said the sale of control of MCA Inc., the Hollywood movie company, did not represent a complete abandonment of the software business by Matsushita, the giant consumer electronics company.


U.S. Sharply Rebukes Russia For Its Offensive in Chechnya
The Clinton Administration stepped up its criticism of Russia's offensive in Chechnya today, saying the campaign was a major miscalculation that would backfire for the Russians and hurt relations with the United States.
In a stinging attack issued less than a month before President Clinton is to visit Moscow, the State Department's new spokesman, Nicholas Burns, said the Administration was alarmed by reports of atrocities against Chechen civilians.


Gannett Co.(GCI,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 26


Velarde Relishes Minor Role on Yanks
Randy Velarde returned to the team to which he always felt he belonged.
The Yankees today signed him to a minor league contract that will pay him less than half of what he made as a valuable utility player last season.
Still, Velarde seemed twice as happy to merely have a job and be back with the Yankees.


Corrections
A caption yesterday with a picture showing Thomas J. Petrizzo at the wake of a reputed mobster misidentified him in some editions.
Mr.
Petrizzo, who faces trial on charges linked to mob killings, was in the center, getting into a car.


Ellen Hermanson, 42, Advocate For Survivors of Breast Cancer
Ellen Hermanson, a crusader in the battle against breast cancer, died yesterday at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center in Manhattan.
She was 42 and lived in Manhattan.
The cause was breast cancer, her family said.


Mercury Finance Co.(MFN,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


The Flame Is Still Flickering For Conner
Just when all but his closest friends and most loyal crewmen had written off his chances for defending the America's Cup, Dennis Conner played Houdini one more time today and beat the regatta favorite, Young America.
"He's a survivor," said Tom Whidden, tactician for Conner's Stars &amp; Stripes.
"He's always the hardest to beat with his back against the wall. It's good to be sailing with him because he always has a few tricks to stay alive."


Corrections
A dance review on Monday about a performance by Ballet Inc. at the Theater of the Riverside Church on Friday night misstated the company affiliation of the choreographer of "To Celestial Spaces," and omitted the affiliation of two of the dancers in the work.
The choreographer, Christopher Wheeldon, and the dancers, Emily Coates and Jennifer Chipman, are all members of the New York City Ballet.


Training Found a Big Factor in Child Care
The quality of care that preschool children receive both in day-care centers and in family day care can be significantly improved with training and tighter limits on the number of children each adult looks after, according to two new studies made public yesterday.
The studies, by the Families and Work Institute, a nonprofit research group in New York, examined 150 licensed care centers in Florida and 130 family care homes in three states.


Superior Industries Int'l.(SUP,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Companies Say End To E. Coli Is Found
Cargill Inc., one of the nation's largest food processors, and Frigoscandia, a Swedish maker of food processing equipment, said today that they had developed a method to eliminate virtually all disease-causing bacteria in beef, pork and poultry.
The process uses a blanket of steam to pasteurize the surface of carcasses and could be easily inserted into meat-processing lines, the two companies said.
In tests conducted since last October at Kansas State University, 99.9 percent of the bacteria was eliminated.
The main target of the new technology is E. Coli 0157: H7.
The process has been given preliminary approval by the Food Safety and Inspection Service of the Department of Agriculture for full-scale installation in a Cargill meatpacking plant this summer.


Bears Shouldn't Learn to Trust Humans
To the Editor:
Re your April 4 Science Times article on Terry DeBruyn's work with American black bears:


Guatemala Makes Progress Toward Peace; Killing Machine
To the Editor:
"Guatemala's War: Ideology Is the Latest Excuse" (Week in Review, April 9) is right to trace the origins of Guatemalan Army persecution of the indigenous population to the "liberal revolution" of 1871.


Plan to Detect Spies Would Open Private Records of U.S. Workers
In an effort to aid investigators and prosecutors seeking evidence of espionage, the Clinton Administration has drafted new rules that would order more than two million Federal employees and military personnel with access to classified information to let investigators see their financial records.
The records to be opened to scrutiny would include bank statements, credit reports and travel documents.
In addition, those with the highest security clearances, 100,000 or more people, would have to file financial disclosure statements covering themselves and their families.


Alberta Energy reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Banco Latinoamericano de Exportaciones S.A.(BLX,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Once Again, Death Visits Sarajevo


U.S. Gives Up Right to Control Drug Prices
The National Institutes of Health today relinquished its right to require "reasonable pricing" on drugs and other products developed in cooperation between the Government and industry.
The pricing policy had been opposed by business interests since it was imposed six years ago.
Dr.
Harold Varmus, director of the institutes, said the research agency would give up the option to review the introductory price of products developed from basic research sponsored by the Government.
The policy was adopted in 1989 in response to criticism that drugs developed with substantial Government help were being marketed at excessive prices.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; MTV's two cable channels move to increase viewership.
THE two cable channels owned by MTV Networks that are devoted to music video clips -- MTV: Music Television and VH1 -- are introducing distinct, and distinctive, campaigns aimed at increasing viewership and, importantly, advertising.
As disparate as the efforts are, there's something both have in common -- and if you guessed Madonna, you know your music videos.


Arafat's Police in Gaza Widen Crackdown on Muslim Radicals
Yasir Arafat's forces in the Gaza Strip intensified their campaign against Muslim radicals today, making dozens of new arrests, sentencing one man in closed court to life in prison and warning militants that unlicensed guns would be confiscated.
Some Muslim leaders said they regarded this crackdown as far more serious than similar efforts made in the past by the Palestinian Authority, headed by Mr.
Arafat.
But others derided it as merely a show, intended like its predecessors to placate Israel after two suicide bombings in Gaza on Sunday that killed seven Israeli soldiers and a visiting American university student.


Warm but Unhappy Look at Farming
Paul Zehrer's moody family drama "Blessing" captures the rhythms and rituals of Midwestern farming life in such acute detail that you can almost feel the bite of the damp morning air at milking time and smell the pungency of the barn.
Regularly throughout the film, the camera draws back to gauge the weather and survey the austere beauty of the countryside.
This atmosphere seeps under the skin of the film's four main characters, all members of dairy-farming family in Wisconsin.
Jack (Guy Griffis), the flinty, autocratic head of the household, is an embittered eccentric barely able to make ends meet with his herd of dairy cattle.
In fits of frustration, he beats his beloved cows.
Lately he has acquired the habit of climbing to the top of his silo and taking snapshots.


Rose's Stores Inc.(RSTOQ,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 28


U.N. Dismisses Russian From Croatia Peacekeeping Post
The United Nations dismissed a Russian general today from its peacekeeping force in Croatia, accusing him of incompetence, poor leadership and connivance with Russia's traditional allies, the Serbs.
The decision to dismiss Maj.
Gen.
Aleksandr Perelyakin brought furious protests from Russian officials at the United Nations and a defiant statement from the Defense Ministry in Moscow, which said the general remained at his post.


Norwest Deal With Ryland
The Norwest Corporation said yesterday that it had agreed to acquire the Ryland Group's mortgage-securities-administration business for $47 million in cash.
The business provides services like tax calculations for investors in mortgage-backed securities, which are formed from pools of mortgages.
At the end of last month, the unit employed about 140 people and was servicing 546 securities with a principal balance of $42.8 billion.


Hibernia Corp.(HIB,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


INSIDE
Hoax Is Charged at Yale
Just a month before he was to graduate, a Yale student faces criminal charges that he got into the college and received $61,000 in financial aid after falsifying his previous academic record.
Page B1.
Dole as Social Conservative
Senator Bob Dole, campaigning for the Presidency, denounced the entertainment industry and supported voluntary school prayer.
Page A18.
New Twist in Simpson Trial
Lawyers for O. J. Simpson said the prosecution, afraid its case was faltering, was trying to engineer a mistrial to gain a retrial.
Page A20.


Southtrust Corp.(SOTR,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


IP Timberlands Ltd.(IPT,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Marriott Int'l(MAR,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 24


Chrysler and Ford Lower '92 Expectations
Disappointed by the slow pace of sales in the first quarter, the Chrysler Corporation and the Ford Motor Company said today that they had lowered their expectations and were forecasting only modest growth in industry sales in the United States this year.
Citing higher interest rates as a cause, both companies brought their estimates in line with that of the General Motors Corporation, which projected sales of 15.6 million cars and light and heavy trucks this year, up narrowly from 1994 sales of 15.4 million.


World News Briefs; Colombia Gives Rewards In Drug Crackdown
The Colombian Government has stepped up its pressure on the country's largest drug trafficking ring, posting huge rewards for information leading to the capture of the ringleaders and increasing the number of raids against the traffickers' hideouts and storage areas.
The police say that raids in Cali, the home of the ring, have uncovered documents and communications equipment used by drug lords as well as hiding places and bunkers in properties allegedly belonging to Jose Santacruz Londono, a leader of the ring.
Some of the confiscated documents include lists of politicians and security forces allegedly on the traffickers' payroll.


Favorable Verdict for Jury Changes; Lawyers Are Unhappy. Other Signs Are Hopeful, Too.
For Wayne Roth, a defense lawyer in a medical malpractice case, the end of the world arrived last week, 15 minutes into his questioning of prospective jurors.
Mr.
Roth had the misfortune of being chosen for an experiment to make selection faster, less intrusive and more pleasant for jurors.


Peoples Heritage Financial Group Inc.(PHBK,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Corrections
A article yesterday about the Los Angeles Raiders misstated the dates of the National Football League's college draft.
It will be conducted April 22 and 23, not this weekend.


A String of Disasters Leaves Japanese on Edge
The most shocking drama to reach Japan in years has its audience riveted, in part because of the possibility of an even scarier sequel coming soon.
It began last month with the nerve gas attack on the Tokyo subway system, which killed 11 people and injured more than 5,000, and it is unfolding on streets and television screens around Japan.
The case has become the national obsession.


In New York, Food Stamp Cuts Will Inflate Ranks of Hungry
To the Editor:
"Kool-Aid, Not Soda: Living on Food Stamps" (front page, April 5), on Kentucky families struggling to stretch food stamps into meals, was a welcome addition to the often all-too-one-sided debate on restructuring the food stamp program.


Seeking Money to Build Stadium
Mayor James Whelan had asked the state Casino Reinvestment Development Authority to consider allocating $9 million of the $12 million cost of a minor league baseball stadium at the city-owned Bader Field airport.
But board members said they need to know more about the plans for the new Atlantic League of Professional Baseball.
LAWRENCE VAN GELDER


RESULTS PLUS
N.H.L.
Penguins Defeat Capitals  Jaromir Jagr had a goal and two assists to lead the Pittsburgh Penguins to a 3-1 victory over the visiting Washington Capitals last night.
The Penguins won for the second consecutive night to move within 2 points of the first-place Quebec Nordiques in the Northeast Division.
Capitals goaltender Jim Carey made his 19th consecutive start and had just his fourth loss.
He is 13-4-2 since he was recalled from Portland of the American Hockey League on March 1. (AP) RED WINGS 4, STARS 1: Dino Ciccarelli's power-play goal triggered a four-goal second period as visiting Detroit extended its unbeaten streak to nine games with a victory over Dallas. (AP)


Market Place; Those mortgage-backed derivative securities are about dead in the water.
TAKE big losses.
Mix in a lot of bad publicity.
What do you get?
A market that is almost dead.
The creators of mortgage-backed derivative securities, who were churning out more than $1 billion a day of new merchandise early last year, managed to sell just $5.1 billion of such securities in the first quarter of this year.
That was down an immodest 94 percent from the $82.5 billion sold in the first quarter of 1994.


Brendel's Survey Visits Beethoven In a Quiet Mood
Alfred Brendel's recital on Monday night at Carnegie Hall was a splendid demonstration of how often and how completely Beethoven departs from mythic archetypes.
Anyone looking for the "heroic" Beethoven, the heaven-storming romantic, would have found precious few traces in the five sonatas chosen by Mr.
Brendel.
Here was music that aired tentative queries, became hypnotized by simple tonalities, sailed abruptly to alien harmonic regions, broke into simple song, propounded eccentric counterpoint and more often than not trailed off into silence.
Mr.
Brendel's survey of the 32 Beethoven sonatas, now in its third year, has generally presented close chronological groupings.
Monday's program focused on music from the years 1809 and 1814: the sonatas in F sharp (Op. 78), G (Op. 79) and E minor (Op. 90).
Even with the addition of two earlier pieces, the "Pastoral" (Op. 28) and the Sonata in E flat (Op. 7), the spacious lyric invention and playful developmental energy of Beethoven's late middle period predominated.
"Sonatas Important to Schubert" would have made a good subtitle.


Naming of American to Unicef Post a Setback for Europeans
The appointment late Monday of an American, Carol Bellamy, as the new head of Unicef ends a turf battle between Europe and the United States that revealed much about the politics of decision-making at the United Nations.
In the middle was the United Nations Secretary General, Boutros Boutros-Ghali, who was still calling leaders over the weekend to win support for his final choice.
By that time it had become clear that he would not be able to -- or would not choose to -- defy pressure from the United States, the largest national contributor to Unicef's budget.


Foreign Affairs; Have You Heard?
When I was a reporter in Beirut in the early 80's the three most chilling words anyone could say to you were: "Have you heard?" The news that followed was almost always bad.
That is why I shuddered on the morning of Jan. 18, 1984, when a banker friend called me to say: "Have you heard . . .? Malcolm Kerr has been shot."
Malcolm was the president of the American University of Beirut, an expert on Arab politics and a friend of mine.
I immediately ran over to the A.U.B. campus.
By the time I got there Malcolm was dead, the gunmen were gone and the only trace left of the murder was the bullet hole that had gouged the wall on the stairs to his office.


Happy New Age Healer Who's No Hero at Home
"Stuart Saves His Family" is a two-step comedy about 12-step recovery programs, presided over by Al Franken as the amusing New Age healer he plays on "Saturday Night Live." Stuart Smalley, that grinning avatar of O.K.-ness, has his own self-help television show, where the set consists of an armchair, a mirror and backdrop of sunny sky.
Thus ensconced, Stuart delivers homilies like, "It is easier to put on slippers than to carpet the world."
Having fine-tuned this nicely fatuous character (and having spun off his own self-help book in the process), Mr.
Franken moves on to the second step of trying to make Stuart the centerpiece of a full-length movie.
But "Stuart Saves His Family" is little more than a set of intermittently funny skits strung together by a sketchy nonplot about Stuart's relatives.
As directed by Harold Ramis, it's seldom better than just amiable.
It's one of too many "Saturday Night Live" spinoffs this season.
And it repeats itself without the cunning of Mr.
Ramis's "Groundhog Day."


Bandag Inc.(BDG,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Supervalu Inc.(SVU,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 25


C.I.A. Asks Congress for Money to Rein In Iraq and Iran
The Central Intelligence Agency has asked Congress for $19 million next year to continue covert operations to destabilize Iraq and to curb what the Administration calls Iran's expansionist ambitions, Administration officials say.
The operations -- with about $15 million to be spent against Iraq and about $4 million against Iran -- are intended to support the Clinton Administration's stated policy goal of "dual containment."


Collective Bancorp (COFD,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


A Feathery Fable of Love And Other Mushy Stuff
When Hubie, a chubby, shy penguin with the voice of Martin Short, falls in love with Marina, a pretty penguin with a pink flower on her head, he knows what he has to do.
According to the mating ritual of their breed, he must drop a pebble -- a kind of engagement ring -- at her feet.
These are words to live by in the penguin world: A kiss on the hand may be quite continental, but pebbles are a girl's best friend.
That idea may be a lot more charming if you're 4, the optimum age for viewers of this gentle, animated musical.
Though "The Pebble and the Penguin" is pleasant, it doesn't have the vivid characters, first-rate animation or sense of adventure that turns movies like "The Lion King" into endlessly watchable favorites.


Chairman Steps Down at Time Warner's Interactive Media Group
Geoffrey W. Holmes, the outspoken chairman of the interactive media group at Time Warner Inc., has resigned after his division was folded into Home Box Office and his duties were scaled back.
Craig Moody, the chief operating officer of the group, has also resigned in the shake-up.


Chest Pains Put D'Amato In Hospital
Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato suffered chest pains yesterday and was admitted last night to St.
Francis Hospital in Roslyn, L.I.
Mr.
D'Amato was alert and upbeat as he was wheeled on a gurney about 6:15 P.M. into the hospital's emergency room.
He gave a thumbs-up sign to reporters and television camera crews standing nearby.
"I've always kept in good shape," he said.
"I'll be all right."


Potato Salad Low in Fat? Jawohl!
GERMAN potato salad is not associated with low-fat food, especially when it is combined with sausage.
But this version, with a delicious new low-fat sausage I stumbled upon, has all the flavor and homeyness of traditional German potato salad with less of the fat.
The sausage, which comes from Hans' All Natural Chicken and Turkey Sausage, is available by mail from Penn Valley Farms in Chicago; (800) 270-7366.
To complete the meal, stir fry broccoli florettes in a bit of sesame oil, then add some grated ginger, chicken stock and dry sherry and cook until tender.


Singapore Hotel Collector Adds an American Trophy
One of Singapore's leading businessmen, Kwek Leng Beng, is adding to his hotel empire with today's agreement to assume control of the Plaza Hotel from Donald J. Trump in a deal in which Mr.
Kwek is being joined by Prince Walid bin Talal of Saudi Arabia.
The deal is the second instance in less than a year of a leading Asian business figure sweeping away one of Mr.
Trump's most prominent assets.
Last summer, Cheng Yu-tong, a Hong Kong property and hotel developer, took control of a large tract of undeveloped land on the West Side of Manhattan that was owned by Mr.
Trump but was heavily mortgaged.


Food Notes
Lambs for Petting
Baby lambs from Hollow Road Farms in the Hudson Valley will visit the Union Square Greenmarket on Saturday from 10 A.M. to 2 P.M.
Visitors will be able to pet the lambs, and the farm will have sheep's milk cheeses and yogurt for tasting.
For Last-Minute Orders
Most catering shops are no longer accepting orders for Passover and Easter, but Campagna Catering at Campagna Restaurant, 24 East 21st Street, (212) 460-8716, is one exception.
It will fill orders through 5 P.M. tomorrow for roast chicken with garlic and herbs ($14 each), among other dishes.


The Talk of Cyberspace
TALK shows, spreading like the Blob in the old science fiction movie, have already taken over the landscape of broadcast television, radio and cable.
Just when it seems the American appetite for such shows surely must have been satisfied, they have found another frontier, where they are spreading anew: the Internet.
Shows that mimic the familiar format -- a host, a celebrity guest, a studio audience -- are now a common feature of life on line.
The shows have producers and talent bookers just as "Good Morning America" does, and almost anyone who might grace the set of Regis or Bryant, hawking a miniseries or a political agenda, is likely to appear on line, where questions and answers scroll across the computer screens of the audience as they are typed.


Spain's Modern Quixote Awaits a Final Tilt
His eyes are sunken now, his hair is flecked with gray and his jowls are puffy.
But at times Felipe Gonzalez can still rise to the occasion.
He'll strip off his necktie, put on the rawhide jacket (a bit tight around the midriff) and take possession of the crowd with those soft Seville consonants and the karate-chop gesture lifted from J.F.K.
Then, for a moment, it's like the old days.


'Heart and Soul' of Bills Joins the Falcons
Linebacker DARRYL TALLEY, called the "heart and soul" of the Buffalo Bills' defense, agreed yesterday to a two-year contract with the Atlanta Falcons.
Details of the contract were not immediately available, but The Buffalo Evening News had reported that Talley was considering a two-year deal worth about $1 million a season.
He received $1.4 million from the Bills in 1994.


Crompton &amp; Knowles Corp.(CNK,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 1


Germans Said to Be Buying British Macmillan
If negotiations go as expected, Macmillan Publishers Ltd., the largest independent publisher in Britain and one of the oldest houses in the world, will soon be owned by Holtzbrinck, the German media conglomerate, people in the industry said yesterday.
The deal, possibly to be completed as early as this weekend, is yet another powerful symbol of the relentless conglomerate drive among publishers.
It also signals a concerted effort by the German company to stake out a bigger territory in the English-language book market.


Maryland's Smith Is Pondering the Pros
The University of Maryland basketball star JOE SMITH said he was leaning toward entering the National Basketball Association draft this summer instead of staying in school for his junior year.
The 6-foot-10-inch center said he discussed the situation with his mother over the weekend and told her he feels ready to play in the National Basketball Association.


China Tire Holdings Ltd.(TIR,N) reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


WIC Western reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


Wine Talk
AS anyone who has climbed the Matterhorn or sped through the St.
Gotthard Tunnel knows, the Swiss thrive on challenges.
Even as we speak, they are here in New York for a go at a tough obstacle, the American wine market.
Swiss wine?
Yes, the Swiss have made wine for probably as long as the French next door.
Maybe longer; there are grapes in Switzerland, like the petite arvine, that supposedly trace their lineage back to the Roman legions.


Trade Center Bombing Suspect Says Aim was Killing of 'Zionist'
The man accused of engineering the 1993 bombing of the World Trade Center has suggested that the real target of the explosion was not the center itself but a "Zionist official."
In an hourlong interview with Al Hayat, an Arabic newspaper published in London, the accused terrorist, Ramzi Ahmed Yousef, insisted he was not directly involved but at the same time hinted that he knew key details of the attack, including who carried it out and who the target was.


Fans Looking to Turgeon to Answer Prayers
Last week, after the Islanders traded Pierre Turgeon to Montreal, his former teammates were watching hockey highlights on television in the locker room after practice.
Turgeon had scored a goal and was pumping his arms in celebration to the cheers of the Forum fans.
The Islander players, who like and admire Turgeon, reacted favorably, but not without wisecracks.


Reporter's Notebook; A Judge Gets Ideas By Mixing in Gallery
The murder trial of Waneta E. Hoyt may be drawing national attention, but the judge , Vincent Sgueglia of Tioga County, says it is no reason to temper the folksy way he runs his courtroom.
During recesses, Judge Sgueglia (pronounced SKWEEL-yah) quickly doffs his robe and often wades into the gallery to mingle with reporters and other observers of the trial of Mrs.
Hoyt, who is charged with killing her five young children a quarter century ago.


Budget Foes' Common Ground: Cherry Garcia
Assembly Speaker Sheldon Silver and the Senate majority leader, Joseph L. Bruno, started to mend their battered relationship today with an afternoon stroll from the Capitol to the Ben &amp; Jerry's ice cream parlor on Lark Street.
After a prolonged impasse over the state budget, the walk produced the first significant agreement between the two men.
"He asked me what flavor, and I said Cherry Garcia, and he said O.K., I'll have that, too," said Mr.
Silver, a Manhattan Democrat who issued today's invitation.
"And if he does the budget that way, we shouldn't have a problem."


Churchill Scholars Named
Ten American college students have been awarded scholarships by the Winston Churchill Foundation for graduate work in engineering, mathematics and the sciences.
The students, chosen for their academic and extracurricular achievements, will receive about $20,000 toward tuition, travel and living expenses to attend Winston Churchill College at Cambridge University in the next academic year.
The foundation has awarded the scholarships for 32 years.


New Chairman at Waterloo
Questions about the ability of Waterloo, the restored Colonial village and arts center here, to account for the use of state grants, have led Percival H. E. Leach to step down as board chairman.
Mr.
Leach, who initiated the restoration of the village in the 1960's, will remain as president.
Clifford Goldman, the acting executive director, said that Mr.
Leach will be replaced by Leonard Coleman, president of baseball's National League.


Fraschilla Is Staying as Manhattan Coach
There will probably come a time when Fran Fraschilla will leave Manhattan College to coach a more prominent basketball program that will pay him more money and offer more perks and recognition.
But now is not the time.
Fraschilla, saying "why spoil what I have here," turned down the chance to become the head coach at the University of Tulsa and will remain the Jaspers' head coach for at least another season.


With Some Cookbooks by Chefs, A Grain of Salt Is Necessary
WHEN chefs cook, they have a legion of helpers to chop up ingredients, whisk sauces, infuse oils and put the finishing touches on elaborate plates of food.
That can make cookbooks written by chefs problematic for home cooks.
Perhaps it is best to view these books not as recipe collections but as documents that give some understanding of what inspires chefs and how their restaurants work.
While some of the new cookbooks by chefs have recipes that are too complex for most people, almost all of them provide telling glimpses of creative chefs.


Newswoman Widens Lawsuit
Last month, Sara Lee Kessler, who used to be an anchor for WWOR-TV, Channel 9, sued the station, claiming religious and age discrimination.
Now she has added three more charges -- sex harassment, defamation and retaliation -- because of comments that a Channel 9 sportscaster, Russ Salzberg, made on the radio after the suit was filed.
Mr.
Salzberg said that Ms.
Kessler was "the single most disliked person" at WWOR, the suit charges.


A Celebrated Statue on 34th Street


Sherman Likes Cable Racing
Allie Sherman, president of New York City Offtrack Betting Corporation, gave a positive review yesterday to the experiment of showing live horse races from Aqueduct and Yonkers on cable television in the metropolitan area.
But Sherman stopped short of saying how a dispute between New York City OTB and the New York Racing Association over minimum-balance requirements for telephone betting accounts might be resolved to keep the racing association from halting the experiment.
No minimum balance is required for an OTB phone account, but state law requires a $450 minimum balance for N.Y.R.A. accounts.
The racing association operates the Aqueduct, Belmont and Saratoga race tracks.


New Pressure on Rowland
Faced with a potential deficit of as much as $1 billion in Gov.
John G. Rowland's proposed two-year budget, Democratic legislators and Mr.
Rowland, a Republican, are at odds over who should solve the problem.
At a news conference today, the Democratic leaders of the General Assembly reiterated their complaints that Mr.
Rowland submitted an unbalanced budget.


Metropolitan Diary
A BUSY, bustling morning filled with the usual commotions and sounds of an early Monday.
Alexandra J. Wall, walking to work along 26th Street, overhears the boring office talk of the two well-suited men behind her.
There is a sudden break in the conversation: "Hello, hello," one of the business types says between pauses.
Ms.
Wall realizes the fellow is addressing a cellular phone.
"I'm in a meeting right now," he fibs.
"Can I call you back? Great. Bye."


CLINTON IS SEEKING TO PAY PAKISTANIS FOR BLOCKED ARMS
President Clinton vowed today to work with Congress to find a way to compensate Pakistan for the purchase of more than $1 billion of military equipment that it has paid for but that has been held up by law for five years in a dispute over that country's nuclear program.
"I don't think it's right for us to keep the money and the equipment," Mr.
Clinton said after a meeting at the White House with the Pakistani Prime Minister, Benazir Bhutto, who has demanded that the United States refund the money or deliver the equipment, including 28 F-16 jet fighters.
"That is not right, and I am going to try to find a resolution to it."


Sunstates Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Of Home Runs and History
Twenty years ago last Saturday, Hank Aaron hit the 715th home run of his underappreciated career.
Throughout the preceding year, he had endured an onslaught of vitriolic racial prejudice; once he surpassed Babe Ruth's record, he finally found some relief from the hate mail and death threats that had compelled the Atlanta police to hire an armed bodyguard for him.
In "Hank Aaron: Chasing the Dream," Mr.
Aaron is an appropriate vessel to explore the civil rights movement from the 1940's through the 1970's.
Born in rural Alabama, he became a Brooklyn Dodgers fan because Jackie Robinson's example as the first black man in the major leagues made his dreams possible.
Mr.
Aaron arrived in the majors, as a Milwaukee Brave, in 1954; his first three seasons coincided with Robinson's last three.


En Route to a New Home in the Sea


Audiovox Corp.(VOX,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


U.N. Anniversary Concert
The actor James Earl Jones and the New York City Gay Men's Chorus are to join the American Symphony Orchestra on April 30 at Avery Fisher Hall for a concert commemorating the founding of the United Nations 50 years ago.
The program, which is to start at 3 P.M., will include Mark Blitzstein's "Airborne Symphony," Arthur Honegger's Third Symphony and Richard Strauss's "Metamorphosen," all of which were composed during the 1940's and reflect different perspectives on the war.
Thomas Jones, tenor, and William Sharp, baritone, are the guest soloists; Mr.
Jones is to narrate, and Leon Botstein will conduct.
Tickets are $20 to $40.
Information: (212) 721-6500.


Iraq Hides Biological Warfare Effort, Report Says
The United Nations official monitoring Iraq's weapons of mass destruction said in a report today that Baghdad might have been concealing a biological warfare program since the late 1980's.
In a six-month review of Iraqi compliance with Security Council resolutions on weapons control imposed in 1991 after the Persian Gulf war, the official, Rolf Ekeus, said Iraqi missile systems and chemical warfare agents were accounted for and under a functioning surveillance system.


Firstfed MichiganCorp.(FFOM,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Allwaste Inc.(ALW,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


Teledyne Inc.(TDY,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


BUSINESS DIGEST
Singapore and Saudi Buyers For Plaza Hotel in New York
The Plaza Hotel in Manhattan is being sold to a Saudi Arabian Prince and a Singapore company.
The buyers, who valued the landmark hotel at $325 million, are essentially taking over the Plaza by assuming most of its debts.


CIT Group Holdings Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Rock That Still Gets Power From Its Rural Roots
Rock songs used to twang all the time, and every bent note was a link to rock's country-and-blues pedigree.
That was decades ago, before rock absorbed Tin Pan Alley pop and British music-hall bounce, before power chords and punk and hip-hop.
Now, the old twang is just an option, but it still carries connotations of down-home stability, Southern roots, sincerity and boozy good times.
Country music still uses the twang, of course, though country's current hit makers have as much in common with the 1970's country rock of the Eagles and Linda Ronstadt as they do with Hank Williams or Kitty Wells.
And some rock bands use the twang, too, including the three that headlined at Tramps over the weekend: Jason and the Scorchers and the Beat Farmers on Friday night, the Jayhawks on Saturday night.
For them, there's still friction between the traditionalism of country and the license of rock, and the friction makes sparks.


Gunter Guillaume, 68, Is Dead; Spy Caused Willy Brandt's Fall
Gunter Guillaume, the East German spy whose unmasking in 1974 forced the resignation of the West German Chancellor, Willy Brandt, died on Monday at his home near Berlin, a friend of the family said yesterday.
He was 68.
Mr.
Guillaume served seven and a half years in a West German prison for espionage before being released in exchange for eight captured West German, American, and British spies in October 1981.
He was later decorated with the Order of Karl Marx by Erich Honecker, the East German Communist leader who fell just before the Berlin wall came down in 1989.


A Federal Tax Lottery
To the Editor:
I would like to propose an idea that could encourage millions of Americans voluntarily and enthusiastically to pay the Federal Government more taxes than owed.


Please Do Not Feed the Rats
Some people feed bread crumbs to pigeons.
James Sadesky, 72, of North Bergen likes to feed doughnuts to rats.
Unfortunately, that is considered a crime.
Now he has been sentenced to 40 hours of helping county workers exterminate the rats in North Hudson Park, where he used to distribute stale pastry.


Nets Said to Weigh Lesser Role for Reed
As the end of the regular season takes its toll on a beleaguered franchise, the Nets are left with two questions to answer: Can they make the playoffs?
And what will happen if they do not?
The club's majority owners, David Gerstein and Alan Aufzien, have scheduled the annual stockholders' meeting for April 24, the day after the end of the regular season.
One of the five minority owners is already guaranteeing changes in next season's management structure.


U.S. Petroleum Data
In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
Apr. 7
Mar. 31
Apr. 8
1995
1995
1994
Gasoline production, daily
7.2
7.4
6.8
Distillate production, daily
3.2
3.2
3.2
Gasoline stocks
213.2
213.8
213.8
Distillate stocks
116.6
120.7
100.1
Crude imports, daily
6.8
8.4
6.9
Product imports, daily
1.6
1.0
1.8
Crude stocks
335.4
337.3
337.1
Crude production, daily
6.6
6.6
6.7
Refinery utilization (%)
90.5
89.8
88.9
Source: American Petroleum Institute


U.S. Policy on Kurds Doesn't Make Sense
To the Editor:
I applaud "Washington and the Kurds" (editorial, April 4), admonishing Turkey to withdraw its troops from Iraq and demanding that the Kurds get "decent treatment" from all the countries in which they live.
Washington's policy toward the Iraqi Kurds, however, is a muddle.


D'Amato in Hospital
Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato suffered chest pains and was admitted to St.
Francis Hospital in Roslyn, L.I.


Media General Inc.(MEG.A,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 26


Sexually 'Ambiguous' Bishop Is Promoted
The Bishop of London, who recently said his sexuality was "ambiguous," was today named the next Archbishop of York by Prime Minister John Major.
The 53-year-old Bishop, David Hope, will take over the job, the second most senior in the Church of England, in August, when the current Archbishop, John Habgood, retires.


CHRONICLE
DAVID A. JONES was suddenly seized with an idea the other day: if giving $1 million to the CUNY Graduate School and University Center for fellowships for black and Hispanic doctoral candidates was a good idea, then $2 million must be a better idea.
Mr.
Jones, the chairman and chief executive of Humana Inc., the managed health-care program based in Louisville, Ky., was at a luncheon in his honor at the graduate center when he and his wife, Betty, met seven of the nine fellowship recipients.


'St. Mark's Gospel' Closing
"St. Mark's Gospel," Alec McCowen's one-man show, is to close after the matinee on Sunday at the Lamb's Theater, 130 West 44th Street, Manhattan.
It had been scheduled to run until May 7.
The Sunday matinee of the play will be its 17th regular performance; it had one preview.


Tettleton's Home Runs Have Yet to Win a Job
Candy Maldonado was the first to notice that Mickey Tettleton was packing.
"You leaving?" Maldonado asked his fellow free-agent camper this morning.


Greenbrier Cos.(GBX,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


Abbott Laboratories (ABT,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Chen Yun, Who Slowed China's Shift to Market, Dies at 89
Chen Yun, a conservative Communist Party patriarch whose revulsion to Western capitalism served as an important brake on the pace of economic reform in China during the last 16 years, died on Monday.
He was 89.
A lengthy obituary read on state-run television tonight said he died of an undisclosed illness.
The obituary, issued by the Central Committee of the governing Chinese Communist Party, described Mr.
Chen as a "great proletarian revolutionary and statesman, an outstanding Marxist, one of the pioneers and founders of China's socialist economic construction, and a long-tested, brilliant leader of the party and state."


Personal Health; Intervening with someone who drinks too much.
STEWART O. did not seem like an alcoholic, at least not to those who worked with him.
He was reliable and caring as a special education teacher during the school year and as a camp counselor every summer.
But his friends and family saw another side of Stewart, an ugly, argumentative side that emerged when he had too much to drink, which seemed to be happening more and more often.
So they hatched a plan they hoped would save him.
Everyone who meant anything to Stewart, including his 10- and 13-year-old children, joined him at a friend's house one morning on a ruse that they would be helping the friend move.
Before Stewart knew what was happening, he found himself surrounded by a circle of caring friends and relatives who told him one by one that they loved him but could not continue to live with him or be his friend the way he was.


Molex Inc.(MOLX,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Rutgers Students in Protest Fast
In an effort to force the resignation of Rutgers University's president, two students began a hunger strike at noon yesterday.
Francis L. Lawrence has been under fire since February, when it was revealed that he said disadvantaged students do not have "the genetic hereditary background" to score well on standardized tests.
He later apologized.


Producer Prices Hold the Line, Calming Jitters About Inflation
In an unexpectedly benign report, Government figures showed today that inflation vanished at the producer level in March, as both energy and food prices turned down.
Not only was the price of finished products unchanged for the month, constituting the best performance since October, but goods at earlier stages of production also settled back to a pace that calmed jitters that had been developing from sharp price increases since late last year.
March marked the end of the fourth year of economic recovery and expansion following the 1990-91 recession.


Two Motives Considered in Shooting of Reputed Mobster
Inside the Gambino crime family, investigators say, there were ample reasons to call him "Handsome Jack" and "the Actor."
In the treacherous world of the Mafia, John P. Giordano was looked upon as a high-ranking mobster in the Gambino crime family without an enemy in the underworld.
His reputation reportedly was that of an affable capo or captain, who raked in millions of dollars for the family and who was a steadfast supporter of the family's imprisoned boss, John Gotti.


Governor Signs Health Bills
Governor Whitman has been busy turning bills into law, including two designed to stop AIDS from tearing families apart.
One measure will create 44 housing units for people with AIDS and their families.
A second will allow parents who are terminally ill or facing a disability to appoint guardians for their children without giving up parental rights.


Star Banc (STB,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Two Scholarships Given New Names After Controversy
It was one of those things nobody noticed.
In each of the last several years, 50 students at the Borough of Manhattan Community College have been granted $500 scholarships named for the Communist North Vietnamese leader, Ho Chi Minh, and for Joanne Chesimard, the convicted murderer of a New Jersey police officer, who is the state's most-wanted fugitive and is now known as Assata Shakur.


A Tuneup? The Nets Need an Overhaul
The left-hander at the Nets' practice yesterday wore No. 44 and played some point guard, but he didn't answer to the name Derrick Coleman or Kenny Anderson.
The 10th man in a scrimmage of nine relatively healthy Nets and no attending stars was Jerry Eaves, assistant coach.
"We had a good day, really," said Butch Beard, who was hazarding no guesses on when the ailing Coleman and Anderson might again play, or even show up.


Police Squad Pursues North Bergen Graffiti Vandals
The undercover anti-graffiti police have already caught "SET2," age 11; "AMOS," age 17, and "MYSTAFO," age 12.
Now the police patrol is looking hard, day and night, for "FLEX," "EVE" and "PYRO," as well as the people behind scores of illegible and illegal scrawls that have popped up on businesses, homes and playground structures since last fall.


T. Keith Glennan, 89, First Chief of Space Agency
T.
Keith Glennan, an educator who put together the National Aeronautics and Space Administration in 1958 as its first leader, died today in Mitchellville, Md.
He was 89.
The cause was complications from a stroke.


Gill Returns to Sonics After a Short Leave
Seattle SuperSonics guard KENDALL GILL returned to the team yesterday after a week off for treatment of clinical depression, saying he feels great and urging others not to wait as long as he did to get help.
"My short absence had very little to do with basketball," Gill said.
"I was diagnosed with a metabolic imbalance, something that I've been suffering from, annoyingly, for a very long time. I've been treated for it, I will continue to be treated for it and I've never felt better physically or mentally in my life. I should have taken this step a long time ago." (AP)


Montana to Retire, Newspaper Reports
JOE MONTANA's long-rumored retirement from football will likely become official early next week, The Los Angeles Times reported yesterday.
The newspaper said the quarterback's friends and family would be in San Francisco for the announcement.


Dole Works on Expansion Of a Conservative Resume
The day after signing a no-new-taxes pledge to reaffirm his credentials as a fiscal conservative, Senator Bob Dole of Kansas plunged into the Midwest today to present himself as a dedicated social conservative.
Making a weeklong tour to announce his candidacy for the Republican Presidential nomination, Mr.
Dole unleashed scornful attacks on the entertainment industry, drug dealers and welfare mothers and put forth a forceful endorsement of voluntary prayer in schools.


Rhodes Inc.(RHD,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


Dorsey Trailers Inc.(DSYT,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 25


Plum Creek Timber Co.  L.P.(PCL,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Champion Int'l. Corp.(CHA,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Trump Is Selling Plaza Hotel To Saudi and Asian Investors
The Plaza Hotel, long a symbol of luxury and grandeur in New York and more recently the crown jewel in Donald J. Trump's shaky business empire, is being sold to two of the world's richest men: a Saudi Arabian Prince and one of Singapore's leading entrepreneurs.
The buyers said yesterday that the deal put a total value of $325 million on the landmark hotel at 59th Street and Fifth Avenue near Central Park.


No Headline
"It's Contract, Contract, Contract, just like it was health care, health care, health care." PETER FLETCHER, a Michigan Republican.  [ B10:3. ]


Repap Enterprises reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Some of Rich Find A Passport Lost Is A Fortune Gained
Each had a reason for giving up American citizenship, and each says it had nothing to do with taxes.
One man wanted to be a citizen of Israel, the land of his birth.
Another was a global marketer who could live anywhere and now calls Belize his home.
Still another so loved the balmy Bahamas that he preferred a Bahamian passport to an American one.


St. Paul Bancorp Inc.(SPBC,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Thomas Industries(TII,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Consolidated Papers Inc.(CDP,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


5 Youths Plead Guilty to Rape And Assault
Five teen-agers pleaded guilty in Brooklyn Criminal Court yesterday to raping, beating and robbing a Russian immigrant last April as she took her first jog of the spring along the Coney Island boardwalk.
The youngest teen-ager, Larry Harris, was a 14-year-old eighth grader at the time of the rape.
The age of the assailants, and the brutality of the attack -- in which the woman was kicked in the head so hard that her forehead bore the imprint of a heel for a week -- outraged and frightened city and neighborhood residents last spring.


Willamette Industries(WMTT,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Thompson Gains Tutor As Butler Finds Pupil
It was barely after 8 A.M. on Brett Butler's first official day in Mets camp, and it had already started.
He was standing in the back of the locker room, holding court, his hands waving with his words, as is his wont.
His captive audience today happened to be Ryan Thompson, the Mets' center fielder until the club signed Butler to a free agent contract Tuesday morning.
With less than two full years of major league experience, the 27-year-old Thompson is a novice compared with Butler, who is 10 years older and came up with the Atlanta Braves in 1981.
And so when Butler approached him with some advice, Thompson hung on every word.


Riggs National Corp.(RIGS,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


'Rugrats' Observes Passover
If not a first, it certainly is a rarity: a cartoon series devoting an episode to a Jewish holy day.
"A Rugrats Passover" is on Nickelodeon this evening at 8, with repeats set for Saturday at 7:30 P.M. and Sunday at 10 A.M.
"Rugrats" are impossibly precocious infants whose world rarely gets beyond the line of vision demarcated by their parents knees.
Tommy Pickles is the group's reckless explorer, along with his best pal Chuckie and the twins Phil and Lil from next door.
Forever complicating their lives is Angelica, Tommy's spoiled cousin.
The parents, of course, are usually oblivious to the loony antics of the kids.


No Headline
I hate fish, but I've been eating it several times a week for years. -- DR.
ARNOLD LEVINE, Princeton professor.  [ A1:5. ]


New Ads Coming For Coke Classic
The Coca-Cola Company will introduce six television commercials on Monday as part of continuing plans to release new work throughout the year for its flagship Coca-Cola Classic brand.
Separately, the company has become a sponsor of the National Football League's initial foray onto the Internet.
The "Always Coca-Cola" commercials, created by the Creative Artists Agency talent agency in Beverly Hills, Calif., join a series of spots created by ad agencies like Bartle Bogle Hegarty in London and Fallon McElligott in Minneapolis.
One humorous commercial likens the inventions of the light bulb and Coca-Cola by showing Thomas Edison inspired by the soft drink; at the end, a voice cries out, "Tom, turn off the light and come to bed." A second spot features a Snippet, a novelty toy similar to a Chia pet; as the toy slurps Coke through a straw, grass sprouts on its head.


'Blood Brothers' Closing
"Blood Brothers," a musical with book, music and lyrics by Willy Russell, is to close after the matinee on Sunday, April 30, at the Music Box Theater, 239 West 45th Street, Manhattan.
The matinee of the play, directed by Bill Kenwright and Bob Tomson, will be its 839th regular performance; it had 15 previews.


Another Shelling of Sarajevo Underlines Political Stalemate; Moscow Defends General
The Defense Ministry asserted today that charges against a Russian general who was dismissed from the United Nations peacekeeping force in Croatia were exaggerated, but it refused to comment on the substance.
Some military officials accused the West of trying to push the Russians out of peacekeeping in the former Yugoslavia.


Citizens Bancorp (Md.) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


City's Talks With Drivers On Contracts At an Impasse
Talks to avert a threatened strike by school bus drivers broke off without progress yesterday, and school and city officials distributed contingency plans for transporting 150,000 children to and from school.
After meeting with City Hall labor negotiators, angry union leaders emerged saying that a strike was their only option.


Corrections
A chart in Business Day yesterday about the history of the Plaza Hotel in Manhattan misspelled the surname of the man who bought it in 1958.
It was Lawrence A. Wien, not Wein.


In Hartford, Senate Passes Welfare Bill
Governor John G. Rowland won his first victory in an effort to create the toughest welfare system in the country, a program that he hopes will be so severe it would discourage poor people in other states from moving to Connecticut.
The Republican Governor's proposal, which passed the Republican-controlled Senate today, would place an 18-month limit on benefits for recipients of Aid to Families with Dependent Children who are considered employable and cut the money provided to a family of three from $581 a month to $308 by next year.


U.S. Judge Orders Ex-Guatemala General to Pay $47.5 Million
A Federal judge in Boston ordered an ex-Guatemala general today to pay $47.5 million to an American nun who was tortured and eight Guatemalans who were terrorized by the Guatemalan military in the 1980's.
The retired general, Hector Gramajo, is a conservative candidate for president who says he had close contacts with the Central Intelligence Agency when he was Defense Minister from 1986 to 1990.


Devils Solve Capitals' Carey to Resume Winning Ways
Jim Carey, the 20-year-old rookie goaltender of the Washington Capitals, has been the talk of the National Hockey League over the past six weeks, but tonight the Devils had the last word.
They took advantage of their opportunities, got superb goaltending of their own from Martin Brodeur and skated away with a 2-1 triumph at USAir Arena.
Sergei Brylin and Neal Broten scored against Carey, who has been vastly responsible for the transformation of the Capitals into a playoff contender.
Although this was his third consecutive loss, Carey lost only twice in his first 17 starts.


John J. Farina, 69, Radio Station Owner
John J. Farina, who founded radio stations in New York, Connecticut and New Jersey, died on April 6 at the Marcella Nursing and Rehabilitation Center in Burlington, N.J.
A resident of Eastampton Townshiip, N.J., he was 69.
The cause was a stroke, said Carmine J. Berardinelli, the manager of the Berardinelli Forest Hill Memorial, a funeral home in Newark.


Passages


Operator of Reactor Is Fined
An $80,000 fine was imposed yesterday on the operators of the Salem Generating Station for intimidating engineers who expressed concern about safety at the nuclear reactor on the Delaware River.
The Public Service Electric and Gas Company, which operates the reactors, said it did not dispute the findings of the Nuclear Regulatory Commission and would not contest the civil penalty.


Warm Springs Journal; A Town Still Feels Franklin Roosevelt's Presence
This tiny west Georgia town was decked out in ribbons and bunting today, and the predominant color was a funereal purple in memory of an adopted son.
Even the pine trees were dressed in mourning, draped shawl-like with vines pendulous with sweet-smelling, purple wisteria blossoms just as they were 50 years ago when Franklin Delano Roosevelt's funeral cortege made its passage from the Little White House here through town to the train depot.
Year by year, the number of townsfolk who remember seeing and talking with the nation's 32d President during his twice-yearly visits dwindles.
But while the once-vivid image of the wealthy Yankee who tooled about the area in his roadster is becoming more blurred for some, it remains indelible as myth for others.


The Players Are Back, but Are Card Collectors?
With the start of the major league baseball season less than two weeks away, trading-card makers are looking to rebound from the 234-day baseball strike that has shrunk their business by as much as 75 percent.
Photographers for the six card companies are in spring training camps taking pictures of players who have switched teams through free agency or trades since the strike ended.
Sales forces have fanned out nationally to drum up delayed orders.


Mutual Funds Could Reap Large Gains In a Takeover
Several mutual funds with big stakes in Chrysler Corporation shares have aggressively added to their positions in recent months, putting fund investors in a position to reap big gains if a takeover of the No. 3 auto maker is completed.
Vanguard Windsor fund, Chrysler's largest shareholder among mutual funds, increased its stake by nearly 14 percent since the end of January.
At that time, according to Morningstar Inc., the $11 billion fund held 13 million Chrysler shares.
Charles T. Freeman, assistant portfolio manager of the fund, said that holding rose to 14.8 million shares as of Tuesday, the day before Kirk Kerkorian announced a $55-a share offer for Chrysler.


White Supremacist Found Guilty of Assault
The leader and founder of a white supremacist music and publishing network based in Detroit has been found guilty of aggravated assault in a melee between white-power supporters and anti-racist demonstrators in Ottawa in 1993.
The supremacist, George Burdi, 24, had been charged in the beating of Alicia Reckzin, also 24, after a white-power rock concert near Parliament Hill.
He was convicted on Monday in an Ottawa court.


Corrections
A picture caption yesterday about two Consolidated Edison workers shot in Queens misidentified one of the injured men in some editions.
Besides John Kolnsberg, who was shown in the picture, the other victim was Donald Bernardini; a third worker, Anthony Deagresta, was present at the shooting but was not injured.


Kerkorian's One Rule: Always Win
He is a reclusive multibillionaire who aims to lure high rollers to his MGM Grand Hotel in Las Vegas, Nev., by signing up the nation's most famed celebrities, among them Barbra Streisand and Mike Tyson.
He is 77 years old, but he still hatches new deals, plays tennis regularly, steers his own car and, until a few years ago, his own jet.


Levi Strauss Associates Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 26


Woolworth Ends Dividend, Cuts Spending
The Woolworth Corporation announced after the stock market closed yesterday that it was eliminating its quarterly dividend of 15 cents a share and slashing capital spending.
The cutbacks are intended to bolster the troubled retailer's cash flow, the chairman and chief executive, Roger N. Farah, said.
Together, the two actions are expected to save the company $113 million this year.


Preventives for '87 Subway Death Still Not in Use
More than seven years after a Queens woman was caught by closing subway doors and dragged to her death, the Transit Authority has not complied with most of its own plans for avoiding such incidents.
Transit officials conceded yesterday that many subway stations and cars have yet to be equipped with safety devices like door-obstruction sensors and closed-circuit television cameras, which help conductors know when passengers are caught in subway doors.


Democrat Assails Pension Plan
The subjects were pensions and politics.
Representative Robert Andrews, a Democrat poised to run against Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman in 1997, charged yesterday that the Governor is taking dangerous risks with retirement money for state workers and public school teachers.
In response, a Whitman spokesman said the money was safe, suggesting that Mr.
Andrews was spreading irresponsible stories.
The Congressman said he was just trying "to set the record straight."


Market Place; Investors' grievances bring Sybase back down to earth.
IN January, Mark Hoffman, the chief executive of Sybase Inc., complained in The Wall Street Journal about the rash of class-action lawsuits charging mismanagement because of sudden drops in the stock prices of high-technology companies.
He bragged that Sybase, the high-flying maker of data base software, had avoided such trouble.
But last week Sybase got an unwanted welcome to the club, when 12 shareholder lawsuits were filed against the company, which is based in Emeryville, Calif., after the stock plunged more than $16, or 41 percent.


Oce-van der Grinten N.V.(OCENY,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


Essay; Iraq's Ton of Germs
The U.S. renounced the use of biological warfare in 1970 and destroyed the germs held for retaliation if attacked.
President Nixon told me the reason for his bow to the unilateral-disarmament crowd: "We'll never use the damn germs, so what good is biological warfare as a deterrent? If somebody uses germs on us, we'll nuke 'em."
In drafting his renunciation, I wondered: Did we have a pollution problem in killing and getting rid of the germs?
The man handling bio-war at the Pentagon said: "No problem. We'll just stop feeding 'em."


Center Chooses Seton Hall
Kelland Payton, a 6-foot-10-inch, 255-pound center from Biloxi High School who made the all-state basketball team in Mississippi, will attend Seton Hall next fall.
Payton averaged 17 points, 13 rebounds and 6 blocked shots last season, despite being double- and triple-teamed most of the time, according to his coach, John Pugh.


Lee A. Rubel, 66, Computer Scientist And Mathematician
Lee Albert Rubel, a mathematician who promoted the use of analog computers, died on March 25 at Covenant Hospital in Urbana, Ill.
He was 66 and lived in Urbana.
The cause was leukemia, said his wife of 40 years, Nina Marcus Rubel.


Vagrant Is Charged In Con Ed Shooting
A homeless man wounded in a gun battle with the police was charged yesterday with shooting two Con Edison workers Tuesday morning on a street in Jamaica, Queens.
Yusef Jackson, 26, was charged after investigators said they discovered that the 9-millimeter weapon Mr.
Jackson used in the gunfight was the same weapon used in the first shooting.
Mr.
Jackson gave a statement to the police admitting the shooting, according to a complaint filed yesterday by the Queens District Attorney.


Tettleton Gets Rangers Job
When Mickey Tettleton packed his equipment and left the free-agent training camp in Homestead, Fla., on Tuesday, he was waiting for a telephone call to tell him that he had joined the Oakland Athletics.
The call never came.
Instead, Tettleton joined the Texas Rangers yesterday.
Tettleton and his agent, Tony Attanasio, reached agreement with the Rangers on the type of contract that has been typical of free-agent signings the past week.
The defensively versatile and switch-hitting Tettleton, who previously had a three-year, $8.5 million contract with Detroit, accepted a one-year deal for a $550,000 salary and the chance to earn $500,000 in performance bonuses.
He can earn the entire amount if he plays in 125 games and has 200 plate appearances.


Appeals Court Overturns 'Crazy Eddie' Convictions
A Federal appeals panel yesterday overturned the stock fraud and racketeering convictions of Eddie Antar, the founder of the once high-flying chain of Crazy Eddie electronics stores, who was found guilty in 1993 of one of the largest stock frauds in history.
The action appears to set the stage for a new trial of Mr.
Antar and his brother, Mitchell Antar, whose convictions on racketeering and securities fraud charges were also overturned yesterday.


First Midwest Bancorp Inc.(FMBI,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


First Union Corp.(FTU,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Another Shelling of Sarajevo Underlines Political Stalemate
A mortar shell slammed into a central street in Sarajevo today, wounding seven people, and international peace mediators called off a visit to the city because of a lack of security at the airport.
The shelling, and the cancellation of the visit by American, French, British, German and Russian officials, underscore the fact that more than three years after the Bosnian war began, nothing fundamental has changed in the capital.


Commerce Bancorp Inc.(COBA,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


MET LIFE SEEKING A BUYER FOR METMOR FINANCIAL
The Metropolitan Life Insurance Company said yesterday that it wanted to sell Metmor Financial Inc., a subsidiary that arranges mortgages for homes and commercial buildings, and handles the servicing of those mortgages.
The announcement came only a few weeks after the Prudential Insurance Company of America announced plans to sell its mortgage banking business, one of the largest in the country and several times the size of Metropolitan's unit.
Metmor, based in Overland Park, Kan., arranged $1.3 billion in mortgage loans last year and handles the servicing, or record-keeping, of $13 billion of mortgages.


Time Warner Negotiating a Deal To Sell Half of Six Flags Parks
Time Warner is nearing a deal to sell about 50 percent of the Six Flags theme parks to a group of investors for as much as $800 million, according to people familiar with the plan.
The deal, which Time Warner hopes to announce within two weeks, would be the biggest asset sale engineered under Gerald M. Levin's chairmanship since he pledged to reduce the company's $15 billion debt two months ago.


Frederick D. Nichols, 83, a Preservationist, Dies
Frederick D. Nichols, who rescued Thomas Jefferson from Stanford White, died on Sunday at a nursing home in Charlottesville, Va.
He was 83 and a retired professor of architecture at the University of Virginia, where he spearheaded and supervised the 1976 restoration of Jefferson's celebrated Rotunda.


Annie Fischer, Pianist, Was 81; Noted for Insight and Musicality
Annie Fischer, a Hungarian pianist known for the elegance of her Mozart performances and her vital, prismatic approach to early Romantic repertory, died on Monday at her home in Budapest.
She was 81.
Miss Fischer was a pianist who played with an intensity of concentration and focus that seemed almost at odds with the poetry and impetuousness of her interpretive style.
She shunned the machinery of modern career-making and rarely gave interviews.
Preferring not to be far from Budapest, she performed mostly in Europe, although she undertook several brief tours of the United States over the last 13 years.
And because she disliked making recordings, the comparatively few disks she recorded for Deutsche Grammophon and EMI are prized by collectors.


Crestar Financial Corp.(CF,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


International Briefs; British Telecom In Italian Venture
British Telecommunications P.L.C. joined yesterday with the third-largest bank in Italy, Banca Nazionale del Lavoro, to offer telephone services to big Italian companies.
The partners will invest $:150 million, or about $240 million, during the next decade to improve the data and voice network to be used in their venture, called Albacom.


Bonnie Bird, Graham Protegee And Noted Dance Teacher, 80
Bonnie Bird, a Martha Graham dancer in the 1930's and an internationally known teacher, died on Sunday at her home in Tiburon, Calif.
She was 80.
The cause was cancer said Marion North, a friend and colleague.


EMC Corp.(EMC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 1


CHRONICLE
Forty years after he announced his discovery of the first successful polio vaccine, Dr.
JONAS SALK returned to the University of Michigan on Tuesday to be honored for his triumph over the dreaded disease.
The university and the March of Dimes honored him at Rackham Auditorium on the Ann Arbor campus, The Associated Press reported.
It was there in 1955 that he announced a successful trial of the vaccine.


We Can All Learn From McNamara's Remorse; Give Profits to Veterans
To the Editor:
I don't know what Robert S. McNamara plans to do with the profits from the sale of his memoirs, but he should not profit from the death of 58,000 Americans in what became known as McNamara's War.
You report (front page, April 9) that he broke down in tears during the taping of an interview for television, and later on explained that this profoundly embarrassed him, "but the sense of grief and failure is strong."


Two high-level executives leave Wells Rich unexpectedly as the agency asserts wrongdoing.
TWO longtime top executives of Wells Rich Greene BDDP Communications in New York have unexpectedly left after being accused by the agency company of unauthorized use of corporate funds for personal gain.
One of them has called the accusations "outrageous and inaccurate."
David R. Sklaver, 43, president of Wells Rich Greene BDDP Advertising since August 1993, overseeing the Detroit and New York offices, has resigned, the agency company said yesterday, and Tom Fagan, 46, executive vice president and chief financial officer of Wells Rich since 1987, has been dismissed.


Stratacom Inc.(STRM,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 1


Tuesday Lunch Plans: Watch Montana Retire
Elaborate plans were being made yesterday for a grand retirement announcement by Chiefs quarterback Joe Montana in San Francisco next Tuesday.
Montana, who carved out a Hall-of-Fame career with the 49ers by guiding them to four Super Bowl championships, has decided to end his 15-year career in the National Football League, the last two coming with the Kansas City Chiefs.


Corrections
The tables of foreign stock indexes and the International Herald Tribune indexes in Business Day yesterday included erroneous figures in some editions, reflecting market activity on Monday, not Tuesday.
Readers wishing corrected copies of the tables may write to Production Quality Control, The New York Times, 229 West 43d Street, New York, N.Y. 10036, or telephone (212) 556-1992.


Simpson's Lawyers Attack Handling of Blood Samples
Lawyers for O. J. Simpson continued today to grill Dennis Fung, the police criminal evidence expert who gathered the blood evidence in the case, suggesting that Mr.
Fung was part of a broader police conspiracy to frame Mr.
Simpson.
In no rush to end what Mr.
Simpson's lawyers appear to view as one of the high points of the trial, Barry Scheck, the Cardozo Law School professor handling DNA testimony for the defense, depicted Mr.
Fung not only as incompetent but also dishonest, willing to lie to protect the police who investigated the killings with which Mr.
Simpson has been charged.


International Multifoods Corp.(IMC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


Utility Fails to Win Relief From Its Contracts With Independents
A Federal agency today rejected a request by an upstate New York utility, which had sought to get out of high-cost contracts to buy power from independent producers.
The decision could keep rates higher for customers -- sometimes by about $100 a year -- for a decade or more, both in New York and elsewhere.
The utility industry is in many ways on the verge of a new era, one in which the forces of deregulation will make electricity more of a commodity that can be bought and sold in a highly competitive nationwide market.
And as in any such bazaar, prices will be forced downward.


Illinova Corp.(ILN,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Rangers Get a Hand Back on the Playoff Ladder
Jeff Beukeboom gave new meaning to short-handed goal last night and helped the Rangers edge the Buffalo Sabres by 3-1 at Madison Square Garden.
The victory ended a four-game home losing streak for the Rangers, who remained tied with the Montreal Canadiens, 2 points behind eighth-place Hartford with 10 games left.
The Rangers have six games remaining at Madison Square Garden, where they are 7-8-3.


Commemorating Roosevelt's Death, Democrats Praise His Legacy of Liberalism
Fifty years ago today, Franklin Delano Roosevelt, the visionary President who led the nation out of the shadow of the Great Depression to the brink of victory in history's first global war, died in this tiny spa southwest of Atlanta.
Roosevelt had come here, as he did more than 40 times in his Presidency, seeking relief from the effects of the polio that had left his legs paralyzed.
When he succumbed to a cerebral hemorrhage in the first year of his fourth term, American troops under his command were crossing the Elbe River in Germany, 60 miles from Berlin, and fighting on Okinawa, the last stepping-stone to the home islands of Japan.


Are Owners Seeking More Replacements?
Baseball's ruling executive council completed a two-day meeting yesterday with no decision on when the owners want to resume labor negotiations.
Bud Selig, the acting commissioner, said the eight-owner council also did not make a decision on Chuck O'Connor, management's chief labor lawyer, whose status has come into serious question.


John Chamberlain, Columnist, Dies at 91
John R. Chamberlain, a syndicated columnist, book critic and author whose journalism career spanned more than six decades, died on Sunday at Yale-New Haven Hospital.
He was 91 and a longtime resident of Cheshire, Conn.
Mr.
Chamberlain had been associated with a number of newspapers and magazines, including The New York Times, The Wall Street Journal, Fortune, Barron's and Life magazine.
He produced eight books, including a collection of his writings, "The Turnabout Years," published in 1992.


Allies of U.S. Seek to Block Bill on Cuba
Canada, France, Britain and the 15-nation European Union have started an unusual campaign to block a bill in Congress that would tighten the trade embargo against Cuba, saying the bill would unjustifiably punish foreign companies that have dealings with Havana.
These allies assert that the bill, sponsored by Senator Jesse Helms, the North Carolina Republican who is chairman of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, would bring improper pressure on other countries to adhere to Washington's policies by, for example, barring any country that imports Cuban sugar from selling sugar to the United States.


No Tax Increases, Mayor Vows
Mayor Sharpe James promised no increase in property taxes and no cuts in the municipal work force when he presented his 1995 budget to the City Council yesterday.
His $476 million budget proposes an increase of $1 million in school spending and a decrease of $2.2 million in allocations to Essex County.
His plan would reduce municipal spending by $25.2 million compared with last year's budget.
"The dollars have been stretched as thinly as possible," the Mayor said.


Student Who Loved Two Cultures Is Buried in New Jersey


Corrections
A music review yesterday of a performance by the pianist Alfred Brendel at Carnegie Hall on Monday night misstated the date of his next recital there.
It will be Monday, April 17, not May 17.


Jury Finds Drug Agents Assaulted Gay Men, but Not Out of Bias
Two gay men who were assaulted and arrested by three Federal Drug Enforcement Administration agents on the Upper West Side in November 1988 were awarded $111,000 in damages yesterday by a jury in United States District Court in Manhattan.
The jury found that the agents used excessive force and that the two men, Marc J. Anderson and Jeffrey E. Grubb, were unlawfully arrested after a minor traffic mishap.
But the jurors did not find that the agents acted solely out of bias, even though Mr.
Anderson and Mr.
Grubb said they were taunted with an anti-gay slur during the incident.


Accounts
Astra U.S.A., Westboro, Mass., a unit of A.B.
Astra, to Gerbig, Snell/ Weisheimer &amp; Associates, Columbus, Ohio, to introduce two drugs in the United States, Pulmicort Turbuhaler, for asthma, and Entocort, for ulcerative colitis.
Gerbig, Snell already handles other drugs for Astra.
The billings were estimated at more than $15 million.
ITT Sheraton Hotels in Hawaii, a unit of the ITT Corp., to Milici Valenti Ng Pack Advertising, Honolulu, to handle advertising for its 10 hotels, previously handled by Peck Sims Mueller, Honolulu.
The billings were estimated at more than $6 million.


Midlantic Corp.(MIDL,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31





Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article on Tuesday about a Jewish settlement in the Gaza Strip described its setting incorrectly.
The settlement, Kfar Darom, is surrounded by fields, not by desert.


Bujones Choreography Is Showpiece for Troupe From Puerto Rico
In an atypical lull in local ballet activity, Ballet Concierto de Puerto Rico more than fills the void with its first season at the Joyce Theater.
The small troupe from San Juan, founded and directed by Lolita San Miguel, has class as well as classicism and opened a week's run on Tuesday night with a lively mixed program.
Fernando Bujones choreographed "Valses y Variaciones Alegres," an elegant showpiece for the beautifully schooled dancers and anything but the usual cliched ballroom ballet.
Jesus Miranda, a company member, captivated the audience with energy and line in his mix of modern dance and ballet in an atmospheric ode to a Puerto Rican rain forest, "El Portal del Yunque" ("Gateway to El Yunque").
Jimmy Gamonet de los Heros, the Miami City Ballet's resident choreographer, came up with a schematic but admirably nervy version of "Carmen," led by the sparkling and technically secure Maria Teresa Robles.


D'Amato Leaves the Hospital
Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato walked out of St.
Francis Hospital this morning, declaring that while stress may have got the better of him in recent days, his heart and arteries were in good condition.
"I feel great and it's a wonderful relief to know that the worst is not just around the corner," said Mr.
D'Amato, who entered the hospital on Tuesday after suffering chest pains and fearing a heart attack.
He said he planned to take a few days off to rest.


2 Companies Aim At the Gay Market
Two units of giant consumer marketers -- the Procter &amp; Gamble Company and the General Motors Corporation -- are aiming sales pitches at homosexuals for the first time.
The Giorgio Beverly Hills unit of P.&amp; G. and the Saturn Corporation unit of General Motors have each bought advertisements in the May issue of Out magazine, owned by Out Publishing in New York.
The ads being run are part of their regular campaigns; Giorgio's, for its Wings for Men fragrance, is by Grey Advertising in New York and Saturn's, for its 1995 automobiles, is by Hal Riney &amp; Partners in San Francisco.


City National Corp.(CYN,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Shifting Course On the Arts, Aiming For the Mainstream
Who deserves a slice of the shrinking pie?
So far as New York City arts financing goes, it may turn out to be the institutions with the biggest appetites.
According to representatives of several of the city's arts organizations, the Giuliani administration decided last week to eliminate city support entirely for 400 smaller museums, theater companies, arts education organizations and other groups, and to concentrate the city's increasingly limited cultural-affairs budget on larger, more established institutions.
The proposal -- which is not yet final, and has not been announced -- represents a further step in a preference expressed in December 1993 by John S. Dyson, the Deputy Mayor for Finance and Economic Development, that city arts subsidies be funneled toward large institutions, like the Metropolitan Museum of Art, that directly enhance the city's economy by attracting tourist dollars.


Rams Given Green Light for St. Louis Move
The Rams will be allowed, after all, to make St. Louis their new home.
The National Football League owners today approved the Rams' move from Anaheim, Calif., to St.
Louis in a vote that produced 23 in favor, 6 against and 1 abstention.


Provident Bancorp Inc.(PRBK,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Synovus Financial Corp.(SNV,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Sir John Soane's New Tricks
EVEN if they have not read Charles Dickens's legal yarn "Bleak House," most everyone in London knows that the buildings lining Lincoln's Inn Fields are mostly occupied by solicitors and barristers.
An exception is No. 13, a Portland-stone-faced mansion on the north side of the square.
It is Sir John Soane's Museum, and at least 50,000 people a year make the pilgrimage to experience the light-filled labyrinthine interiors, look up through the domed ceilings to lantern skylights and view the glorious chockablock displays of paintings and sculpture, architectural models and prints that have not substantially changed since 1833, when Soane gave the place to Britain as an architectural museum.


Memorialize F.D.R., Not His Disability
To the Editor:
"Roosevelt's Disability an Issue at Memorial" (news article, April 10) exposes the greatest hurdle that disabled Americans must surmount: regardless of our accomplishments, the nondisabled world insists on depicting the handicapped in terms of their handicaps, not who they are or what they accomplish.


Protesters Against Rutgers President Clash With Police
Protesters and the police clashed briefly today at a demonstration to demand the resignation of Rutgers University's president.
Witnesses at the protest said a few people were treated for minor injuries after the police used pepper spray and brought out clubs to disperse about 250 demonstrators who were blocking an intersection outside the house of the president, Francis L. Lawrence, in Piscataway, about half a mile from the campus in New Brunswick.


We Can All Learn From McNamara's Remorse; They Lost Vietnam
To the Editor:
Re "McNamara Recalls, and Regrets, Vietnam" (front page, April 9): The 20th anniversary of the fall of Saigon to the North Vietnamese Army's mechanized divisions, modern infantry formations, world-class artillery and updated MIG jets and electronics is still observed by United States journalists and politicians as a tragic loss for a benighted United States policy, flawed and misguided in a futile effort to interest an agrarian folk culture in a colonial exploitation doomed to failure.


Juvenile Court Trial In Crown Hts. Case
A Federal judge ruled that the Brooklyn teen-ager indicted on civil rights charges in the killing of a Hasidic student in Crown Heights in 1991 must be tried as a juvenile.
If convicted, the defendant, Lemrick Nelson Jr., will now face a maximum sentence of five years in prison, rather than the possibility of life.


Smith (A.O) Corp.(SMC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Sports of The Times; West 49th's Hockey Landmark
NOBODY has lived there for several years.
The house number, 418, is gone.
The windows are boarded.
The gray iron fire escape hangs like a skeleton on the battered five-story brick tenement not far from the littered sidewalk in front of the 7 Brothers Famous Deli on the the corner of Ninth Avenue and West 49th Street where the black-and-white one-way arrows tell where the Mullen brothers went.
West 49th is one way west, where 38-year-old Joey has played with the St.
Louis Blues, the Calgary Flames and now the Pittsburgh Penguins as the first United States-born player to produce 1,000 points, including 484 goals, in the National Hockey League.


Little People, Milan Loves You
WITH giant Ikea banners strung high across the streets proclaiming, "Il Design Democratico," and the titans of the high-profile Italian furniture industry trying out a new down-market lingo -- "knock down" and "quick assembly" -- this mecca of high style is finally getting down to the nitty-gritty.
It's called "piccoli prezzi" (affordable prices, to you).
In its 34th year, the five-day Salone Internazionale del Mobile, the international furniture fair, gave pluralism a kiss on each cheek.


Successor To Selig Is Nowhere In Sight
One year ago yesterday, the retiring United States Senator from Maine announced that he had withdrawn his name from consideration for the United States Supreme Court and said that if the job of baseball commissioner were offered, he would consider it.
But George Mitchell's name has not been heard in baseball circles since.
Nor has anyone else's in connection with the job.
Certainly it hasn't been offered to anyone.


Premier Bancorp Inc.(PRBC,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Academic Competitors at a Chicago School Now Admit Cheating
In what will surely become a classroom lesson on the costs of dishonesty, some student scholars at Steinmetz High School here have finally admitted cheating in a statewide academic competition they won last month, a case of apparent triumph turned to disgrace.
The confessions come after a month of indignant student denials that were supported by the Steinmetz principal.
On Tuesday, several members of the school's team acknowledged to officials of the competition, the Illinois Academic Decathlon, that they had obtained a pilfered copy of the test in advance and that a Steinmetz student had posed as a judge in the speech category.
The cheating was apparently condoned by the team's coach, Jerry Plecki, an English teacher who resigned under pressure last month after acknowledging that he had fed his team an answer key before the 1994 competition.
Details of the cheating at this year's competition came to light in a class essay written only a few days later by the student who had posed as a judge.
When confronted, the student told school officials that the essay, entitled "Confession," was fictitious.
But it turned out to be a virtual blueprint for confirming the wrongdoing.
Asked about the essay, the Steinmetz principal, Constantin Kiamos, told The Chicago Tribune: "I'm heartsick. I can't describe it any other way."
Steinmetz won the competition on March 11 by posting scores that were astonishingly high.
A week later, after refusing to submit to a "validation test," the team was stripped of its title.
But its members continued to deny cheating.
Before students were called in for questioning by school officials, Mr.
Plecki told them to "give the performance of their lives," according to officials of the Illinois Decathlon Association who investigated the case.
Mr. Plecki has been unavailable for comment since resigning last month.
Even now, some of the students on the nine-member Steinmetz team deny the cheating.
But Patricia Lee Refo, a lawyer for the Illinois Decathlon Association, said the proof was obvious.
"The denials," she said, "get pretty silly at some point."
Officials had become suspicious after an analysis of test scores showed that the Steinmetz team's performance had been so magnificent that it defied logic.
For example, of the 12 highest Academic Decathlon math scores in the nation, six came from Steinmetz, a school of working-class youths on the city's Northwest Side that is the alma mater of Playboy magazine's founder, Hugh Hefner.
In addition, a member of last year's Steinmetz team, Angela Lam, came forward to say that cheating had occurred during one round of the 1994 competition.
Ms.
Lam said Mr.
Plecki had encouraged the students to cheat, telling them: "Everybody cheats. That's the way the world works."
After stripping Steinmetz of its title, officials awarded the Illinois championship to Whitney Young, a selective-admissions school on the South Side that had won the competition for the previous nine years.
Decathlon officials said they were even more appalled by the students' repeated denials than by the cheating itself.
"If they had come forward and said, 'Oh my gosh, we made a terrible mistake,' this event would have been an unfortunate but small moment in the lives of these kids," Ms.
Refo said.
"The reason it became what I suspect will be a life-altering event is that they didn't do the right thing."


Jo Sinclair, Novelist And Memoirist, 81
Jo Sinclair, who wrote about the struggles of immigrant families in America, died on April 4 at her home in Jenkintown, Pa.
She was 81.
The cause was cancer, said Joan Soffer, her companion.


The Beach In a Necklace
WHEN counter tops are cut from sheets of Du Pont Corian, Jan Johnson, a jewelry designer, recycles the scraps into earrings, necklaces, bracelets and buttons.
When the pieces are cut and polished, they resemble chunks of granite in sandy colors "inspired by walks on the beach," said Ms.
Johnson, who trained at the Rhode Island School of Design and now lives in Newbury, Mass.
A small necklace costs $20; a 24-inch strand is $80.
Information: (508) 865-9964.


COMPANY BRIEFS
CHATTEM INC., Chattanooga, Tenn., a maker of health and beauty aids, has agreed to sell its specialty chemicals division to Elcat Inc.
Warren, N.J., in a cash and stock transaction valued at $25 million.


A Versatile Sports Shoe That Likes a Little Gardening
SERGIO LOZANO, 29, an industrial designer for Nike in Beaverton, Ore., says he has designed about 100 shoe styles.
His Air Mada is the company's top-selling outdoor sports style.
The latest version, the $80 Air Mada Plus (left), was introduced last week.
Mr.
Lozano said he was inspired by the rugged materials of mountain-climbing gear.
His design "tweaks" include front-and-back pull-on tabs to make it easier to get the shoes on, and a gusetted tongue that keeps out trail debris (and deer ticks).
The Air Mada Plus is designed for "general outdoor pleasure, nothing hard-core," Mr.
Lozano said.
"But it can withstand the rigors of hiking, bouldering and light rock climbing, as well as the rigors of gardening in Connecticut."


Mark Twain Bancshares (MTWN,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Connecticut Death Penalty Law Is Toughened


From the Waterfront to the Rails
In a ceremonial doubleheader, the way was paved yesterday for revitalization of the Hoboken waterfront and easier rail travel in northern New Jersey.
With Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman looking on, the City and the Port Authority signed an agreement to develop five blocks of the waterfront.
If all goes according to plan, the $93 million project, which is to create 4,500 construction jobs and 7,000 permanent jobs, will be completed in about four years.
At the same ceremony, the Governor signed a bill to connect several northern New Jersey rail projects in a "Circle of Mobility."


Study Finds Fish-Heavy Diet Offers No Heart Protection
A large study has failed to confirm a cherished nutritional belief: that the more fish you eat, the better you will be protected against heart disease.
The study, by Dr.
Alberto Ascherio of the Harvard School of Public Health and his colleagues, followed 44,895 men for six years to determine whether those who ate the most fish would have the lowest incidence of heart disease.
To the researchers' surprise, they found that it did not matter whether the men ate fish once a month or six times a week -- the rate of heart disease was unaffected.


Palestinians Keep Families In the Dark About Trials
Abdullah Shalah turned on his radio the other day and heard that his son, Omar, had been sentenced overnight to life imprisonment by a Palestinian tribunal here for planning a suicide bombing that killed 21 Israelis in January.
Mr.
Shalah was jolted.
No one from the Palestinian Authority had told him that his jailed son, a mosque preacher and member of the militant group Islamic Holy War, had been accused of a crime, charged and tried, he said.


Journal; Tin Cans and String
Republicans could have a lot of fun with last Saturday's Democratic fund-raiser at Steven Spielberg's home, where Hollywood couples paid $50,000 each to dine with Bill and Hillary Clinton, listen to Robin Williams's shtick and chow down on populist vittles like fried chicken.
What more perverse weekend to schedule such an event than the one in which the President ended his 100-day silence to re-emerge as the champion of the middle class?
Awkward as this symbolism was, even more embarrassing is how little the Democrats have to show for their ostentatious synergy with the most powerful and imaginative minds in the pop-culture industry.
Bill Clinton may draw campaign checks from the DreamWorks moguls, but it is the G.O.P. that cannily milks the machinery of the mass media to pound out its message.


U.S. Plans to Threaten Japan With Tariffs in Trade Dispute
The Clinton Administration, frustrated by nearly two years of fruitless negotiations with Japan over American autos and auto parts, will warn Tokyo that it will move to impose several billion dollars in punitive tariffs unless major progress is made in opening Japanese markets in the next three weeks.
The strategy, which has been under formulation for several weeks, was approved at the White House today during a meeting of top Cabinet officers and other officials dealing with trade, senior officials said today.


Trial as Juvenile Ordered For Crown Hts. Defendant
A Federal judge ruled yesterday that the Brooklyn teen-ager indicted on civil rights charges in the killing of a Hasidic student in Crown Heights in 1991 must be tried as a juvenile.
If convicted, the defendant, Lemrick Nelson Jr., will now face a maximum sentence of five years in prison, rather than the possibility of a life term.
In making his ruling, Judge David G. Trager of Federal District Court in Brooklyn rejected the argument of Federal prosecutors that Mr.
Nelson, who was 16 at the time of the killing, had committed premeditated murder.
The judge also ruled that the Government had failed to establish that Mr.
Nelson was either beyond rehabilitation or "someone whose personality would indicate a clear tendency toward future violence."


Barnes Group Inc.(B,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


5-Day Week For Belmont
The five-day week in racing at Aqueduct will be extended to Belmont Park when it opens its spring season on May 3, it was announced yesterday by Kenneth Noe Jr., president of the New York Racing Association.
"There is too much racing," Noe said.
"We feel by running five days a week we will be able to provide a better product for our fans and simulcast customers across the country."


Investor Plans Offer for Chrysler In a $22.8 Billion Takeover Deal
With the support of Lee A. Iacocca, Kirk Kerkorian, the secretive billionaire investor who is the biggest shareholder of Chrysler, astonished Wall Street and the automotive industry today by saying that he would bid for complete ownership of the auto maker.
The deal, valued at $22.8 billion, would be the largest takeover since RJR Nabisco was bought more than six years ago for $25 billion.
Mr.
Kerkorian said he would offer investors $55 for each of their shares, 40 percent higher than the closing price of $39.25 on Tuesday.
At the proposed price, the 10 percent stake that Mr.
Kerkorian holds in Chrysler would be valued at nearly $2 billion.


Bitter Racial Dispute Rages Over Adoption
Addicted to the crack passed to him in the womb, Matthew left the hospital nine days after his birth in 1992 in the arms of Lou Ann Mullen, his foster mother.
Ms.
Mullen, looking at his unruly shock of dark hair and wizened face, gave him the nickname of Little Man.
But a month after lovingly nursing the infant back to health, Ms.
Mullen and her husband, Scott, broached the subject of adoption, only to be rebuffed by their social worker.
Little Man was black.
The Mullens were not.


Casinos Outplay Vegas Strip
The dozen casinos here generated higher gross operating profit margins last year than their 19 counterparts on the Las Vegas Strip, according to a new report from the New Jersey Casino Control Commission.
The average Atlantic City casino generated a gross operating profit of $67 million compared with $52 million for the average Strip casino.
Gross operating profits are earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation, amortization or charges from affiliates.


Alumax Inc.(AMX,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Pulitzer Publishing Co.(PTZ,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Transactions
Baseball  American League
BOSTON RED SOX -- Agreed to terms with Alejandro Pena, pitcher, on a minor-league contract.
CALIFORNIA ANGELS -- Signed Luis Raven, infielder, to a one-year contract.


Tellabs Inc.(TLAB,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


We Can All Learn From McNamara's Remorse; Point of No Return
To the Editor:
Robert S. McNamara, in his retrospective on the Vietnam War (front page, April 9), deserves all the blame he heaps on himself, and more.
But he remains naive if he believes that the United States could have withdrawn from Vietnam after the assassination of President Ngo Dinh Diem.


METRO DIGEST
CONNECTICUT DESEGREGATION SUIT FAILS
Civil rights advocates, whose school-desegregation lawsuit set off an anguished six-year debate in Connecticut over the racial divide between its cities and suburbs, were handed a sharp defeat when a judge ruled that the isolation of poor minority children in Hartford's schools was not the state's fault.
A1.
NEW YORK CITY  TALKS WITH SCHOOL DRIVERS AT IMPASSE Talks to avert a threatened strike by school bus drivers broke off without progress and school and city officials distributed the contingency plans for transporting 150,000 children to and from school.
B3.


The Museum
On April 13, 1870, the Metropolitan Museum of Art came into the world.
It had no properties, either art or real estate, no funds or promises of them, only a very grand name and the very grand ambitions of its founders.
It was to be, said William Cullen Bryant, one of the museum's guiding spirits, "a repository of the productions of artists of every class, which shall be in some measure worthy of this great metropolis and of the wide empire of which New York is the commercial center."
The funds came fast, as did the first collections and, eventually, the museum's first home -- a modest Fifth Avenue brownstone.
Several moves and 10 years later the museum arrived, at last, in Central Park, where it has been ever since.
"Can you believe it?" crowed one joyous trustee on opening day.
"Can you realize that the thing really exists?"


Fear of Attacker Remains for Seles
MONICA SELES, who has not played competitive tennis since being stabbed in the back in Hamburg, Germany, nearly two years ago, said yesterday that she remains haunted by the image of her attacker, GUNTHER PARCHE.
In a statement released by IMG, which represents Seles, she explained her reluctance to testify at the appeal hearing earlier this month in which a judge upheld Parche's suspended sentence.


Riley's Reward for Anthony: Some Post-Season Playing Time
During the last three weeks, Greg Anthony has played his best basketball of the season for the Knicks.
And that raises a question.
Will Anthony be in the rotation, or on the bench, during the playoffs?
Pat Riley can answer that.
And today, Riley sounded like a coach who is leaning toward giving Anthony some playing time during the post-season.


Deep in Training for a Musical Easter
Dr.
Gerre Hancock is negotiating his busiest week, with music to rehearse and perform for 15 church services from Palm Sunday through Easter, and it doesn't seem to unravel him.
In fact, he radiates serenity.
He has been doing this for 24 years as the organist and choirmaster at St.
Thomas Episcopal Church on Fifth Avenue at 53d Street.
"I just feel so lucky making a living doing what I'd rather be doing," he said over a cup of coffee at the St.
Thomas Church Choir School on 58th Street between Avenue of the Americas and Seventh Avenue, where he lives with his wife, Judith, also an organist.


McReynolds Is Calling It a Career
Outfielder KEVIN McREYNOLDS says he is ready to retire.
"I'm ready to turn the page," said McReynolds yesterday.
"I've been playing since I was 5 years old, and I never sat on the bench. I don't want to start at 35."
McReynolds spent 12 seasons in the majors, playing for the San Diego Padres from 1983 to 1986; the Mets from 1987 to 1991 and again in '94, and the Kansas City Royals from 1992 to 1993.
Last fall, the Mets declined to exercise a $3.6 million option on McReynolds, although they and other teams retained an interest in signing him as a platoon outfielder and pinch-hitter.


Colonial Bancgroup (CNB,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Corrections
An obituary yesterday about Ellen Hermanson, an advocate for survivors of breast cancer, misspelled her husband's name.
He is Hugo Moreno, not Mareno.
The obituary also misstated her residence.
She lived in Brooklyn, not Manhattan.
The article also misstated the name of a group whose board she served on.
It is the National Coalition for Cancer Survivorship, not the National Coalition for Breast Cancer Survivorship.


Madeleine Herling; Philanthropist, 75
Madeleine Herling, a businesswoman and philanthropist, died on Sunday at Mount Sinai Medical Center in Miami Beach.
She was 75.
Besides her home in Manhattan, she had residences in Miami Beach, Zurich and Sao Paolo, Brazil.
The cause was complications from leukemia, a spokesman for the family said.


Harley-Davidson Inc.(HDI,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 26


'Can You Hurl, Lad?'; A Sport Deep in the Irish Blood Is Running Thin in New York
Two thousand years ago, or so the legend goes, an Irish hero conquered a kingdom by wrestling a giant guard dog and shoving a ball down its throat.
This was not just any ball.
It came from the lightning-fast, rough-and-tumble, lacrosselike sport called hurling.
That pretty much sealed hurling's place as Ireland's national pastime.
Ancient armies played it to warm up for battle, sometimes killing hundreds before the real fighting began.
Fourteenth-century British rulers banned it: too Irish.
Irish Republican Army supporters used hurley sticks to break up British Army recruiting classes.


Spring, by the Yard
LOOKING at Tricia Guild's "Mad Hatter" pattern, one would think the English fabric designer had been to a few Easter parades on Fifth Avenue.
Fourteen hats, "the kind you'd find in a child's dressing-up box," she said, decorate a field of painted stripes.
With all the frills upon it, the cheerful design captures the giddiness of spring and complements other patterns in her Designers Guild collection.
The printed cotton fabric, which is sold to-the-trade only, costs about $32 a yard at Osborn &amp; Little, 979 Third Avenue (near 59th Street); (212) 751-3333.


International Briefs; Pirelli Reports A Profit for 1994
Pirelli S.p.A. of Italy said yesterday that it returned to profitability in 1994, for the first time since 1990, as both its tire and cable operations made money again.
The company said it would not pay a dividend, because its parent company lost money.
That is because the profits in 1994 from the tire and cable companies will not be passed on to the parent, which would make the payout, until this year.
Pirelli said the results from the first few months of 1995 indicated that the profit would rise again this year.
Consolidated net profit was 110 billion lire, or $65 million, in 1994, in contrast to a loss of 62 billion lire in 1993.
Pirelli lost almost 229 billion lire from 1991 to 1993. (Bloomberg Business News)


Last Subway Ride For 'Julio and Marisol'?
Once upon a time in New York City, a young man and woman named Julio and Marisol argued in the subway about AIDS and safe sex.
No one interrupted them for almost five years, but now they have finally been made to feel less welcome.
That, more or less, is what has happened to the romantic cartoon pair whose anguish, expressed in English and Spanish, was mined by the New York City Health Department to remind people how to avoid AIDS.


Giuliani Puts an End to a Slogan Contest
Another mayor might have picked a sillier slogan for New York, perhaps a self-mocking slogan, or even a nutty boast about urban coyotes.
But not Rudolph W. Giuliani, who last night on the "Late Show With David Letterman" could not resist burnishing his reputation for creative political pugilism.
Making his third nationally televised appearance on the CBS program, the Mayor was offered a chance by Mr.
Letterman to select his choice of five new slogans to increase tourism in New York City, each written by the show's staff.


Guilty Plea On Donations To Politicans
A former executive of the company that makes Sweet 'n Low pleaded guilty in Federal court in Brooklyn yesterday to operating a complicated scheme to make illegal contributions to some of the nation's most prominent politicians, including Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato and Senator Bob Dole.
At least some of the money, prosecutors say, was intended to influence Congress as it considered whether to ban the use of saccharin, a key ingredient in Sweet 'n Low.
But there is no evidence that any of the politicians knew the money was tainted, the prosecutors said.


Assembly Democrats Declare Their Stance on Welfare Plan
In a sign that state budget talks have moved out of reverse gear, the Assembly's Democratic leadership put the finishing touches on a welfare plan today that would restore about $120 million in spending to Gov.
George E. Pataki's proposed budget.
Though the plan is sure to face opposition from Mr.
Pataki and his Republican legislative allies, it marks the first time in 10 weeks of talks that the Assembly Democrats have declared their bargaining position on perhaps the year's most contentious issue.
Mr.
Pataki has cited the lack of an Assembly welfare plan as the chief reason for the budget being 12 days late.


Ryan's Family Steakhouse (RYAN,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 29


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-13  DOCUMENTS SUGGEST WAR CRIMES  A former member of the Serbian secret police has come forward with documents that could incriminate President Slobodan Milosevic of Serbia as a war criminal.
A1  An attack on Sarajevo reflects the stalemate in Bosnia.
A12  U.S.
TO WARN JAPAN ON TRADE  The Clinton Administration plans to warn Japan that it will move to impose several billion dollars in punitive tariffs unless significant progress is made soon in opening Japanese markets.
A1  MEXICANS WAIT AND WORRY  It is far from clear that Mexico's economic turmoil will flood the U.S. with illegal job-seekers.
Many Mexicans say the decision to go north is not as easy as it once seemed.
A3  QUESTIONING GAZA'S NEW JUSTICE  Two trials of Islamic militants this week represent the first time that Palestinians have sentenced their own people to jail for violence against Israelis.
But they have also raised questions about justice.
A10  ISRAELI DEFENDS PEACE TALKS  Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin told critics that Israel would suffer more suicide attacks if it were to break off peace negotiations with the Palestinians.
A10  A student killed in Gaza is buried in New Jersey.
A10  EX-GENERAL ORDERED TO PAY NUN  A U.S. judge ordered a former Guatemalan general to pay $47.5 million to an American nun who was tortured and eight Guatemalans who were terrorized in the 1980's.
A13  Britain said it would withdraw 400 troops from Ulster.
A5  Nelson Mandela reinstated his wife to her Government job.
A7  Europeans are trying to block a Congress move against Cuba.
A9  Athens Journal: Greece falters as Pandandreou grows frail.
A4 National A16-23, B8-9  EASING UP ON WELFARE  Republican governors submitted a welfare proposal to the Senate that is less harsh than the bill passed by House Republicans.
A1  STUNNING BID FOR CHRYSLER  The billionaire Kirk Kerkorian stunned Wall Street and the auto industry by offering $22.8 billion for Chrysler, in a deal that would be the largest takeover since RJR Nabisco was acquired for $25 billion.
A1  HEART-DISEASE FISH STORY  The more fish you eat, the better you will be protected against heart disease.
That was the popular theory, but it may not be valid.
A1  COLOR-BLIND ADOPTION  An unusual coalition of liberals and conservatives is pressing for adoption policies that do not take account of race.
A16  HOMICIDE CHARGE AGAINST LAB  A laboratory was charged with reckless homicide for allegedly misreading Pap smears that could have saved the lives of two women.
A16  BOY'S OVERWHELMING BURDENS  A teen-ager whose family was burdened by crushing medical bills apparently killed himself after getting a $154.50 ticket for speeding, the police said.
A22  ENDANGERED-SPECIES CHANGES  Senator Slade Gorton of Washington, helped by lawyers from industries affected by the Endangered Species Act, unveiled a bill to make major revisions in the act.
A20  MARKING F.D.R.'S DEATH  President Clinton denounced public cynicism and disunity on the 50th anniversary of the death of President Franklin D. Roosevelt.
B8  PRESSING A CONSPIRACY THEORY  O. J. Simpson's lawyers suggested that the man who gathered blood evidence was part of a police conspiracy to frame their client.
B9  A study offers promise for an Alzheimer's disease therapy.
A19 Metro Digest B1 DESEGREGATION SUIT DEFEATED  Civil rights advocates were handed a sharp defeat in a school-desegregation lawsuit when a judge ruled that the isolation of poor minority children in Hartford's schools was not the state's fault.
A1  Business Digest D1  Arts/Entertainment C11-16  On city financing and the arts.
C11  Performing-arts library gets $12.5 million gift.
C15  Theater: "Travels With My Aunt." C11  Dance: Puerto Rican troupe.
C11  Music: Critic's Notebook.
C14  The Pop Life.
C12  Film: "Jury Duty." C14  Books: McNamara concedes.
C16  TV: "A Rugrats Seder." C16  "The Ultimate Round Trip." C16The Home Section C1-8  At home with Gerre Hancock.
C1  Sports B11-17  Baseball: Trading card makers hope busness will pick up.
B11  No new commissioner in sight.
B15  Mets' Butler tutors Thompson.
B14  Football: Rams given approval to move to St.
Louis.
B11  Basketball: Anthony to get post-season playing time.
B12  Columns: Anderson on the Mullen brothers B11  Hockey: Rangers notch victory over Sabres.
B11  Devils turn back Capitals.
B13  Islanders take the measure of Panthers.
B13  Olympics: New status for surfing, ballroom dancing.
B13  Obituaries B9-10  Paul Akst, colonel who led New York's Draft Boards.
B9  Bonnie Bird, dancer.
B9  Annie Fischer, pianist.
B10  Editorials/Op-Ed A24-25  Editorials  Harvard's unseemly haste.
Making democracy safe for Dole.
The museum.
Ms.
Bhutto's wish list.
Letters  Frank Rich: Tin cans and string.
William Safire: Iraq's ton of germs.
Andre Aciman: In a double exile.
Chronicle D26 Bridge C15 Crossword C9


American Freightways Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Sidney Jacobs, 87, Race Horse Trainer
Sidney Jacobs of Forest Hills, Queens, one of four brothers who became thoroughbred horse trainers, died last Sunday at Parkway Hospital in Forest Hills.
He was 87 years old.
The cause of death was complications from heart and liver disease, said his nephew, Robert Jacobs.


Talks With P.L.O. Will Go On, Rabin Says
Under heavy attack from the political opposition and growing criticism within his own Labor Party, Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin told his critics today that Israel would suffer yet more suicide attacks if it were to break off peace talks with the Palestinians.
Appeals for Israel to rethink its negotiations with the Palestine Liberation Organization have increased since the latest suicide bombing, in which seven Israeli soldiers and a young American woman were killed on Sunday by radical Palestinians in the Gaza Strip.


Amphenol Corp.(APH,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Lukas and Zito Colts Get Ready for Round 3
They are not exactly Affirmed and Alydar, or Sunday Silence and Easy Goer.
They may not even be Timber Country and Afternoon Deelites.
But when they race each other Saturday in the Blue Grass Stakes, it will be their third meeting in two months, and they have every intention of staging a fourth in the Kentucky Derby three weeks later.
They are Thunder Gulch and Suave Prospect, and they combine all the elements of the intrigue already surrounding the 121st Derby: notably, their jousting trainers, D. Wayne Lukas and Nick Zito, and their chances of winning the Derby with these two colts especially since no monster emerged from the Santa Anita Derby last weekend.


Industries Affected by Endangered Species Act Help a Senator Rewrite Its Provisions
Taking aim at what may be the nation's most powerful environmental law, Senator Slade Gorton of Washington today unveiled a bill that would scrap major provisions of the Endangered Species Act.
The bill, likely to be the main effort in the Senate for Republicans who want to change the act, was written largely by the industries that will be most affected by its outcome.
In a speech before timber industry executives meeting in this resort town on the Columbia River, Mr.
Gorton announced a plan to do away with most of the strict requirements to save plants and animals that biologists say are heading for extinction.In their place, he would allow a political appointee -- typically, the Secretary of Interior -- to decide when, how and whether to save a species.


Hilton Hotels Corp.(HLT,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Soderstrom Suddenly Has the Look and Feel of a Winner
Tommy Soderstrom doesn't like to make excuses, but the Islanders' goaltender finally has the chest protector he always wanted.
"It feels comfortable," he said. "And I feel strong, feel confident."
Soderstrom stopped 38 shots tonight as the Islanders defeated the Florida Panthers, 3-1, before 14,703 at Miami Arena.


Prices of Treasuries Increase A 2d Day on Inflation Data
Prices of Treasury securities rose for a second consecutive day yesterday, helped by a gain in the Consumer Price Index of only two-tenths of a percent.
Some market participants noted, however, that the market has now seen three good sets of figures -- last Friday's jobs data, Tuesday's Producer Price Index and yesterday's Consumer Price Index -- and has not really taken off.
Part of the reason may be that small investors are staying away; another may be that expectations of a slowing economy with little inflation have already been priced into the market.


Athens Journal; As a Feeble Papandreou Hangs On, Greece Falters
"We are moving in very, very slow motion," said Eleni Stratigis, an Athens economist.
"Some people believe the Prime Minister should step down."
The bounce has gone from Andreas Papandreou's step and his fiery voice has thinned to a near whisper.
After looming over Greek politics for more than two decades, the once radical Prime Minister of Greece is ailing and withdrawn.


Medical Laboratory Faces Charges in Cancer Deaths
A Wisconsin prosecutor yesterday brought charges of reckless homicide against a laboratory accused of misreading Pap smears of two women who later died of cervical cancer.
Criminal charges rarely result from instances of medical error.
Indeed, the American Medical Association said yesterday that the Wisconsin case was believed to be the first in which a medical laboratory, as opposed to a doctor, had been charged with a crime because of error.


At Border, Mexican Migrants Wait and Worry
The years of hard labor that people from this desert town have done in San Diego restaurant kitchens and the lettuce fields of the Salinas Valley have crowded the streets here with pickup trucks and put satellite dishes on some of the adobe homes.
About one-quarter of the 13,000 residents of this town in north-central Mexico live mostly "on the other side," as they call the United States.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
9.00
9.00
6.25
DISCOUNT RATE
5.25
5.25
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
5.88
5.91
3.43
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.61
5.64
3.53
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.75
5.77
3.97
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.04
7.07
6.92
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.35
7.37
7.26
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.22
8.24
8.07
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.27
6.27
6.30
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills 8


Wang and Microsoft: Foes Turn Into Allies
Wang Laboratories and the Microsoft Corporation said yesterday that they had settled a longstanding patent-infringement lawsuit and formed a broad technical, service and marketing alliance.
Wang, once nearly given up for dead after being forced from the computer-hardware business, received a $90 million cash infusion and a major endorsement by Microsoft for its software products.
Microsoft's investment represents about 10 percent of Wang's common stock.


Winner's Tough Luck at Slots
She won, but she lost.
Overturning a lower court ruling, a two-judge panel of the Appellate Division of Superior Court ruled that a woman who thought she won $75,000 in a casino slot machine should get only $15,000.
Why?
Because an electronic malfunction caused the machine at the Sands Hotel Casino to show the higher number despite a sign saying the highest jackpot was $15,000.
LAWRENCE VAN GELDER


Giants or Jets for Howard?
Erik Howard would merely have to move his locker a few feet, from the Giants to the Jets' locker room.
But the nine-year free agent nose tackle for the Giants is waiting until after the draft on April 22-23 to decide whether to switch teams.
The Jets need a good pass-rushing interior lineman to play alongside Tony Casillas.
The Giants think they have theirs in Ray Agnew, who was acquired from the New England Patriots.


Integration Proposals Over 30 Years
A Superior Court judge ruled yesterday that the State of Connecticut is not responsible for the concentration of poor minority children in the Hartford schools.
The ruling followed 30 years of debate over integrating schools across town lines.


Serb Says Files Link Milosevic To War Crimes
As Western governments seek to turn President Slobodan Milosevic of Serbia into a peacemaker, a former senior member of the Serbian secret police has come forward with documents that could incriminate Mr.
Milosevic as a war criminal.
The former agent, Cedomir Mihailovic, 45, escaped from Serbia last October with a temporary passport provided by the Dutch Embassy in Belgrade, where officials believed his life was in danger.


Lessons for Bruno From His Own District and His Relatives' Good Fortune
JOSEPH L. BRUNO is the new majority leader of the New York State Senate, which makes him one of the three most powerful elected officials in state government.
It is therefore of more than passing interest that he has this theory about black and Hispanic New Yorkers:
"They are the people that got their hands out," he said last week to Newsday.
"They are the ones fighting for welfare."


Doctor Is Shot In Brooklyn
A Brooklyn ophthalmologist was shot and seriously wounded outside his office in Borough Park yesterday, and the police arrested a former patient, who they said may have been dissatisfied with his treatment.
The shooting occurred about 4:15 P.M. on a quiet, residential street filled with schoolchildren as the doctor, Marcus Edelstein, 47, was walking from his office at 615 Avenue L to his car, said a police spokesman, Doram Tamari.


First Virginia Banks Inc.(FVB,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Bidder's Bold Strategy
Kirk Kerkorian wants to increase the value of his Chrysler stake.
His offer for the company appears to be an effort to cash in one way or another.
Page D1.


New York Hasn't Fought Enough for Its Architectural Heritage; Forgotten President
To the Editor:
"Lost, and Found, New York" (editorial, April 6) fails to mention a midtown Manhattan site that has received little or no attention from the Landmarks Preservation Commission or any other municipal or government agency.


Pauly Shore in 'Jury Duty'
If you have odd socks that need matching, you've got something better to do than watching "Jury Duty," in which Pauly Shore plays an obnoxious juror who does his best to disrupt a high-profile murder trial.
Mr.
Shore is a dubious comic proposition under the best of circumstances, but here he's at rock bottom.
Witlessly ripping off the O. J. Simpson case, "Jury Duty" never gets any funnier than letting Mr.
Shore fall out of his seat or randomly throwing in phrases like "bloody glove."


Harvard's Unseemly Haste
The confused debate about Harvard University's decision to dump Gina Grant from its next freshman class yields one clear point.
Because universities teach by how they act in society as well as what they offer in the classroom, Harvard has an obligation to behave in an educated way.
In the matter of Ms.
Grant, it has not.
The university reportedly withdrew Ms.
Grant's early-admission acceptance after receiving an anonymous mailing of press clippings.
The clippings described how Ms.
Grant, at 14, served six months in juvenile detention after pleading no contest to voluntary manslaughter.
She had beaten her alcoholic mother to death in South Carolina.


Barnett Banks Inc.(BBI,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Tears Shed 50 Years Ago Remain Frozen in Time
For Donald Gross, now 63, it was the first time he had seen his grandfather cry.
Albert Gore Sr. was on his way to the dry cleaners when he met a man weeping uncontrollably.
When Millie Ashley heard the news, she stopped picking cotton in a field in Wabbaseka, Ark., and thought to herself, "Well, everything's gone now."
Fifty years ago, Franklin Delano Roosevelt died at 63 of a cerebral hemorrhage at Warm Springs, Ga., on a balmy Thursday afternoon.
Just as the death of John F. Kennedy is a moment frozen in time to those old enough to remember 1963, so members of an older generation can still recall with photographic vividness where they were, what they were doing and what they felt on that day when F.D.R. complained of "a terrific headache" and then collapsed in a straight-backed chair.


AK Steel Holding Corp.(AKS,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


DeKalb Genetics Corp.(SEEDB,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


Airbus Has Its Eye on Half of the Global Market
Boeing may scoff, but Airbus Industrie is serious: It wants to command half of the world market for large civilian aircraft by the next century.
One way to do it, its executives believe, is to make planes that are cheaper to buy and cheaper to operate than Boeing's.


Westcorp Inc.(WES,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Genentech Earnings Exceed Expectations
Genentech Inc. reported first-quarter earnings today that exceeded Wall Street analysts' estimates and any previous quarter in the company's history.
Genentech attributed the gains primarily to increased sales of Activase , its genetically engineered blood-clot dissolving drug for heart attack patients .
Genentech's strong results come as the company may be nearing the end of its quasi-independence.
Roche Holdings Ltd. acquired 60 percent of Genentech in 1990, with an option to acquire the balance of the company by June 30, 1995, at a price of $60 a share.
Genentech shares closed today at $49.125, up 37.5 cents, on the New York Stock Exchange.


Co-Steel reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Union Camp Corp.(UCC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Wind Dies Out, Killing Races
A race that looked like another victory for Dennis Conner today turned into a drifting match without a winner.
Midway in the America's Cup final trials for challengers and defenders, the wind died to less than 3 knots, hardly enough to keep a small dinghy underway.
It was certainly sufficient to knock out the Citizen Cup defender's race between Conner's Stars &amp; Stripes and Bill Koch's boat, Mighty Mary, as well as the Louis Vuitton Cup challengers' match between New Zealand's Black Magic 1 and One Australia.


McNamara Concedes: 'We Were Wrong'
IN RETROSPECT The Tragedy and Lessons of Vietnam By Robert S. McNamara with Brian VanDeMark Illustrated. 414 pages.
Times Books. $27.50.


We Can All Learn From McNamara's Remorse; Too Ready to Forgive
To the Editor:
Congratulations on your April 12 editorial regarding "Mr. McNamara's War": it has restored my faith in clear, objective and hard-hitting journalism.


Storage Solutions With Style
JANIS MELONE and Marcus Santora design clean, architectural furniture in their New Haven studio, including tables, folding screens and toy boxes made of maple and cherry wood and sometimes decorated with Ms.
Melone's decoupage.
Now, they are concentrating on functional but stylish storage solutions.
Their new collection includes medicine chests and storage boxes for the wall, for $200 to $1,100, and corner hutches (left) for $1,150.
Santora Melone furniture, which is made to order, will be exhibited at the International Contemporary Furniture Fair on May 20 at the Jacob K. Javits Convention Center.
Information: (203) 865-2338.


'Hoop Dreams' Star Drafted by U.S.B.L.
Arkansas State's ARTHUR AGEE, who was featured in the acclaimed documentary "Hoop Dreams," was the first pick of the Florida Sharks in the United States Basketball League draft yesterday.
Agee, a 6-foot-2-inch guard, averaged 8.3 points and 3.7 rebounds and led Arkansas State in assists with 103.


G.O.P. GOVERNORS URGE BIG CHANGES FOR WELFARE BILL
Republican governors who helped shape the welfare bill approved by the House of Representatives say it still imposes too many restrictions on the states and are urging the Senate to give them more freedom to run their own welfare programs.
The governors have submitted a new proposal to the Senate that differs in significant ways from the bill written and passed by House Republicans.
The governors' proposal would eliminate some of the harsher features of the House bill.
That measure would prohibit the use of Federal money for welfare benefits to unmarried teen-age mothers, most legal aliens and additional children born to women already on welfare.
The governors' proposal would let states decide whether to provide assistance to those groups.


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS  Agassi Breezes Along  Andre Agassi, newly elevated to No. 1, said it would feel good to hold that ranking even for an hour.
That's about how long it took him to overpower another American, Tommy Ho, 6-3, 6-2, yesterday in Tokyo in his first match since he replaced Pete Sampras at the top of the computer list.
His victory over Ho put Agassi into the third round of the $1.2 million Japan Open, where he will face No. 15 seeded Sebastien Lareau of Canada.
In another match, Michael Chang, No. 6 in the ranking, was down by 1-4 in the first set before he reeled off nine straight games in a 6-4, 6-2 second-round victory over Shuzo Matsuoka of Japan.
Also, Jim Courier edged Anders Jarryd, 4-6, 6-4, 7-5. (AP) SAMPRAS IS UPSET: Unseeded Oliver Gross of Germany upset Pete Sampras yesterday in the Conde de Godo ATP tournament, Sampras's first event since being dropped to No. 2 from the top of the rankings.
Gross, who is 84th in the world rankings, won by 1-6, 6-2, 6-3 in a match that lasted 1 hour 43 minutes. (AP)


M.S. Carriers (MSCA,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


CONNECTICUT WINS SCHOOL BIAS SUIT
Civil rights advocates, whose school desegregation lawsuit set off an anguished six-year debate in Connecticut over the racial divide between its cities and suburbs, were handed a sharp defeat today, when a judge ruled that the isolation of poor minority children in Hartford's schools was not the state's fault.
The completeness of the defeat for advocates of integration in today's Superior Court ruling stunned both educators and elected officials.
State legislators had been so fearful that there was a real chance that the court would order some form of integration across town lines, even including forced busing, that they had reluctantly enacted the nation's first law promoting voluntary integration across an entire state.


Market Opening on Internet For Pollution-Credit Trades
An electronic market for trading pollution credits from Southern California is to begin operating today on the Internet, offering a system that its developers believe will help businesses reduce pollution at the lowest possible cost.
Its developers, scientists from the California Institute of Technology in Pasadena, hope their automated environmental credit exchange, as it is known, will supplant a rival auction market begun last year by Cantor Fitzgerald L.P., a Wall Street brokerage firm.


New York Hasn't Fought Enough for Its Architectural Heritage
To the Editor:
Re "Lost, and Found, New York" (editorial, April 6): A city exists for many reasons, but chief among them is its unfortunately unfunded mandate to preserve, protect and defend its most valuable and vulnerable architectural ecology.


RPM Inc.(RPOW,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


BUSINESS DIGEST
Kirk Kerkorian Offers $22.8 Billion for Chrysler  Backed by Lee A. Iacocca, Kirk Kerkorian astonished Wall Street and the auto industry by offering $22.8 billion, or $55 a share, for Chrysler, in a deal that would be the largest takeover since RJR Nabisco was bought more than six years ago for $25 billion.
The two men hope to complete the offer by lining up a handful of other investors, possibly including another auto company; to borrow more than $10 billion, and to raid Chrysler's own cash reserves to buy the company.
Chrysler stock closed up $9.50, at $48.75, after opening at $52.50.
A1.


American Slain in Gaza Is Mourned
Themes of hope and heartbreak were played out yesterday in two countries thousands of miles apart as a New Jersey student who loved both lands was flown home for burial three days after being killed in a suicide bombing in the Gaza Strip.
Some 2,000 people sat in silence in West Orange, N.J., at the funeral of Alisa M. Flatow, whose father, Stephen, spoke through his grief to recall what his daughter had accomplished in her 20 years, particularly in her last hours.


Seagate Technology Inc.(SEG,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Inflation Stays Subdued, With Consumer Prices Climbing 0.2%
New Government figures released today showed clearly that one of the few remaining symptoms of inflation was actually caused by the medicine the Federal Reserve used to fight it.
Consumer prices rose a modest two-tenths of 1 percent in March, the Labor Department found, with a sizable chunk of the rise representing automobile finance charges, a result of the Fed's increases in interest rates during the last 14 months.


A Paean to Roosevelt, Then and Now


C.E. Schwerdt, 78; Researcher Aided In Fighting Polio
Dr.
Carlton Everett Schwerdt, a virologist who made a major contribution in the fight against polio, died on March 25 at Stanford University Hospital in Palo Alto, Calif.
He was 78 and lived in Palo Alto.
The cause was leukemia, said the Stanford University Medical Center.


First Bank System Inc.(FBS,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


International Briefs; Sales and Earnings Are Up at Daimler-Benz
Daimler-Benz A.G. of Germany said yesterday that its sales and earnings had risen in the first quarter of 1995, but its full-year earnings would be less buoyant because of the weakness of the dollar.
Revenues in the period from January to March rose to 22.3 billion German marks, or $15.8 billion, from 22.025 billion marks in the first three months of last year.
The Daimler-Benz flagship automotive operation, Mercedes-Benz A.G., saw its sales rise 6 percent in the quarter, to 16.6 billion marks, or $11.9 billion. (Reuters)


Blauser Gets Another Braves Contract
Shortstop JEFF BLAUSER and the Atlanta Braves agreed yesterday on a $10 million, three-year contract that gives Blauser the chance to earn about $1.5 million more in performance bonuses.
Blauser, who has played for Atlanta since 1987, was to report to the Braves' spring training camp at West Palm Beach, Fla., after taking a physical yesterday.


At Age 9, Light-Years Ahead
If communication between parents and children isn't difficult enough, the computer seems to be finishing it off altogether.
That is the half-kidding message of "The Ultimate Round Trip," a "48 Hours" jog along the info-highway, where the young whiz by while their elders try to figure out how to get on.
What Erin Moriarty, one of tonight's reporters, calls the electronic generation gap is exemplified by a 9-year-old who has set up in business as a software consultant for manufacturers.
Unless you are 9 years old, you are unlikely to understand much of what the lad does or any of what that fast-talking computer salesman is telling a pair of perplexed parents out shopping for a machine to bring their children up to speed.


Huntington Bancshares Inc.(HBAN,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Lewis A. Dexter, 79, A Political Scientist
Lewis Anthony Dexter, who wrote and lectured widely during a long career as political scientist and sociologist, died on March 27 at Durham Regional Hospital in Durham, N.C.
He was 79 and most recently lived in Baltimore.
He had suffered a brief illness, said Dr.
Herbert A. Simon of Carnegie-Mellon University, a friend and colleague.


Morgan Stanley Names New Equity-Capital Head
James G. Gantsoudes, the former head of the equity capital markets group at CS First Boston Group, will take a similar position at the rival Morgan Stanley Group.
He is replacing William Kneisel, who will leave Morgan Stanley on May 1 for a sabbatical before returning in the fall to a still-unspecified senior position at the firm.


Suns Pin Another Loss on Spurs
Suns 115, Spurs 111
Wayman Tisdale's follow shot with 24 seconds left night last night helped the host Suns send the San Antonio Spurs to their second consecutive loss, 115-111.
Tisdale's shot gave the Suns a 110-106 lead, and they went on to win their fourth straight and pulled within 1 1/2 games of the Western Conference-leading Spurs, whose 15-game winning streak ended the previous night with a loss to Portland.


Federal National Mortgage Assn.(FNM,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Work In Simple Shaker Style
THE Zenlike economy and meticulous carpentry of the Shakers, the 19th-century ascetics, have inspired many 20th-century design innovations, including Henry Ford's assembly line, Philippe Starck's stackable chairs and, now, the home-office desk.
For those who find plastic laminates and stainless steel too antiseptic to work on, this two-drawer, clear maple worktable (above) can be assembled from a kit made by the Shaker Workshops in Concord, Mass.; (800) 840-9121.
It feels more "home" than "office."


Key Does Not Doubt His Mending Shoulder
There is a smoothness and a fluidity to Jimmy Key, from the way he walks and talks to the way he throws a baseball and swings a golf club.
Key likes to be in control, whether pinpointing a changeup on the outside corner or reminding a teammate how he likes his coffee.
But when something serious like arthroscopic shoulder surgery enters the equation, the picture of Key in control becomes fuzzy.
Even he realizes that skeptics wonder if a 33-year-old left-hander with a 35-10 record in two years with the Yankees can continue his pace six months after his left shoulder was repaired.


When the Perfect Gesture Is Everything
That most essential and ubiquitous of accessories, the human arm, is being worn with particular flair this season by Jim Dale.
In "Travels With My Aunt," Giles Havergal's enchanting adaptation of Graham Greene's novel at the Minetta Lane Theater, Mr.
Dale has on nothing more showy than a gray suit with a faint pinstripe.
Yet by merely folding one arm across his waist and resting the elbow of the other on top of it, he acquires instant sartorial splendor.


CHRONICLE
When JOYCE MESKIS was 10, a librarian refused to let her take out a book, saying that it was for adults only.
That decision set her on a lifelong crusade against censorship, she said yesterday.
On Tuesday, the PEN American Center honored Ms.
Meskis for her defense of the First Amendment.
At the group's gala literary dinner at Tavern on the Green, she was given the prize -- $25,000 and an abstract sculpture -- by the writer A. E. HOTCHNER.


Kansas Assistant Is Named Tulsa Coach
STEVE ROBINSON, an assistant coach at the University of Kansas, was hired yesterday as Tulsa's basketball coach.
Robinson, 37, is replacing TUBBY SMITH, who led the Golden Hurricane to the Sweet 16 of the National Collegiate Athletic Association tournament the last two years before leaving for the job at Georgia.
Robinson, a graduate of Radford (Va.) University, joined the Kansas staff when ROY WILLIAMS became coach in 1988.


Seagram Tries to Quell Uncertainty at MCA
After two and a half days of intensive discussions, the Seagram Company, the soon-to-be owner of MCA Inc., has sought to quell the uncertainty there by assuring the entertainment company's top executives that management was not contemplating changes at this time.
Officials at MCA said today that Edgar Bronfman Jr., the president of Seagram, had gone out of his way to assure them that he supported the management and intended to finance new growth.


Britain to Pull 400 More Troops Out of Ulster
The chief British official in Northern Ireland said today that Britain would withdraw 400 more troops from the North within two weeks.
The announcement came a day after the Irish Government announced in Dublin that it had released seven more Irish Republican Army prisoners.
The British and Irish actions were widely interpreted as concessions to Sinn Fein, the political arm of the I.R.A., with a view to advancing the Northern Ireland peace talks.
The effort has been snagged in recent weeks by a dispute between Britain and Sinn Fein over the agenda for talks that would have Sinn Fein officials meet publicly for the first time with a British official about the crucial issue of disarming of the I.R.A.


Nets Reach The Nadir Of Miserable Season
The end may come in Philadelphia on Thursday or at home against the 76ers on Saturday.
Simple math kept the Nets from playoff extinction tonight.
But common sense prevents them from returning to the post-season.
Beneath the roar of the Charlotte Coliseum and above the whimper of a wounded franchise, the Nets were annihilated, 105-77.
The Hornets inflicted the worst beating the Nets have experienced this season, and now all that is left for them is to find a final resting place for their season.


Budget Fine Print Renews Dispute on Police Corruption Panel
The $217 million package of budget revisions Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani sent over to the City Council for approval yesterday seemed routine -- shifting funds from one account to another, keeping the cogs of government turning.
But nothing, it seems, is routine with this Mayor and this Council, which have feuded over everything from fire alarm boxes to street vendors to the city's overall spending priorities.


Ms. Bhutto's Wish List
The United States and Pakistan, once locked in an expedient cold-war embrace that served mutual defense interests, are warily exploring how to establish a subtler, more productive relationship.
It will not be easy, as Prime Minister Benazir Bhutto's visit to Washington this week demonstrated.
Pakistan wants improved relations, renewed American aid and delivery of 38 F-16 jet fighters it bought in 1988.
It advertises itself as a secular, democratic Islamic state in a sea of fundamentalism.
But it is not willing to give up nuclear arming, the reason relations are strained and the warplanes are sitting in Arizona instead of Pakistan.


Paul Akst, 83, Colonel Who Led New York's Draft Boards, Dies
Col.
Paul Akst, who administered the military draft in New York City for many years, including during the Vietnam War, died last Saturday at his winter home in Palm Beach, Fla.
A resident of Manhattan, he was 83.
He died after a lengthy illness, his family said.


Life Technologies Inc.(LTEK,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Making Democracy Safe for Bob Dole
A delegation of two United States Senators, a Representative and the Governor of a major state is seeking free and open elections for New York Republicans in 1996.
The four, who put their bold plan in a letter to Gov.
George Pataki, would benefit from such democratic reform since they want to compete in a Presidential primary that is being set up as a one-candidate race for Senator Bob Dole.
Meanwhile, Senator Dole was launching his candidacy at a million-dollar fund-raiser in New York City by assuring the audience that "I am ready to lead." If so, he will start leading by disowning the plot by Senator Alfonse D'Amato and Governor Pataki to prevent an open primary.


Dexter Corp.(DEX,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


We Can All Learn From McNamara's Remorse
To the Editor:
In a strong attack on Robert S. McNamara's account of the Vietnam years, "In Retrospect," your April 12 lead editorial, "Mr. McNamara's War," insists that "Mr. McNamara must not escape the lasting moral condemnation of his countrymen."


Coach in Sexual Assault Case
As president of a popular youth sports league and a coach for baseball and football teams, George Harris has had close contact with hundreds of the township's children over the past two decades.
Now prosecutors say some of that contact broke the law.
Yesterday, Mr.
Harris, 37, was charged with sexually assaulting an 11-year-old boy several times earlier this year.
He is already in the Union County jail, having been charged March 31 with repeatedly molesting a 13-year-old boy in 1993.


Off-Duty Detective Wounded In Struggle After a Traffic Stop
An off-duty police officer was shot in the head and critically wounded early this morning after he stopped a motorist for a traffic violation, the Nassau County police said today.
James Curtis, a detective with the Lynbrook Police Department, was shot once in the back of his head with his own weapon in a struggle in the parking lot of a newspaper delivery service, the police said.
Charles Davis of Roosevelt, L.I., has been arrested in the shooting.


Stocks Are Unruffled by Chrysler Bid, With Dow Up 10.73
The stock market shrugged off a surprise bid for Chrysler and a mild inflation indicator yesterday, closing modestly higher.
Other markets were similarly unruffled.
Bond prices rose slightly.
The dollar rose modestly against the Japanese yen but fell against the German mark.


INSIDE
Push on Interracial Adoption
Convinced that thousands of black children are languishing in foster care, a coalition of liberals and conservatives are pressing for color-blind adoption policies.
Page A16.
Illegal Campaign Donations
A former executive of the maker of Sweet 'n Low admitted funneling illegal contributions to politicians including Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato and Senator Bob Dole.
Page B1.
An Environmental Battle?
Senator Slade Gorton of Washington unveiled a bill, written largely by industries, that would throw out major provisions of the Endangered Species Act.
Page A20.
Hey, Get Your Trading Cards!
The baseball card business, which has shrunk by as much as 75 percent, is hoping to rebound after the players' strike.
Page B11.


For 'Pelleas' and 'Parsifal,' Orchestra as Master
As one operatic mystery ends, another is about to begin.
Performances of the Metropolitan Opera's new "Pelleas et Melisande" finish tonight.
"Parsifal" starts tomorrow.
They share the same nervous system, but what strange and different lives they lead.
It was Wagner who developed the idea of opera orchestra as ocean.
The Rossinian pit bands of his youth had been more like fountains, the kind of decorative accouterment that melody could splash in without fear of drowning.
Wagner's orchestra made itself the source of all things.
Characters evolve from, and are sustained by it.
The orchestra watches over them, carries their secrets, tells them what to do.
With ambitions the size of Wagner's, the stage was alone not near big enough.


The Pop Life
Concert Slump
Last year may have been the concert industry's most profitable summer ever, with top performers like the Rolling Stones, Barbra Streisand, Pink Floyd and the Eagles on the road.
This summer concert promoters are expecting to set another record: for one of the slowest seasons ever.


GQ Heads Magazine Award Winners
GQ was the big winner yesterday with two National Magazine Awards, the highest honor in the magazine industry.
The only other two-award winner was Jann S. Wenner, editor of Rolling Stone, which won the photography award, and editor in chief of Men's Journal, which won the general-excellence award in its circulation category.
For GQ, also known as Gentlemen's Quarterly, it was the first National Magazine Award in its 38 years.
Arthur Cooper, GQ's editor in chief, accepted the special-interest prize for three articles by Alan Richman, GQ's food writer, and the feature-writing prize for "The Abortionist," a powerful profile by Tom Junod of a family doctor who performs abortions.


U.S. Says the Wives of Two Jailed Americans Can Go to Iraq
The United States will allow the wives of two Americans imprisoned in Iraq to travel to Baghdad, the State Department said today.
Waiving the restriction on travel to Iraq paves the way for the two women -- Kathy Daliberti, of Jacksonville, Fla., and Linda Barloon, who lives in Kuwait City -- to go to Baghdad as soon as Iraq grants them visas.


Executive's Social Acumen Masked His Political Agenda
The testament to Joseph Asaro's keen political skills hung on his office wall at Cumberland Packing Corporation in Brooklyn.
The shiny color photographs, some with famous autographs, showed a beaming Mr.
Asaro mingling with political acquaintances including Presidents Ronald Reagan and George Bush and Senators Alfonse M. D'Amato, Bob Dole and Daniel Patrick Moynihan.
But the cheerful smiles masked another side of Mr.
Asaro, a 52-year-old former construction supervisor who rose to be a company vice president and then was dismissed in 1993, facing allegations that he funneled illegal campaign money to politicians, including Senator D'Amato.
Yesterday, Mr.
Asaro pleaded guilty in Federal District Court in Brooklyn to tax fraud and campaign violations.
Known as an affable, charming man, Mr.
Asaro, of Old Westbury, L.I., built his quiet political organization while working at Cumberland Packing.
He started there as a contractor in 1981 before being hired as a full-time employee three years later, according to the company.
Cumberland officials quickly realized that Mr.
Asaro had a knack for organizing more than warehouse workers.
They said that Mr.
Asaro volunteered that he had political contacts, and proved his connections with a wall of photographs.
Within the company, workers traded stories of Mr.
Asaro's boasts that he could dine with the Pope.
Some believed him after reports that a papal envoy had been at the wedding of Mr.
Asaro's son.
The owners of Cumberland were particularly pleased with Mr.
Asaro's political skills after he arranged a personal introduction with President Reagan.
Company officials were also impressed when Mr.
Asaro escorted several Congressional visitors to the plant, including Representative Geraldine A. Ferraro.
"This is a man who, despite his humble origins, was a very effective communicator," said Martin Auerbach, a lawyer representing the company.
"I think that he really had the appeal of a self-made man. I think that people in Washington respond to that."
Cumberland Packing officials said that they did not know that Mr.
Asaro was involved in a scheme to use phony invoices to cover his political contributions to politicians.
When the company started questioning its employees, they found that Mr.
Asaro had approached several clerks and secretaries, who agreed to write campaign checks for $1,000 to $2,000 in exchange for Mr.
Asaro's promise to reimburse them.
No one had ever complained, Mr. Auerbach said.


Mother Charged With Murder
Eight months ago, the police said, she put her newborn in an old washing machine to die, she confessed, and now Patricia Ann Guenter, 31, has been charged with murder.
The authorities said her admission solved a mystery that began April 5 when workers cleaning out a Hoboken basement found the mummified corpse.


Computer Data Systems Inc.(CPTD,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


New Sport Is Added For Cinderella Teams
The International Olympic Committee continues to do an evasive two-step around its promise to make the Summer Games smaller and more manageable.
The latest sports to gain provisional status are two of the favorites of the ancient Greeks -- ballroom dancing and surfing.
Surfing, one can at least make a case for.
Windsurfing has become an Olympic sport, so why not its forebear.
But ballroom dancing?


Bridge
The 1995 World Team Championship is scheduled to be held in Beijing in October, although the failure of the World Bridge Federation to attract a sponsor has cast doubt on this.
Whatever the venue, American teams will be among the favorites in the Bermuda Bowl for open teams and the Venice Trophy for women's teams.
The two American women's teams will be chosen in playoffs in Washington during the Fourth of July weekend.
A likely winner is the team of Kathie Wei-Sender and Carol Sanders, both of Nashville; Lisa Berkowitz of Old Tappan, N.J., Lynn Deas of Schenectady, N.Y., Beth Palmer of Silver Spring, Md., and Betty Ann Kennedy of Shreveport, La.
The same team with Sue Sachs of Baltimore replacing Mrs.
Berkowitz won the National Women's Swiss Team title in Phoenix on Sunday at the American Contract Bridge League's Spring Nationals.


H &amp; R Block Chief to Quit
H &amp; R Block Inc. said yesterday that its chief executive, Thomas Bloch, had resigned, effective Aug. 31.
The company's stock subsequently soared on hope that his successor would manage Compuserve Inc., its fast-growing on-line subsidiary, more aggressively.
The stock climbed $4.25, to $46.25, on the New York Stock Exchange.


P. W. H. Trevor, 73, Investment Executive
Paul W. H. Trevor, a founder and former chairman of the investment management firm of Trevor Stewart Burton &amp; Jacobsen, died on April 2 at his home in St.
James, L.I.
He was 73.
The cause was cancer, a spokesman for the firm said.


Uncertainty Ahead for U.S. Auto Makers
The offer by Kirk Kerkorian to acquire the Chrysler Corporation comes at a time when the domestic automobile industry is in the best condition since the onset of the energy crisis in 1974.
But prospects for the future are uncertain, as annual sales seem unlikely to grow very fast and more competitors vie for customers.
Last year the Big Three auto companies -- Chrysler, the Ford Motor Company and the General Motors Corporation -- reported combined profits of more than $14 billion, a record high.
Though sales prospects have slipped somewhat recently, most forecasters are still expecting a good year, with total vehicle sales of more than 15 million cars and light trucks.


Economic Scene; Battered but not broken, the honey lobby is back and winning.
REMEMBER price supports for honey, the Federal largesse that was to agricultural subsidies what the $600 toilet seat was to military spending?
In a gesture much noted at the time, Congress suspended the 44-year-old honey program in 1993.
And last year President Clinton chose to honor the spirit of Congress's attack on the honey pot, denying the producers' plea for special protection against imports from Communist countries.
But the beekeepers, explains Greg Rushford, the publisher of The Rushford Report, a Washington-based newsletter on trade policy, have fought back, taking to heart one of the great maxims of modern lobbying: If at first you don't succeed, hire a better lawyer.


Winnie Mandela Is Reinstated on Technicality
The high drama of the dueling Mandelas declined into farce today as Nelson Mandela sheepishly reinstated his estranged wife to her Government job, conceding that his dismissal of her was "technically and procedurally invalid."
Mr.
Mandela's aides hinted strongly he would dismiss his spouse again, this time with greater legal precision, after he returns on Thursday from a trip to the Persian Gulf.


Alcan Aluminium Ltd.(AL,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Illinois Central Corp.(IC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


A House, a Barn, a Pond: A Picture Turns Imperfect
AS I flipped through some magazines recently while my 4-year-old daughter sat for a haircut, I came across an article offering advice to suburbanites who were thinking of moving to the country.
The basic message was: "Mover beware: life in the country isn't all it's cracked up to be."
My wife and I had learned that simple lesson from trying to live the rural life.
But surely we had picked up a few more wood chips of wisdom along the way, although with six years and three moves between then and now, I confess I had not thought about it much lately.


We Can All Learn From McNamara's Remorse; No Secret Information
To the Editor:
In "Mr. McNamara's War" (editorial, April 12), you note that Robert McNamara now admits "no superior knowledge" existed, which was a favorite argument advanced to justify the war.
In fact, he has been aware of the absence of such justification for at least close to 30 years.


Novelty to High-Tech, Eyewear Can Be Daring
POSING for a photographer, Gai Gherardi, a partner in L. A. Eyeworks, which designs and manufactures eyeglasses, demonstrated what she considered the proper way to wear glasses for a picture.
"Some people do this," she said with disapproval, pushing her tiny, diamond-shaped wire spectacles down her nose and gazing over them.
"But that means you don't like being seen in glasses." She quickly adjusted her glasses so that they framed her eyes.
"Much better," she declared.


What's Kerkorian Up To, Anyway?
The turnaround of the Chrysler Corporation -- from an almost bankrupt also-ran to the most profitable car maker in America -- is one of the most impressive stories in American industry.
But investors have been loath to believe that the good news will continue as the economy slows, and they fear losses when the next recession arrives.
As a result, Chrysler's stock price has risen far less than its profits.
Kirk Kerkorian, the 77-year-old financier who owns 10 percent of Chrysler, thinks the stock is too cheap, and by all accounts is very frustrated that it has been getting cheaper.
So far Mr.
Kerkorian has spent about $676 million buying his stake, which was valued at $1.4 billion at Tuesday's trading price, and has collected $95 million in dividends from the company.


Standard Motor Products Inc.(SMP,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


2 Executives Promoted at CBS
CBS promoted two top executives yesterday, the first executive moves made by Peter Lund, the new president of the CBS Broadcast Group.
Mr.
Lund named James A. Warner president of the CBS Television Network, the job previously held by Mr.
Lund, and he promoted Joseph D. Abruzzese from executive vice president to president of the CBS sales division.


John Joseph Crowley Jr.; Diplomat, 67
John Joseph Crowley Jr., a career Foreign Service officer and former deputy representative at the Organization of American States, died on March 28 at Sibley Memorial Hospital in Washington.
He was 67 and lived in Bethesda, Md.
The cause was non-Hodgkins lymphoma, his family said.


Credit McNamara in Winning the Cold War; 'Why We Died'
To the Editor:
"Mr. McNamara's War" (editorial, April 12) was well done.


A Scholarship in Her Memory
The family of Alisa M. Flatow has established a scholarship fund in memory of Ms.
Flatow, a 20-year-old from West Orange who was killed in a bombing in the Gaza Strip.
Donations will be used to provide scholarships for students to attend religious schools in Israel.
Further information may be obtained by calling the Jewish Community Foundation of MetroWest at 201-884-4800, ext. 195.


Now on Moscow TV, Heeere's Aleksandr!
Aleksandr I. Solzhenitsyn, the great anti-Soviet dissident who while living in exile in Vermont turned his wrath on the empty materialism and lowbrow culture of the West, has found a new calling since he returned to a free Russia.
He is a talk show host.


Davis Has a Lock on Los Angeles
Al Davis must have planned it.
The Los Angeles Raiders' Machiavellian mastermind undoubtedly played a devilish role in the Rams' move to St.
Louis, a transfer that hands the Raiders full sway over the nation's No. 2 TV market.
"He's probably been responsible for everything but the Hindenburg," said Howie Long, the Fox analyst and former Raider.


Boise Cascade Office reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Foster Mother Is Convicted
Gioconda Rivera said she was a good Samaritan who took in the four children when their cocaine-addicted mother could not care for them.
The authorities said Ms.
Rivera was, in fact, an abusive foster mother who once tried to make the youngest of her wards eat a dead rat.
A jury agreed, finding Ms.
Rivera, 33, guilty of charges of assault and endangering the welfare of the two brothers and their sisters, from 7 to 10 years old.
In court, the children's mother sobbed when the verdict was announced.


Art in Review
James Casebere
Michael Klein Gallery  40 Wooster Street  SoHo  Through April 22
A claustrophobic serenity seems to fill the bare, whitewashed rooms in James Casebere's new photographs of his own architectural constructions.
As in his last show, the spaces are cells, but whether of prisons or monasteries is left ambiguous.
Details in the images point to both functions.
In one room, a tall, arched window casts a gentle light along a slab bed protruding from a wall; in another, a circular barred window high on a wall is framed by a set of elegant arches.
One photograph, of cell-lined hallways radiating from a central area, is based on the design of the Eastern State Penitentiary, a famed prison in Philadelphia that was closed in the 1960's.
Mr.
Casebere's re-creation of it is exact, down to the whitewashed chunks of debris strewn across the floor.
In recent years, Mr.
Casebere seems to have been pointing toward a kind of absolute zero of architecture.
From models of suburban town houses, he has moved to generic structures, whether a Spanish courtyard or a ranch-house kitchen, all presented as collections of utterly featureless white shapes.
In the cells he has found a subject whose form in the world has the same reduced structure that he imposed on the scenes in his earlier work.
They suggest Platonic ideas of rooms, rather than actual places; they are spaces created by and for the mind, not the body.
As such, they are both transcendent and chilling.
CHARLES HAGEN


Nepal Balks at Its Friendship Treaty With India
Denouncing a 45-year-old friendship treaty with India as obsolete, the Marxist Prime Minister of Nepal, on his first official visit to its giant neighbor, has demanded a major review of the accord, officials from both sides said this week.
Despite his repeated public expressions of unhappiness with the 1950 Indo-Nepal Treaty of Peace and Friendship, the Prime Minister, Man Mohan Adhikary, could wrest from his hosts only a statement that his demand would be discussed.
The statement also said both sides would crack down on militant activities aimed at the other country.


Psst! Want to Buy a Research Lab? The Baby Bells Want Out
FOR SALE: State-of-the-art telecommunications research lab, complete with 6,000 employees and $1 billion annual budget.
Profits: none.
Price: negotiable.
All offers welcome.
After mulling over their options for a year, the seven regional Bell telephone companies formally put their gigantic research consortium, Bellcore, on the auction block yesterday.
Morgan Stanley Inc. has been hired to advise the companies.


International Paper Advances in Offer
The International Paper Company has moved closer to acquiring Carter Holt Harvey Ltd., the second-largest publicly traded company in New Zealand.
The New Zealand Stock Exchange disclosed yesterday that International Paper had acquired, or had acceptances for, 46.5 percent of the outstanding shares of Carter Holt, a forest products company that is the largest forest plantation owner in New Zealand.


Dornan, House Firebrand, Joins the '96 Race
Representative Robert K. Dornan of California, a firebrand conservative Republican who is perhaps the most garrulous and acerbic legislator on Capitol Hill, entered the 1996 Presidential race today, garrulously and acerbicly.
And also joyously.


ports of The Times; Old Routine Sounds Good After Strike
SPLAT! went Jack McDowell's first pitch, smacking into Mike Stanley's mitt, for a called strike, at 7:02 last night.
Any practiced ear could tell you, this was a solid major league "splat!" not the tepid "pfft" of replacement arms throwing to replacement gloves.
This was the sound of velocity, the sound of power, the sound of skill.
Baseball was back, and there were those who had missed it.


Disciplined Firm Gets Hanover Sterling Accounts
The customer brokerage accounts at Hanover Sterling &amp; Company, a penny stock firm that collapsed in February, have been transferred to another firm with a troubled disciplinary history.
But the court-appointed trustee overseeing the shift said the firm that got the accounts, Lew Lieberbaum &amp; Company, was the only one that wanted them.
Mitchell Lowenthal, a lawyer with the law firm of Cleary Gottlieb Steen &amp; Hamilton, which is representing the trustee, said yesterday that the transfer had been made with the approval of the National Association of Securities Dealers, the securities industry's self-regulatory body.
The new clearing agent for the transferred accounts will be the Bear, Stearns Securities Corporation.
The transfer was first reported yesterday by Quick Nikkei News Inc. in New York.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; A tiny agency builds a quirky campaign to promote a low-fat milk with national aspirations.
CAN a series of silly bovine spoofs from a tiny agency help establish a national brand of low-fat milk?
With its eye-grabbing magenta carton sporting a Holstein wearing sunglasses, and quirky commercials pumped up by jazzy music, the brand, Cool Cow, aims to be hip.
Licensed to local dairies, Cool Cow began appearing in North Dakota in December 1993 and is expanding gradually; it is also available in Minnesota and beginning this week will be produced and distributed by Marcus Dairy in Danbury, Conn., for sale in Connecticut, Brooklyn, Queens and Long Island.


Critic's Choice/Film; Two Lenses on Russia, In Very Different Eras
The discontent that bubbles throughout "Long Farewells," Kira Muratova's hauntingly elliptical 1971 film about a middle-aged woman losing touch with her teen-age son, would have been no surprise to Western audiences at that time.
But in the Soviet Union, it was enough to bring the film condemnation and consign Miss Muratova to more than a decade of working as a cleaning woman.
She has since been hailed as one of the foremost Soviet film makers of recent years.
Why the objections?


Security Council May Allow Iraq to Sell $2 Billion in Oil
The Security Council began formal debate today on a resolution that would allow Iraq to sell $2 billion of oil over six months to pay for relief and emergency goods.
If Iraq takes up the offer, a decision it would have to convey formally in talks with Secretary General Boutros Boutros-Ghali, it would be the first legal sale of Iraqi oil since the country invaded Kuwait in August 1990.


Movie Theater Pulls Out Film
Bowing to picketing and threats of a boycott from the local Roman Catholic Church, Robert Roberts decided yesterday to pull the movie "Priest" from his Brook Theater here.
Acknowledging that his decision was a victory for censorship, he said, "I'm in this business to make people happy, not unhappy."


Executive Changes
BALLY GAMING INTERNATIONAL INC., Las Vegas, Nev., appointed Scott D. Schweinfurth senior vice president and chief financial officer and treasurer.
BANC ONE OHIO CORP., Columbus, Ohio, an affiliate of Banc One Corp., named Jeffrey T. Benton senior vice president and chief financial officer.


Critic's Choice/Film; Between Heaven and Earth
The highlight of the Film Forum's current series of films by Michael Powell and Emeric Pressburger is "A Matter of Life and Death," their delirious 1946 fantasy about an English airman caught between heaven and earth.
Beyond envisioning a peaceful, orderly afterlife to soothe a world still reeling from the Second World War, Powell and Pressburger created a dewy, eleventh-hour romance for the dying airman and orchestrated the debate over his destiny on a colossal scale.
This film reaches the pinnacle of its fancifulness when an international array of angels listens to arguments on behalf of the R.A.F. squadron leader, Peter Carter (David Niven), whose life hangs in the balance.
This film may have hard-working angels, but it's no "It's a Wonderful Life" (which opened the same year).
The Powell/Pressburger style is far more voluptuous and peculiar than Frank Capra's, and so feverishly romantic that a glittering tear on a rose petal is one of the film's most representative visions.


Enron Oil &amp; Gas Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


A Landmark Portraitist For an Extraordinary Age
HE once fought a duel with a newspaper editor over an article that offended him.
He served a stint in debtors' prison and lived among the penniless artists of Henri Murger's "Scenes de la Vie de Boheme," the novel on which Puccini based his famous opera.
At the same time, he was his own biggest promoter, a fitting contemporary of Barnum, and he even went to court to bar his brother from sharing his pseudonym.
In an age of larger-than-life personalities, his was certainly one of the largest.
Caricaturist, writer, dandy, critic and impresario, soldier of misfortune and pioneering balloonist, Gaspard-Felix Tournachon, better known as Nadar, is remembered above all for his photographs.
Only a small part of his long life (he died in 1910, just before his 90th birthday) was actually spent taking pictures.
Photography could not satisfy his insatiable appetite for novelty.
He once identified himself as "Nadar, photographer for the time being," and after a while he let his son and associates run his photography business, with the result that his reputation was diluted by the countless routine portraits they churned out.


Simpson Jurors Seen As 12 Angry People
A juror dismissed from the O. J. Simpson murder trial told the judge that jurors were so racially divided that they socialized in groups determined by race, according to a transcript of her meeting with the judge.
The transcript, released yesterday, raises questions about whether 12 people who cannot agree on what videos to watch can reach a verdict in this case.


Republicans on the Attack
The New York Republican State Committee, which has waged an aggressive advertising campaign in support of Gov.
George E. Pataki's budget, displayed a new television commercial yesterday.
Like a previous ad, it is intended to build pressure on Democratic Assembly members from upstate and suburban districts.
ORGANIZATION New York Republican State Committee.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Japan Cuts Interest Rates In Effort to Curb Yen's Rise
The Japanese central bank has cut the discount rate by three-quarters of a percentage point, to a record low of 1 percent, as part of a plan to halt the ascent of the yen against the dollar.
The strong yen has been hindering efforts to revive Japan's sluggish economy because it reduces the demand for the nation's exports.
A1.


Navratilova: Doubles Only
Doubles, yes.
Singles, no way.
Not unless "push comes to shove," said Martina Navratilova yesterday of her impending Federation Cup team commitment.
Navratilova, 15-0 in singles and 12-0 in doubles for the United States, said that her decision to compete alongside her fellow Aspen, Colo., resident, Gigi Fernandez, in doubles against a team from Austria in next weekend's event should not be interpreted as a comeback attempt.
"I always said I would still play doubles," said the 38-year-old Navratilova, who intends to team with Steffi Graf at Wimbledon, "so it's not like I'm coming out of retirement." Navratilova said she hoped the Federation Cup captain, Billie Jean King, will look elsewhere for a singles replacement should the ailing Mary Joe Fernandez (pneumonia) and Lindsay Davenport (bronchitis) be unavailable for duty in Aventura, Fla., April 22-23.
"I haven't played singles in half a year, so I'll be quite happy with my supporting role," Navratilova said.
"But if push comes to shove, I'm willing to play, I just don't know how capable I'll be."


Georgia-Pacific Corp.(GP,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Credit McNamara in Winning the Cold War; Delusions of the Time
To the Editor:
I read with dismay your editorial "Mr. McNamara's War" (April 12), blithely condemning Robert McNamara to a haunted end and refusing his explanation in his new book of his conduct as Secretary of Defense and afterward until now.


Credit McNamara in Winning the Cold War; To March Again
To the Editor:
Today's editorial "Mr. McNamara's War" is one of the finest you have ever printed.
It should remind us that our elected officials do not always know what is best for us.


Diner's Journal
A Grill, but Global
On the Lenox Room's second night, the brown banquettes were filled with chefs, restaurateurs and restaurant consultants checking out the competition.
They wanted to see what Charles Palmer (Aureole, Alva) and Tony Fortuna (sometimes known as the man who tried to buy Lutece) were up to.


ITT Educational Services (ESI,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Philip E. Kraus, 87, Teacher and Author
Philip E. Kraus, an educator and author who was an expert on gifted children, died on Sunday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 87.
He had suffered from Alzheimer's disease for several years, said a daughter, Lucy Kraus.


Holiday Doings
Indoor and outdoor activities celebrating Easter and Passover are planned around the New York metropolitan region this weekend.
Here is a sampling.
Unless otherwise noted, events are free.
Today  "ALL THE FRILLS UPON IT: NEW YORK BONNETS ON PARADE," Museum of the City of New York, Fifth Avenue at 103d Street.
An exhibition of vintage hats from full-sized bonnets to miniatures.
Through May 14.
Hours: Wednesdays through Saturdays, 10 A.M. to 5 P.M.; Tuesdays, 10 A.M. to 2 P.M.; Sundays, 1 to 5 P.M.
Suggested admission: $5; $3 for students, children and the elderly; $8 for families.
Information: (212) 534-1672.


For Children
Egg Hunt and Egg Roll
Central Park Band Shell  Midpark at 72d Street  (212) 360-8214 or (212) 360-8217  Recommended ages: 3 to 10  Tomorrow
At the 49th annual Central Park Egg Hunt and Roll, there will be about 2,000 colored eggs speckling a greensward for a hunt.
Last year, 800 earnest children showed up for the event, sponsored by the New York City Department of Parks and Recreation.
The Parks Commissioner, Henry J. Stern, awarded Easter baskets stuffed with chocolate to nine children who had gathered the most eggs, no doubt making the rest very jealous.


Kimball Intl.(KBALB,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Jersey City and Paterson: Mixed Results for State
The state already controls its second-and third-largest school districts, in Jersey City and Paterson.
In both cities, the results of the takeover have been mixed, with some improvement in buildings but no marked change in student achievement.
The Jersey City takeover in 1989 was the state's first use of a school intervention law enacted the year before.
It was the culmination of a state review begun in 1984, which led to the State Education Department's charging in 1988 that Jersey City schools were crippled by political patronage and nepotism.


Cullen/Frost Bankers Inc.(CFBI,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Pataki Faces a Hostile Crowd At a Loud Town Meeting on S.I.
Gov.
George E. Pataki faced a raucous hour of chants, jeers and shouted criticism of his proposed budget at a town meeting last night in Staten Island, the most hostile crowd he has addressed in a weeklong swing across the state to sell his fiscal plan.
The Governor was booed loudly nearly every time he opened his mouth.
But he remained unruffled -- even calm, with his jacket off and shirt-sleeves rolled up -- as he earnestly answered questions from a crowd of more than 500 people.
At times the chants forced him to stop speaking, but he politely asked questions of his own, writing down a few notes and promising to look into people's concerns.


John R. Twiss, 95, Doctor and Author
John Russell Twiss, a doctor, teacher and author who wrote on diseases of the liver and pancreas, died on Wednesday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 95.
Dr.
Twiss was an internist who specialized in gastroenterology, the study of the stomach and intestine and their diseases, and taught at the Columbia University College of Physicians and Surgeons, Cornell Medical College and New York University Medical School in a career of some 60 years.


Diane Cleaver, Literary Agent For Prominent Authors, Was 53
Diane Cleaver, a literary agent and author, died on Monday in her apartment in Manhattan.
She was 53.
A spokeswoman for the Medical Examiner's office said the cause of death had not yet been established.
But Heide Lange, vice president of the Sanford J. Greenburger agency, with which Ms.
Cleaver was affiliated, said the doctor who had examined Ms.
Cleaver said that the cause of death appeared to have been either a heart attack or stroke.


Corrections
An article last Friday about Turkey's offensive against Kurdish separatists operating in Iraq misstated the location of a buffer zone controlled by Israel.
It is in southern Lebanon, not southern Iraq.


Suspected Bombing Leader Indicted on Broader Charges
Federal prosecutors greatly broadened their case yesterday against the man who they say masterminded the bombing of the World Trade Center.
The defendant, Ramzi Ahmed Yousef, was indicted on new counts of trying to blow up two flights in the Far East and of planting a small bomb that killed a passenger on another flight in Asia.
The indictment means that Mr.
Yousef could face the death penalty if he is convicted in his trial, which is scheduled for this year, according to the United States Attorney in Manhattan, Mary Jo White.
The indictment, filed in United States District Court in Manhattan, essentially replaces one in which Mr.
Yousef was charged solely with the bombing of the trade center in 1993.


METRO DIGEST
METRO DIGEST TAKEOVER ORDERED FOR NEWARK SCHOOLS
A state judge ordered New Jersey's Education Department to take over the long-troubled Newark school district, saying the school board was so incompetent and the education system so riddled with failure that it did not warrant the standard hearing process before the state took control.
While previous reports have detailed how board members enjoyed junkets and new cars, the judge said his main reason for a takeover was that too many Newark schoolchildren failed statewide tests.
A1.


Boise Cascade Corp.(BCC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Cowboys' Williams Accused of Assault
ERIK WILLIAMS, a Pro Bowl offensive tackle for the Dallas Cowboys, was arrested yesterday after a 17-year-old girl accused him of sexually assaulting her, the Dallas police said.
Sgt.
JIM CHANDLER said Williams and another man, RODERICK CARSON, were taken into custody by police officers responding to a telephoned request for help by the girl.
"She told them the story that she had been forced, with verbal threats, to engage in sexual intercourse with both men," Chandler said.


Chief of Doner To Step Down
Jim Dale, chairman and chief executive of W. B. Doner &amp; Company in Baltimore and Southfield, Mich., since June 1992, said yesterday that he would leave the agency after 25 years to pursue personal interests.
"I've been wrestling with the decision to leave for over a year," said Mr.
Dale, 46, who took a two-month sabbatical last summer to "see if there was life beyond advertising." He will, among other things, write a book about Jim Palmer, the former Baltimore Orioles pitcher.
Mr.
Dale joined Doner's Southfield office as a copywriter in 1970 and rose through the ranks, moving to Baltimore in 1982.


NBD Bancorp Inc.(NBD,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Bell Industries(BI,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League
BALTIMORE ORIOLES -- Agreed to terms with Alan Mills, pitcher, on a one-year contract.


Microsoft Manages to Post Record Quarterly Earnings
Defying broad expectations of a lackluster performance, the Microsoft Corporation reported yesterday that its third-quarter earnings rose 55 percent, setting a company record.
Analysts said Microsoft had cautioned them not to expect a high-growth quarter because the company lacked new products in the retail market.
Others expected a slowdown because Microsoft's Office, its package of business programs, was a few months past the peak of its sales cycle -- and because corporations might be holding off on volume purchases pending the planned release later this year of Windows 95, the next version of Microsoft's personal computer operating system.


Art in Review
Mike and Doug Starn
Pace/MacGill Gallery  32 East 57th Street  Manhattan  Through April 29
"I worship a celestial sun," says one of the lovers in "The Two Gentlemen of Verona." The Starn brothers would surely agree: their current exhibition at Pace/MacGill offers a baker's dozen of heliocentric collages, mounted in illuminated Plexiglas vitrines.
The key points of reference here seem to be the Roman myths of Sol Creatrix (god of creation) and Sol Invictus (god of victorious force), and the Japanese myth of Amaterasu (a Shinto sun goddess).
Amaterasu is apparently represented by a photograph of a 15th-century German portrait of a young woman.
But there are also reproductions of pages from Japanese and Egyptian manuscripts, Plato's "Timaeus," Dante's "Paradiso" and a paper on "Particle Dynamics in Two Colliding Plasmas," given at a symposium on nuclear physics held in Kofu, Japan, in July 1994.


Japanese Cult Leaders Sought in Huge Police Manhunt
About 30,000 police officers conducted searches and set up roadblocks around Japan today in a hunt for leaders of the Aum Shinrikyo sect, and the authorities arrested two sect followers who were previously active in the Japanese underworld.
The sect is under suspicion of planning the nerve gas attack on the Tokyo subway system last month, which killed 11 and injured more than 5,000, as well as the shooting of the head of the National Police Agency.
Aum Shinrikyo denies involvement and has accused the Japanese and American Governments of responsibility for the gas attacks.


Conner Finds An Old Ally in the Air to Tie Series
It could be said of Dennis Conner that he can see a wind shift with his eyes closed.
How else to explain a sailor who has developed an uncanny ability to keep coming back with America's Cup victories when his critics are saying he's over the hill now, or too distracted, or too well off to really care?
But there he was again today, edging out an opponent on the defenders' race course for the second finals race in a row.
In a match that called on skillful tactics to deal with an erratic 5-to-15-knot breeze, a rising sea, and a whale on the race course, Stars &amp; Stripes defeated Mighty Mary by 2 minutes 50 seconds.


Calpers Will Oppose Nominees for Philip Morris Board
Charging that the Philip Morris Companies has been unresponsive to institutional shareholders, the California Public Employees' Retirement System, or Calpers, said yesterday that it would oppose the company's management slate of 14 directors for the Philip Morris board.
Calpers, the nation's largest public pension fund, holds $365 million worth of the company's shares, making it the second-largest institutional Philip Morris shareholder among pension funds, behind TIAA-CREF, the largest private pension fund.
Calpers was joined yesterday in its protest by the International Brotherhood of Teamsters.
Its union locals own $142 million worth of Philip Morris shares in 25 funds.


David Mamet's Attempt to Decode Family Life
"The Cryptogram," David Mamet's radical, elliptical new work as both playwright and director, is not casually titled: it speaks in code.
The play is thick with spare Mamet language, which is delivered in such a relentless way that commonplace words take on an edge and a ferocity that have little to do with the meanings and emotions they usually evoke.
The words sometimes punish.
They also illuminate, creating a child's vision of the world with a poignancy seldom experienced in the contemporary theater.


Appeal Urged in Ruling on Crown Heights Figure
Gov.
George E. Pataki and Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani called yesterday for the United States Justice Department to appeal a Federal judge's ruling that a black teen-ager, indicted on civil rights charges in the killing of a Hasidic student in Crown Heights, should be tried as a juvenile.
Calling the judge's decision not to try Lemrick Nelson Jr. as an adult mistaken and mind-boggling, the Governor and the Mayor appeared on the steps of City Hall and said they believed there were more than sufficient grounds to have the ruling reversed.
The judge's decision means that Mr.
Nelson, if convicted, can only only face a maximum prison sentence of five years, rather than a possible life term.


Woman Charged With Forgery
A 36-year-old woman has been accused of forging her signature on her Red Cross lifeguard's certificate and endangering the welfare of a child after an 8-year-old boy nearly drowned in a swimming pool at Martin Luther King High School.
The authorities said Nicyce Smith not only could not save the youngster but had to be rescued herself.
LAWRENCE VAN GELDER


Teacher Suspended for Remarks
A white high school math teacher has been suspended without pay after telling her class that black people are good only for playing basketball and that blacks run fast because their ancestors had to run from their slave masters.
If school officials can, they will ultimately dismiss Diane Montgomery, a 12-year veteran of the school system, who made her remarks after a student said whites are good only at tennis.


First Michigan Bank Corp.(FMBC,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31





Dole Food Co.(DOL,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 25


On My Mind; Stacking the Deck
Avoid superlatives, the editors of The New York Times used to advise reporters.
As soon as your story is in print, somebody will prove that there was a heavier rainfall, a higher tree, a fatter, taller, older, richer or speedier human being.
So I will forgo saying that a recent ABC show on drugs was the worst effort at dealing with a major American problem ever aired.
Somewhere there must be a tape of a worse one.


Texas, All of It, According to Michener
Adapted from James A. Michener's 1987 novel, "Texas," ABC's four-hour "James A. Michener's Texas" aims for Lone Star State dimensions.
As Charlton Heston, the narrator, sonorously puts it at the very beginning, talking about Texicans, as they were called then: "This is the story of their fight for freedom. This is the story of Texas." Well, sort of, wrapped in the devices of fiction.
Mr.
Michener's novels-by-research are rooted in solid statistics.
And a good many are stuffed into this production, usually via Mr.
Heston: at 360,000 square miles, the area of Texas was "bigger than the original 13 Colonies combined," or the famous battle of the Alamo lasted just 90 minutes.
The rest is a mixture of fact and fiction.


Clinton Says Tax Cut Hinges On Incentives for Education
Further refining his differences with the Republicans on the drive to cut taxes, President Clinton said today that "any tax relief must be geared to helping middle-class people and to helping people educate themselves."
The President's comments, in an interview with CNN, marked the second time in as many days that Mr.
Clinton sought to distinguish his own tax proposals, which include new deductions for college and vocational training, from Republican alternatives.
On Wednesday, he vowed to oppose any bill that did not include tax relief for the cost of education.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-8  JAPAN SEEKS TO REIN IN YEN  Japan introduced a plan to halt the ascent of the yen against the dollar.
The effort,intended to revive Japan's sluggish economy, included a cut in a key interest rate, to 1 percent.
A1 A1  FORMER COMMANDOS SEEK HELP  More than 50 Vietnamese commandos who worked behind enemy lines for the U.S. were imprisoned in the 1960's.
The survivors want to leave Vietnam, but their applications have been rejected by the U.S.
A1


Holiday Weekend
Today is Good Friday and the first day of Passover. NEW YORK
GOVERNMENT OFFICES: Federal, state and municipal offices are open.


Rethinking Welfare: Collecting From Fathers -- A special report.; Georgia, Pursuing Child Support, Discovers Its Potential and Limits
With a self-sufficiency born of pride and desperation, Sheila Anderson seems to be just the sort of single mother politicians are searching for in the rush to change the welfare system.
Abandoned by the father of her 5-year-old son, she took welfare only long enough to find work.
"I make our living," said Ms. Anderson, a 27-year-old telephone operator.


Passover Price Gouging Is Reported to Be Easing
Shopping for Passover in Borough Park has been a tradition for Frances Klein for more than 30 years.
As she sorted through bins of onions at a greengrocer on 13th Avenue this week, she grudgingly conceded that Passover price gouging -- another tradition -- finally seems to have ended.
"There was a time when things would go sky high before Passover," Mrs.
Klein, 65, said.
"Now it's not so bad. And it's about time. It's not right when they charge more right when you need more stuff. Social Security checks don't go up."


Democratic Welfare Plan Would Force Some to Work
Trying to weave together the disparate factions of his party, Assembly Speaker Sheldon Silver released a Democratic welfare plan today that would require more recipients to work, but without resorting to the tougher measures proposed by Gov.
George E. Pataki.
The plan immediately came under attack by the Republican Governor and the State Senate majority leader, Joseph L. Bruno, as a tepid measure that would not move people off welfare and that would actually cost the state $300 million more than the current system.


Developers File Bias Suit
The developers of a Jewish nursing home that was rejected by the planning board this week are suing this Bergen County borough for religious and age discrimination.
The Jewish Home and Rehabilitation Center wants to convert a vacant building in an industrial park into a 180-bed nursing home.
But the planning board in Rockleigh, population 270, voted against the project, arguing that it would overburden its fire and ambulance corps.


Art in Review
Catherine Opie  Gavin Brown's Enterprise 558 Broome Street SoHo Through April 22
To some extent, all art reflects a life style, but some art is simply life-style art.
Catherine Opie's is.
Her genre is formal photo-portraiture; her subjects in this show are men and women who, for the most part, align themselves with an underworld of leather bars, cross-dressing and extremes of anatomical ornament.


Street Newsstands and Bus Stops Are Giuliani's Latest Concern
Adding a new plank to his quality-of-life campaign, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani announced an ambitious effort yesterday to reduce clutter on some of New York City's busiest corners by regulating and in many cases relocating everything from newsstands to bus stop shelters and ultimately, public telephones.
If enacted by the City Council, the plan would bring radical changes to the city's streetscape and provide some organization to New York's chaotic and congested sidewalks.


New Welfare Rules Are Set
In Camden County, people who want welfare will have to work.
"It's about responsibility," said Jeff Nash, director of the Board of Freeholders.


Art in Review
'Chocolate!'  Swiss Institute 495 Broadway (between Broome and Spring Streets) SoHo Through May 20
Chocolate's allure lies in its contradictions.
It is simultaneously sweet and bitter, hard and melting.
Lovers give chocolates to provoke desire, but the chocolate eggs and bunnies of Easter are symbols of childhood innocence.


Standard Microsystems Corp.(SMSC,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


Student Loan Marketing Assn. (SLM,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


CCB Financial Corp.(CCBF,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Corrections
A picture caption on Wednesday about reaction to the Contract With America transposed the names of two friends of Lonnie Parcell, a Pittsboro, N.C., man who called the contract a political ploy.
Bill Burgess was to Mr.
Parcell's left; John Goldston was on his right.


Credit McNamara in Winning the Cold War; He Wasn't Alone
To the Editor:
Your condemnation of Robert McNamara for his part in the Vietnam War (editorial, April 12) seems entirely too harsh and mean-spirited.
He and Lyndon Johnson were not alone in prosecuting the war.
There were other Cabinet officers who ranked as high as Mr.
McNamara whose complicity in that monumental and bloody tragedy should not be forgotten.
RALPH T. BIRDSEY  Atlanta, April 12, 1995


National Commerce Bancorp (NCBC,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


A New Ride for the Chairman of Six Flags
Jann S. Wenner first realized that his friend Robert W. Pittman had a future in amusement parks when the two men rode into Branson, Mo., on a motorcycle trip in 1990.
Mr.
Pittman dragged him to Silver Dollar City, a local theme park, for an exhaustive tour.
"He was even fascinated by the size of the Coca-Cola cups," said Mr.
Wenner, the publisher of Rolling Stone magazine.
Yesterday, Mr.
Pittman, now the chairman of the Six Flags theme parks of Time Warner Inc., moved closer to a deal to sell 51 percent of Six Flags to an investment group led by Boston Ventures, executives and investment bankers familiar with the plan said.


Art in Review
Jessica Stockholder  Jay Gorney Modern Art 100 Greene Street SoHo Through April 29
In her latest show, Jessica Stockholder may perform the unsettling feat of getting better and worse at the same time.
Ms.
Stockholder's acid color is stronger, more blazingly retinal than ever, whether it is applied to her festering fusions of found objects and materials or indigenous to them (as in the case of bright rolls of yarn, garish fabrics and plastic buckets and storage units).
But somehow the structures themselves aren't so interesting; they seem clotted and clumsy, and unmemorable, which may be part of the point.


Elimination Number Is 1 For Nets
They keep losing, and the fingers keep pointing.
Many of them are directed at Kenny Anderson, who must have felt the whole world was yelling at him to pass the basketball.
He has known this feeling before, but never was it driven home more loudly than tonight.


Flat Spending By Consumers During March
Consumers spent about $2 billion less in March than economists had anticipated, the Commerce Department reported today, contributing to what has become a marked, although largely welcome, slowdown from the economy's superheated pace of late last year.
Retail sales edged up two-tenths of 1 percent for the month, a rise not only shy of forecasts but more pronounced because February sales were revised sharply downward to post the biggest decline in a year.


49ers Sign a Replacement for Sanders
MARQUEZ POPE joined the San Francisco 49ers yesterday and began getting used to filling both a new position and the big shoes of DEION SANDERS.
Pope formally signed a four-year, $4.7 million contract with the 49ers after the Rams declined to match the offer for the restricted free agent.


Lobzenica Journal; As Political Passions Cool, It's the Ageless Easter
For more than a decade, the priests at the Gorka Klasztorna monastery presented one of Poland's more elaborate Easter passion plays, with well-crafted costumes, time-consuming rehearsals and carefully chosen local farmers to act the main roles of the Easter story.
Even the horses for the Roman cavalry were the tallest and most robust in the region.
In the early 1980's, after the imposition of martial law, the extra effort here was symbolic of the strength of the Roman Catholic Church against the Communist Government.


Umpires See First Pitch, From the Owners
As replacement umpires worked the first 1995 exhibition games not played by replacement players, major league umpires yesterday received management's first proposal since the National and American leagues locked them out on Jan. 1.
Robert Kheel, the lawyer who negotiates for the leagues, and Richie Phillips, the umpires' lawyer, both declined to disclose details of the proposal.


Spring Is Back And So Are Shad


The 3d President's 252d


Corrections
An article on Wednesday about Holocaust chairs at American colleges misstated the date and place of the first such chair.
It was established in 1976 at Yeshiva University.
The article also misstated the name of one of the colleges that have such chairs.
It is the Richard Stockton College of New Jersey, which used to be named Stockton State College.


Whitman Apologizes for Remark on Blacks
Looking for some way to illustrate the point that you can't legislate morality when dealing with the issue of unwed mothers, Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman told a London publication that young black males have a game called "jewels in the crown" that refers to the number of children they can father out of wedlock.
Today Mrs.
Whitman apologized for the remarks, which Senator Wayne Bryant, a Camden Democrat, had called "racially divisive," saying it was not the Governor's "first example of insensitivity."


Confidence Shaken, Hospital Tries to Bounce Back After Series of Errors
After William Delgado was told last month that he had clogged arteries and needed coronary bypass surgery, he had something worse to worry about.
University Community Hospital in Tampa, where his recommended surgeon was on staff, was the subject almost daily of news broadcasts about a series of errors in treatment over a one-month period last February and March: an arthroscopic operation on a patient's wrong knee; the amputation of the wrong leg below the knee on another; the death of a man removed from his ventilator by mistake, and a tubal ligation without the patient's consent.


Chrysler, Braced for Attacks, Reports a Decline in Earnings
Robert J. Eaton, the buttoned-down chairman and chief executive of Chrysler, likes to say that he has made almost no product decisions since jumping to the auto maker from the General Motors Corporation three years ago.
But today, the Chrysler Corporation reported the first quarter-to-quarter decline in earnings in almost four years.
The report showed the reason, even before the investor Kirk Kerkorian made his takeover proposal for Chrysler on Wednesday, that Mr.
Eaton faced a slew of tough decisions.


Harvard Is Now Asking If a Would-Be Student Who Killed Her Mother Then Lied About It
The high school senior whose acceptance to Harvard University was rescinded last week after the university learned that she had killed her mother is facing a widening web of accusations that she has been deceptive about her behavior and misled Harvard officials about the circumstances under which her mother died.
Harvard's student newspaper, The Crimson, said today that the student, Gina Grant, told the Harvard graduate who interviewed her as part of the admissions process that her mother had died in an automobile accident.


Coltec Industries(COT,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 2


100 Days of Dreams Come True for Lobbyists in Congress
Washington's corporate and business lobbyists represent a myriad of often clashing interests.
But there is striking unanimity about the first 100 days of the new Congress: things, they say, could hardly have gone better.
As members of a coalition called the Thursday Group, lobbyists worked hand in glove with the House Republican leadership to build grass-roots support for the Contract With America, earning chits they hope will prove useful in the months ahead.


Real Ball! Real Players! McDowell Makes It Count
Jack McDowell still does not have a contract with the Yankees, but he has quietly shaved his Fu Manchu down to a modest mustache to conform more with George Steinbrenner's strict facial hair policy.
Believe it or not, McDowell's date with a razor could have a positive impact on contract negotiations.
These are the 1995 Yankees.
Without his trusty whiskers and with Steinbrenner watching, McDowell breezed through three innings tonight in his Yankee debut.
The Mets barely dented McDowell as he stifled them on one single while looking precise and powerful in pinstripes.
If this was an audition for a contract, McDowell's performance would have received an exemplary grade.


The P.L.O. Crackdown in Gaza
Under heavy pressure from Israel and the United States, Yasir Arafat's Palestinian Authority has launched its toughest crackdown yet against Islamic groups who would wreck the Israel-Palestinian peace agreement by terror.
Mr.
Arafat's police in Gaza have arrested hundreds of people from the two main militant groups, Hamas and Islamic Holy War.
The Palestinian administration has also announced a new drive to register weapons and has begun sentencing fiery orators to harsh terms for "inciting civil strife."
The Islamic groups have responded with rhetorical defiance but tactical caution.
They are as anxious as Mr.
Arafat to avoid an intra-Palestinian civil war in Gaza.
So far Mr.
Arafat has moved mainly against preachers, journalists and low-level militants, not armed fighters or commanders.
It is far from clear whether his resolve, or the militants' restraint, will last.


Writer, Nice Guy, Has Crush on Bird
It's a certain sign of movie stardom when an actor's early work is hauled off a shelf.
Sometimes this is comically embarrassing, as stars turn up with bit parts or bad hair.
But "The Cormorant" suggests that Ralph Fiennes's current golden-boy aura has at least something to do with wise career moves.
This 1993 made-for-the-BBC movie is not some humiliating skeleton falling out of his closet, but a quirky, modest psychological thriller about a man who inherits a possibly malevolent bird.
It is also a showcase for Mr.
Fiennes, who is in almost every scene.
While he is onstage in "Hamlet," which begins its Broadway previews tonight, "The Cormorant" will be opening at the Joseph Papp Public Theater, where it was shown briefly in December as part of a BBC retrospective.
Though the film would not be getting a theatrical release if Mr.
Fiennes hadn't gone on to "Schindler's List" and "Quiz Show," there is a lot to be said for seeing Ralph Fiennes in a role that offers plenty of gorgeous close-ups and grace notes.
He plays a writer named John, whose wire-rim glasses offer the clue that he's smart.
With his wife, Mary, and their small son, Tom, he moves from England to Wales when he inherits a house and a bird from his Uncle Ian.
If John fails to care for the bird, he may lose the house.


The Met Holds a Party To Celebrate Its 125th
The Metropolitan Museum of Art celebrated its 125th anniversary yesterday with a party in the museum's Charles Engelhard Court.
Among those on hand to help with the festivities were Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani; Libby Pataki, the First Lady of the State of New York; Kitty Carlisle Hart, chairwoman of the New York State Council on the Arts; Walter Cronkite, and museum trustees including Brooke Astor and Annette de la Renta.
One hundred and fifty schoolchildren were there, too, from such schools as Booker T. Washington Junior High School in Manhattan, P.S. 230 in Brooklyn and P.S. 31 in Bayside, Queens.


Kaydon Corp.(KDN,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 1


Credit McNamara in Winning the Cold War; A Solemn Obligation
To the Editor:
How dare you, in "Mr. McNamara's War" (editorial, April 12), equate the battlefield heroism of American troops with street protests of the period?
Those who served fulfilled a solemn obligation of citizenship; those who protested merely exercised their first amendment rights.


For a Taste Of the Open Road, Visit Chinatown. Really.
HOLIDAY INNS always meant North Carolina to me.
When we started driving to Florida a few decades ago, we were always happy to see the familiar green sign blinking in the darkness, an oasis of civility alongside the interstate.
Holiday Inns were always the same.
Eighteen-wheelers parked outside.
Fried chicken at night.
Two double beds.
Maybe grits in the morning.
Rocky Mount?
Fayetteville?
Lumberton?
We stayed in them all.


International Rectifier Corp.(IRF,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Judge Orders a State Takeover Of the Newark School District
A state judge today ordered New Jersey to take over the long-troubled Newark school district, saying the city's school board was so incompetent and the education system so riddled with failure that it did not warrant the standard hearing process before the state assumed control.
While previous state reports have criticized board members for attending conferences at tropical resorts and spending money on meals and new cars, the judge said today that his main reason for ordering a takeover was that too many Newark schoolchildren failed statewide tests.


Daly Chooses Restraint And 2-Iron
John Daly and his broker were having a conversation earlier this week, shortly after he had shot a final-round 81 in the Masters.
Daly was a little uncertain about whether to play in this week's MCI Classic at the Harbour Town Golf Links.
He got what might prove to be his best financial advice of what has so far been a pretty lean season when his broker imparted a little golf counsel.
She told him to play.


A Former Smoker Cheers
When I quit my two-pack-a-day smoking habit three years ago, I told myself that I would take it up again when I turned 65.
Thirty-five smoke-free years and then I could resuscitate a romance with my old habit and, as S. J. Perelman might say, go to hell my own way.
But unless I plan to spend my retirement years in Paris or Beijing, that might not be an option: New York is slowly becoming a smoke-free zone.
And you know, that's fine by me.
In fact, I cheered from my bed when I woke up Monday morning, switched on the radio and heard that the ban on smoking had gone into effect.


Credit McNamara in Winning the Cold War; Years of Madness
To the Editor:
Re "In Memoir, McNamara Recalls, and Regrets, Vietnam" (front page, April 9): The man who bemoans his tragic mistakes is the same one who in "In Retrospect," a book of 414 pages only once mentioned the damage the United States caused to Vietnam.


Female Kicker on Louisville Roster
With one year of college eligibility left, KATHY KLOPE decided to try out for the football team.
Her decision has landed her a spot on Louisville's roster.
Klope, a fifth-year senior and the starting goalkeeper for the Louisville women's soccer team the last two seasons, will begin practicing with the Cardinals football team Monday.
It is believed she would become only the second female to play Division I college football.
HEATHER SUE MERCER walked on at Duke last year and is still on the roster.


COMPANY BRIEFS
ALLIANT TECHSYSTEMS INC., Hopkins, Minn., received final Federal Trade Commission approval for its $465 million acquisition of Hercules Aerospace Co., a unit of the Delaware-based chemical company Hercules Inc.
BIG O TIRES INC., Englewood, Colo., an independent automotive-tire concern, said the latest buyout offer of almost $53 million by a group of senior executives and franchisees was inadequate and it hoped the group would increase its bid.


JAPANESE SETTLE ON PLAN TO CURB THE SURGING YEN
Japan's Government announced an emergency plan this morning aimed at halting the precipitous fall of the dollar against the yen and at rescuing the nation's fragile economy from the brink of another recession.
As part of the effort, the Japanese central bank later cut the discount rate three-quarters of a percentage point, to a record low of 1 percent.


Amsco Int'l.(ASZ,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 2


Louisiana-Pacific Corp.(LPX,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Ackerley Communications Inc.(AK,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


National Westminster Bancorp Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Rodman Expected to Return Tonight
DENNIS RODMAN was expected to suit up and possibly play for the Spurs tonight when Sacramento visits San Antonio.
Rodman, averaging 7.3 points and a league-leading 17.4 rebounds per game, has not played since separating his right shoulder in a motorcycle accident March 19.
The Spurs confirmed that Rodman would be taken off the injured list and be in uniform after Rodman took park in an optional workout with several teammates yesterday.


Dissent on Chechnya: Word to the West
The Russian military campaign in the secessionist region of Chechnya has been accelerated and become more brutal because of Russia's desire to end visible resistance before world leaders come to Moscow on May 9, some of Russia's most respected human-rights advocates said today.
Sergei A. Kovalyov, who remains President Boris N. Yeltsin's human-rights commissioner, said, "By May 9, it must be possible to shrug one's shoulders and say, 'Yes, many things happened in Chechnya and of course we are very sorry about it, but don't worry, the war is over.' "


Ex-Outreach Workers Say They Assaulted Homeless
Bubba, Big Black, Kizer and Red are the street names of four men who have said they served on squads that beat up the homeless.
They said that in recent years, while working for the Grand Central Partnership, they and others threatened, bullied and attacked homeless people to force them from doorways, bank vestibules, plazas and sidewalks all over Manhattan.
"We beat people at Sixth and Waverly," said Ernest Montgomery, a 6-foot 4-inch amateur boxer known as Bubba.
"We beat people at Tudor City. We beat people at 51st and Third. We beat people at 86th and Third. We beat people at Herald Square and Greeley Square. We beat people at the Roosevelt Hotel."


With 10 to Play, Rangers Cool on Scoreboard-Watching
Brian Leetch walked out of the Rangers' dressing room today wearing a baseball cap that displayed the letters NYPD.
New York trails Hartford by 2 points in the chase for the final playoff berth in the Eastern Conference with just 10 regular-season games remaining, but Leetch was not about to dial 911.
"We have 10 games left, so there are still a lot of points out there," said Leetch.
"For us, the wins are very important right now, but we're not going to start scoreboard watching until the last four or five games to see what kind of position we're in."


No Tricks Are Needed In Knicks' Victory
You had to wonder what Chris Webber was thinking.
His Washington Bullets were down by 11 points early in the second quarter against the Knicks last night and lucky it wasn't 50 the way they were playing defense.
Webber is a nice player and one of the most talented power forwards in the game, but he has a habit of talking way too much trash and scowling after a good play.
That would be fine if the Bullets weren't 18-59, on a 13-game losing streak and doggy-paddling in the kiddie pool, which is the bottom of the Atlantic Division.
But Webber's flair sometimes pops up at inappropriate moments.
After dunking on Charles Oakley and nearly bringing down the backboard in Shaquille-like fashion during the second period at Madison Square Garden, Webber began to jaw.
To no one really in particular.
Just jawing.
He was called for a technical foul.


Dr. David Thompson, 72, Dies; Ex-Head of New York Hospital
Dr.
David D. Thompson, who led New York Hospital during 20 years of sweeping medical advances and turbulent upheaval until his retirement as director in 1987, died yesterday at the hospital where he had spent all but two years of an almost 50-year career.
He was 72 and lived in Tenafly, N.J.
The hospital said he died of leukemia.


Dr. King's Widow Loses a Plea To Regain Control Over Papers
The state's highest court has rejected a plea by the widow of the Rev.
Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr. to regain control of her husband's papers from Boston University.
In the ruling on Wednesday, the justices of the Massachusetts Supreme Judicial Court unanimously upheld a 1993 jury decision that declared Boston University the rightful owner of the papers based on a letter from Dr.
King to the university's library dated July 16, 1964.


Connecticut School Segregation
Connecticut Superior Court Judge Harry Hammer delivered a puzzling, incomplete and disappointing ruling on Wednesday when he declared that the state could not be held responsible for its grievously segregated school system.
This small state is divided into 169 municipalities, most of which are also self-contained school districts.
The system has created stark racial segregation.
In cities like Hartford and Bridgeport, almost exclusively black and Latino schools consistently produce lower test results, higher dropout rates and fewer college-bound graduates than their affluent, white suburban neighbors.


Scary Psychological Portrait
"Clean, Shaven" was shown as part of last year's New Directors/ New Films series.
Following are excerpts from Janet Maslin's review, which appeared in The New York Times on March 22, 1994.
The film opens today at the Quad Cinema, 13th Street west of Fifth Avenue, Greenwich Village.
Lodge H. Kerrigan's "Clean, Shaven" quickly demonstrates that Mr.
Kerrigan is capable of scaring the daylights out of his audience, given the right material.
Mr.
Kerrigan, who wrote, produced and directed this unsettling psychological portrait, begins by powerfully conveying the disturbed mental state of his film's main character.
Peter Winter (Peter Greene) appears to be a child-killer, but not much about him is objectively clear.
The film heightens the tension by confining its narrow focus to Peter's bizarre, angry view of the world.


Home Video
May the Manual Be Easy
Tired of that VCR?
Presuming that enough people are, hardware makers and software suppliers plan a new generation of equipment to replace old machines and analog tapes.


School Bus Drivers Conduct Brief Wildcat Strike on S.I.
More than 150 school bus drivers facing the loss of lifetime job guarantees staged a wildcat walkout on Staten Island yesterday, but called off a threat to strand thousands of children in schools after a union leader warned of a public-relations fiasco and pledged an all-out fight against city plans to slash costs by rewriting bus contracts.
"In our industry for 40 years we never left a kid in school," a vice president of the Amalgamated Transit Union, James Connors, told angry placard-carrying drivers.


Jones's Confidence Is Up And Fastball Is Down
Bobby Jones does not want to repeat -- or even remember -- spring training last year.
It was a terrible six weeks.
His fastballs were up, his earned run average was fat, his supposedly guaranteed spot in the Mets' rotation was a sudden uncertainty.
"It was terrible," Jones said today. "I didn't want that to happen again."


Last Chance
Here is a sampling of shows and exhibitions in New York City that are to close soon: Closing This Weekend  BERND AND HILLA BECHER, Sonnabend Gallery, 420 West Broadway, at Spring Street, SoHo.
"Industrial Facades," photographs that explore architectural typology.
Through tomorrow.
Hours: Today and tomorrow, 10 A.M. to 6 P.M.
Free.
Information: (212) 966-6160.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  *
Federal Home Loan Bank is selling $15 million of notes due in 1997 through FBS Investment Services.
The noncallable issue is priced at par to yield 6.58 percent.


CHRONICLE
London theatergoers will have to be patient if they want to see RAQUEL WELCH make her theatrical debut on the West End.
The 54-year-old actress has been touring regional theaters in England in the role of Epifania Fitzassenden in "The Millionairess" by George Bernard Shaw, preparing for an opening in the Albery Theater in mid-May.
Poor reviews have put that plan on hold, and instead, "Five Guys Named Moe," has been booked at the theater.


Cult Leaders Hunted
Japanese police officers searched for leaders of the sect suspected of planning the nerve-gas attack on the Tokyo subway system last month.
Two sect followers were arrested.
Article, page A3.


Charles Lawrence, Appeals Judge, 75
Charles B. Lawrence, who was a justice of the Appellate Division of the New York State Supreme Court, died on April 3 in the Brooklyn Hospital Center.
He was 75 and lived in Brooklyn.
He died after a brief illness, his family said.


Inside Art
Sellers' Fees Made Nonnegotiable
Sotheby's announced yesterday that it was changing its rate structure for sellers' commissions.
The new, nonnegotiable rates apply to consignments beginning this fall.
For years, both Sotheby's and Christie's have supposedly charged sellers 10 percent of the purchase price on items that sell for more than $7,500; 15 percent on items selling for $2,000 to $7,500, and 20 percent on items selling for less than $2,000.
But with sellers offering extremely expensive items, both auction houses have negotiated the fee, often eliminating it altogether. (The auction house also receives a percentage of the price from the buyer.)


Jets' Strategy Probably Rules Out McNair
The Jets plan to unveil a more aggressive approach to the college draft that will be based on the player's immediate impact and that probably signals that they will not pick Steve McNair, considered by many the nation's top quarterback, with their No. 9 pick.
In a sense, the Jets unveiled their leadership today at the annual news conference advancing the National Football League draft on April 22: Coach Rich Kotite and Dick Haley, whose title is director of player personnel.
But Haley has been the de facto boss of the Jets' scouting operations for several months, since General Manager Dick Steinberg learned he had stomach cancer.


RESULTS PLUS
GOLF  Peete Shares PGA Seniors Lead  Calvin Peete, his shoulder still on the mend, took advantage of a fast start yesterday to share the first-round lead in the PGA Seniors Championship at Palm Beach Gardens, Fla.
Peete shot a four-under-par 68 after going four under for the first eight holes.


INSIDE
A Working Relationship
Conservative and business lobbyists worked closely with House Republicans to build support for the Contract With America.
Page A12.
The Intersection Esthetic
Mayor Giuliani wants to reduce clutter on street corners by regulating or relocating newsstands, bus shelters and other structures.
Page B1.
Homeless Beatings Charged
Four men who worked for the Grand Central Partnership said they beat homeless people to force them from doorways and sidewalks.
Page B1.
Dornan Enters the '96 Race
Representative Robert K. Dornan joined the Republican Presidential field, declaring: "Come with me. I'm going to enjoy myself." Page A11.


First Commerce (FCOM,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Restaurants
Four stars are easier to get than to keep.
Imagine the pressure.
Everyone wants a reservation.
Everyone expects perfection.
The smallest error is rarely overlooked.
Given the situation, it must be tempting to play it safe and avoid change.
But this would never work: an establishment that does not develop should not retain its starry status very long.
Fortunately for them, most restaurants grow into their stars.
Not Le Bernardin: at the ripe old age of three months, it had all four stars bestowed upon it.
The restaurant has been in the spotlight ever since.
In 1986, the brother-and-sister team of Gilbert and Maguy Le Coze moved from Paris to New York, and Mr.
Le Coze's cooking changed American dining.
His style, impeccably fresh fish cooked with respect and simplicity, was soon so widely copied that people forgot who had invented it.
That did not seem to bother Mr.
Le Coze, who continued to turn out the most daring seafood in the city.


Treasury Securities Prices Higher in Shortened Session
Prices of Treasury securities moved higher yesterday, in a shortened trading session, on weak retail sales data that suggested economic growth was continuing slowly enough to keep inflation under control.
Yesterday's half-day session in advance of Good Friday and the start of Passover was choppy but uneventful as the Commerce Department reported weaker-than-expected March retail sales, or about half the gain most market participants expected.


On Stage, and Off
Pickets Dressed for the Part
The rumors were around for two weeks: the stagehands' union would picket performances of "London Suite," the new Neil Simon play at the Union Square Theater.
Mr.
Simon's decision to go off Broadway is an oft-mentioned counterstroke in the battle between unions and producers over costs.
That battle may heat up this summer; the stagehands' contract expires on July 31.
Some preparing for the negotiations are predicting a strike or a lockout; others pooh-pooh the idea.


CHRONICLE
EVERETT RAYMOND KINSTLER has been commissioned by the Yale Club of New York to paint a portrait of President Clinton, who graduated from Yale Law School in 1973.
"I'm looking forward to it," Mr.
Kinstler said yesterday.
"It's a great honor to paint any President of the United States."


The F.B.I. Goofed; The C.E.O. May Pay; Discredited Rumors About Bally Executive Could Resurface
Two years ago, a Federal Bureau of Investigation agent in New Orleans included an almost offhand comment about Arthur M. Goldberg, the head of one of the nation's largest casino companies, in a court affidavit used in an organized-crime investigation:
"The Newark Division of the F.B.I. has identified Goldberg as an associate of the Colombo" crime family.


Diebold Inc.(DBD,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Credit McNamara in Winning the Cold War
To the Editor:
It is sad that Robert S. McNamara carries such a heavy burden, believing himself to be responsible for the lives lost and the blood spilled in the war in Vietnam.
It is unfortunate that The Times, which supported the war effort in its early stages, is so unforgiving in its "Mr. McNamara's War" (editorial, April 12), as if it were all so unnecessary.


El Paso Natural Gas Co.(EPG,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Favorable Earnings Reports Send Stock Market to Highs
Spurred by favorable earnings reports, the stock market set records yesterday in anticipation of a three-day holiday weekend.
The Dow Jones industrial average closed at 4,208.18, up 10.37 points for the day and almost 3 points higher than the previous high of 4,205.41, set on April 6.
It marked the 17th record high for the Dow this year.


On Jay Street, Something Besides Spring Was in the Air
The lights went bad, the air turned foul, and soon the streets of downtown Brooklyn were full of sick people.
Well, maybe.


U.S. Backing Turkish Plan to Use Iraq Kurds to Prevent Raids
Clinton Administration officials said today that they supported Turkey's plan to have Iraqi Kurds help keep Turkish Kurd separatists from using northern Iraq as a base for attacks against Turkey.
The officials also said they would join Turkey in pressing the two major factions of Iraqi Kurds to stop feuding between themselves so they could help protect Turkey against cross-border attacks by what the Administration says are terrorists in the Kurdistan Workers Party.
The party, known as the P.K.K., is seeking to set up an independent state.


U.S. Trust Corp.(USTC,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


PILOT IN A CRASH HAD LOW RATINGS
The National Transportation Safety Board staff released reports today showing that the pilot of an American Eagle turboprop that crashed near Raleigh-Durham International Airport last December, killing 15 people, joined American Eagle four days after being forced to quit by another airline for incompetence.
A cockpit transcript shows that in the last moments of the flight, the pilot apparently became confused about whether one of his two engines had stopped, and if so, which one.


Butler Manufacturing Co.(BTLR,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Getting Used to Idea of No Cup and No Nectar
The Rangers are struggling just to get into the playoffs, much less win a second straight Stanley Cup, but no True Fan of the Blues should be gnashing teeth over this.
Last season was enough to sustain us for another 54 years.
Nevertheless, tonight's game against Boston is critical, especially in light of Wednesday night's victory over Buffalo.
The Rangers need to win tonight for a .500 home ice won-lost percentage, a bare minimum for credibility; also, to prove that Mike Richter's quickened performance in goal was no fluke and that the referee's failure to whistle Jeff Beukeboom's no-stick assist was not necessary for victory.
Still, we need to prepare for a year without a cup. (There have been years like that, remember?) The following excuses for the Rangers' collapse may seem overheated and under-intellectualized, better suited to general magazines with Victoria's Secret ads, yet here they are. 1.
KEENAN USED THEM UP


Corrections
A chart on Wednesday showing what New York and Federal law-enforcement officials say is the power structure of the Gambino crime family transposed two names.
Joseph Corozzo is a capo, or captain, in the family, according to the authorities, not one of its four top leaders; his brother, Nicholas, is among the top leaders, law-enforcement officials say.


Credit McNamara in Winning the Cold War; Citizen's Rebuke
To the Editor:
"Mr. McNamara's War" (editorial, April 12) is literature, in addition to being one of the most profound expressions of moral outrage to appear in a venue of the major media.
You have my congratulations and everlasting respect.


Takeover of the School District
A state judge ordered New Jersey's Education Department to take over the long-troubled Newark school district, saying the local school board was so incompetent and the education system so riddled with failure that there was no need for more hearings before the state took control.
Page A1.


Stalwart of the Kennedy Justice Dept. Finds His World in Ashes After a Trial
As an Assistant United States Attorney General for Presidents John F. Kennedy and Lyndon B. Johnson, Norbert Schlei laid hands on history.
Now, at the age of 65, he has his fingerprints on file with Federal marshals and a smudge on his distinguished legacy.
Mr.
Schlei, one of the nation's top law-enforcement officials in the pivotal era of civil rights and the Cuban missile crisis, was convicted of securities fraud and conspiracy in Federal District Court here in January.
Prosecutors said Mr.
Schlei and five others conspired to sell $16 billion in fake Japanese Government bonds, from the mid-1980's to 1992.


Schulman (A.) Inc.(SHLM,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


J. P. Morgan's Profits in First Quarter Are a Surprise to Analysts
Confounding expectations, J. P. Morgan announced profits for the first quarter yesterday that were sharply higher than what analysts had expected, largely because of a big improvement in its trading business this year.
Morgan earned $255 million, or $1.27 a share, down 26 percent from $345 million, or $1.69 a share, in the corresponding quarter last year.
But earnings were up 32 percent from the fourth quarter and included a charge of $55 million related to cutbacks that have reduced employment by 4 percent.
Morgan's operating earnings, before the special charge, were $1.44 a share, compared with Wall Street expectations of $1.16 a share, according to a survey of analysts by Zacks Investment Research.


Credit McNamara in Winning the Cold War; Losing the Peace
To the Editor:
It was with frustration that I read your April 12 editorial "Mr. McNamara's War" and the public response to that editorial in today's edition.
Both dwelt on an analysis of events concluded over 20 years ago, demonstrating that Vietnam is still an event, a war, a subject for scholarly debate, but not a place.


Endangered Integrity
Republicans bent on weakening the nation's environmental laws are trashing the principles of decent government in the process.
This double insult was underscored this week when Senator Slade Gorton of Washington unveiled a bill that would scrap major provisions of the Endangered Species Act.
Making light work for himself, Mr.
Gorton farmed out the chore of drafting his revision to a group of Washington lawyers representing timber, mining, ranching and utility interests that have a huge economic stake in disabling the current law.
Those industries have also contributed sizably to Mr.
Gorton's re-election campaign.
Mr.
Gorton says he did not bother to consult with environmentalists because he already knew what their views were.


Art in Review
Jane Fine  Casey M. Kaplan 580 Broadway (near Prince Street) SoHo Through May 5
Jane Fine's bright, cartoonish abstractions, seen in the painter's first solo exhibition, are an improvement over her previous group-show efforts.
Ms.
Fine has heightened her colors, eliminated some of the clunkiness that characterized her elaborate compositions and gained more control of her odd mix of the biomorphic, the gestural and the latently geometric.
Her dense aggregates of piled and stepped shapes alternate with dripped and scumbled areas and insinuations of toon reality (a schematic flower here, a nail's head there).
It's the Hanging Towers of Babylon filtered through a Disney-crazed sensibility, the goal being consistency built out of inconsistency, an all-over energy made of myriad details, each as carefully considered as the next.
This kind of anti-heroic approach to painting has many practitioners, most prominently Lari Pittman, but also Amy Sillman and Betsy Kaufmann.


Goodrich (B.F.) (GR,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Tracing the Circuits in the Contemporary Mind
SIX MYTHS OF OUR TIME  Little Angels, Little Monsters, Beautiful Beasts and More
By Marina Warner
135 pages. Vintage Books. $10.
Throughout her impressive career as a cultural historian and novelist, Marina Warner has evinced an ardent interest in myths and the machinery of myth-making.
Her critically acclaimed book "Alone of All Her Sex" deconstructed the cult and iconography of the Virgin Mary.
"Joan of Arc: The Image of Female Heroism" looked at the legend of St.
Joan and the assorted permutations it has undergone over the years.
And even her 1989 novel, "The Lost Father," looked at the emotional and psychological consequences of the family myths members of a sprawling Italian clan choose to tell about their pasts.


Sticking Point Emerges on U.S.-China Trade
Wrapping up a contentious week of trade talks in China, a senior United States official said today that the reluctance of China to open its markets remained a serious impediment to its plans to join the global trading community.
Remarks by the official, Under Secretary of Commerce Jeffrey E. Garten, pointed to a stubborn gap between Beijing and Washington on trade issues.
Despite the signing of a landmark intellectual property rights agreement in February that both sides hailed as a model of cooperation, China and the United States do not even agree about the size of their trade imbalance, much less what to do about it.


Credit McNamara in Winning the Cold War; Spreading Blame?
To the Editor:
Thank you for your April 12 editorial about Robert S. McNamara's current stance regarding Vietnam.
His is not the courageous mea culpa it pretends to be.
As a principal proponent under President Lyndon B. Johnson of increased United States involvement in Vietnam, he could be expected to identify and regret only his own shortcomings.


Excused Juror Tells Judge That Racial Hatred Permeates and Divides Simpson Panel
The most-recently excused juror in the O. J. Simpson case has painted for Judge Lance A. Ito a picture of a panel torn by racial tensions, in which black and white jurors went shopping separately, exercised separately and watched movies separately.
By the former juror's reckoning, racial animosity permeated the steam room, phone room, exercise room and movie room, as well as the jury box and the van that ferries the panelists to court.
Her account raises questions about whether 12 people who cannot agree on what videos to watch or how long they can stay on treadmills can ever agree on Mr.
Simpson's guilt or innocence.


Credit McNamara in Winning the Cold War; We Were Right
To the Editor:
Thank you for "Mr. McNamara's War" (editorial, April 12).
Very early in the Vietnam War, while in my mid-30's and the mother of baby boys, I joined the small but growing group of war protesters.
We wrote letters, marched on Washington, circulated petitions, worked for Eugene McCarthy and George McGovern and, most nights, I wept for our young men dying in Vietnam.


Pelicans Can't Wait to Get Their Feet Wet


Dallas Semiconductor Corp.(DS,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 2


The Spoken Word
GLORIA STEINEM, St.
Luke's School, 487 Hudson Street, Greenwich Village.
A lecture by the author and co-founder of Ms. magazine.
Tuesday at 7:30 P.M.
Tickets: $30; proceeds benefit the school's financial aid program.
Reservations: (212) 924-5960.
"ART AND RELIGION IN BALI," Harold Linder Theater, American Museum of Natural History, Central Park West at 79th Street.
A lecture by Hildred Geertz, professor of anthropology at Princeton University, followed by an ethnographic film by Timothy and Patsy Asch and Linda Connor, and a Topeng masked theater performance by I Nyoman Catra.
Tomorrow at noon.
Free with museum admission: $6 for adults; $4 for students and the elderly; $3 for children.
Information: (212) 769-5100.


Clayton Homes (CMH,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


A Man Said to Be Waving a Gun Is Killed by Two Officers
A technical employee at the prestigious Dalton School was shot and killed by two police officers Wednesday night outside his Washington Heights apartment building after he refused to drop an automatic handgun he was waving at the officers, the police said.
Police officials characterized the man, Katarima Mwaria, 25, as an unstable individual who was pointing a gun at pedestrians and harassing women for a half-hour leading up to the shooting.
When he was shot, he had four bags of marijuana in his possession, the police said.


A Tradition, and a Resort, at Twilight
THE Pines Resort Hotel is busy, busy, busy.
Chef On Ma is up to his elbows in matzoh balls.
The bakers are whining for assistants.
Busboys are stacking 4,000 new plates, knives, forks and spoons, which sound something like a symphony for cymbals.
Reservations for Passover have come in at a steady pace, with 700 guests expected tonight, the first of the eight-day holiday.
True, this is 100 people short of a sell-out.
And there was a time not too long ago when packing the place for Passover was a given.
But it is nothing to fret over, all things considered.


Potlatch Corp.(PCH,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Handgun in Shooting Purchased Legally
The homeless man charged with shooting two Consolidated Edison workers Tuesday on a street in Jamaica, Queens, purchased the semiautomatic handgun used in the attack legally in California, where he was living at the time, the police said yesterday.


ALC Communications Corp.(ALC,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
9.00
9.00
6.25
DISCOUNT RATE
5.25
5.25
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
6.38
6.17
3.49
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.57
5.61
3.56
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.70
5.75
3.98
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.02
7.04
6.95
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.33
7.35
7.28
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.20
8.22
8.11
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.25
6.27
6.35
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills 8


Schumacher's Brazil Prix Victory Restored
The disqualifications of MICHAEL SCHUMACHER and DAVID COUL THARD in the Brazilian Grand Prix were reversed by the International Automobile Federation's court of appeals in Paris yesterday.
The change restored the victory to Schumacher, the reigning world champion, and the second-place finish to Coulthard.
But each racing team was fined $200,000 because their fuel samples in the March 26 race did not match the samples that were tested at the start of the season.
The samples were found to be legal. (AP)


USG WINS A ROUND IN COURT ON ASBESTOS CASES
The USG Corporation has won the backing of the Illinois Supreme Court in its battle to secure up to $550 million from insurance companies to help cover asbestos claims against its United States Gypsum Company unit.
The court denied appeals by 11 insurers of eight test cases in which they had argued that policies they wrote in earlier decades contained language excluding asbestos coverage.
USG also said it had reached a $38.4 million settlement with one of the 11 carriers.
USG shares rose $1.125, to $24.625, on the New York Stock Exchange.


Sabres' Holzinger in First Game Tonight
BRIAN HOLZINGER, the top collegiate player in the nation who on Wednesday signed a multiyear contract with the Buffalo Sabres, practiced with his new team for the first time yesterday in Buffalo in preparation for his National Hockey League debut in Quebec tonight.
Holzinger, 22, won the Hobey Baker Award, given to the nation's top collegian, after recording 35 goals and 34 assists this season while playing for Bowling Green. (AP)


Accounts
Benckiser Consumer Products U.S.A., Danbury, Conn., a unit of Joh.
A.
Benckiser G.m.b.H., to Margeotes Fertitta Donaher &amp; Weiss, New York, to handle Lime-A-Way hard-water stain cleaner, previously at Deutsch Inc., New York.
Margeotes Fertitta already handles the company's Jet-Dry product line.
The billings were estimated at $8 million.


Farmers In France Ponder Candidates
For Andre Bredelet, a 63-year-old retired farmer who has been the top elected official of this tiny village for 30 years, the big question is not who will be elected the next President of France next month, but who will succeed him as Mayor in June.
"I've got arthritis, I've stopped working on the farm, and it's time for someone else to take over," he said.
"It's time for someone else to take over the burdens, but nobody's even come forward yet."


Mutual Life Set to Name New Chief
The Mutual Benefit Life Insurance Company, whose collapse in 1991 was the largest ever of an American insurer, is expected soon to name as its new chief executive Alan J. Bowers, an accountant who has been a consultant to the company since the middle of last year, according to insurance executives.
Mr.
Bowers, a partner at the accounting firm of Coopers &amp; Lybrand, has not yet signed an agreement with the company, which is based in Newark, and was one of several candidates presented by an executive search firm.
But Mr.
Bowers, who lacks direct experience in the insurance business, is said to be the front-runner.
He is said to have the support of New Jersey's Insurance Commissioner, Andrew J. Karpinski, who is also chairman of the 10-member Mutual Benefit board.


MBNA Corp.(KRB,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


No Headline
"By May 9, it must be possible to shrug one's shoulders and say, 'Yes, many things happened in Chechnya and of course we are very sorry about it, but don't worry, the war is over."' SERGEI A. KOVALYOV, President Boris N. Yeltsin's human rights commissioner.  [ A6:1. ]


Appeals Court Opens Way for Female Cadet at The Citadel
A Federal appeals court yesterday handed Shannon Faulkner another victory in her campaign to join the Corps of Cadets at The Citadel in Charleston, S.C., apparently paving the way for her to become the college's first female cadet.
In a 2-to-1 ruling, a panel of the United States Court of Appeals for the Fourth Circuit, in Richmond, upheld a lower court ruling in Miss Faulkner's favor and said she must be admitted in August unless the state implemented an acceptable plan to accommodate all women seeking a military-style education.


Rock-Tenn Co.(RKTN,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Israeli Patrols Kill 90 Dogs In Arab Town
This city is suddenly without dogs.
Owners are hiding their pets in their houses.
Shepherds have smuggled theirs out of town.
Scarcely a bark can be heard when Israeli soldiers patrol the streets during the nighttime curfew.


Fields Fill for Derby Dress Rehearsals
Six colts were entered in the $500,000 Blue Grass Stakes today, with Thunder Gulch the favorite at 8-5 followed closely by Suave Prospect at 2-1 in their final dress rehearsal for the Kentucky Derby.
In New York, eight colts were entered in the $500,000 Wood Memorial at Aqueduct, which will also be run Saturday as the co-feature of racing's countdown to the Derby.
But racing people visualized the Wood as more of a solo performance by Talkin Man, last year's Canadian juvenile champion, who made his 1995 debut three weeks ago by winning the Gotham Stakes by seven lengths and who was made the 4-5 choice for the Wood.


F.A.A. Vows No Reduction In Air Traffic
The Federal Aviation Administration promised today that there would not be cutbacks in flights to New York City's three major airports this summer, because of a plan it will announce on Friday to remedy a chronic shortage of air traffic controllers in the area.
As a short-term solution, the F.A.A. will provide the region with $800,000 more in overtime money so that it can maintain six-day weeks for controllers through the end of the fiscal year, on Sept. 30.


Credit McNamara in Winning the Cold War; Advice Was Available
To the Editor:
Your April 12 editorial "McNamara's War" was devastating.
However, these supplementary comments are pertinent and warranted.


Whirlpool Corp.(WHR,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Once Commandos for U.S., Vietnamese Are Now Barred
They say they are the lost patrols of America's war in Vietnam: more than 50 Vietnamese commandos who worked in secret behind enemy lines for the Central Intelligence Agency and the United States military.
The commandos and more than 400 of their fellow spies were captured and imprisoned in the 1960's, Government records show.
They survived for decades in forced-labor camps.
Now they want to leave Vietnam, where they are reviled as traitors, and come to the United States.


Clinton Sees Little Basis for Dollar's Fall
In his most extensive comments on the dollar since it began its recent fall, President Clinton said today that he saw little basis in reality for its recent weakness.
He expressed confidence that financial markets would ultimately take into account the effects of his Administration's fiscal policy.
"The United States will continue to reduce the deficit, we will reduce it more, we will have a responsible policy, and the dollar will respond accordingly," Mr.
Clinton declared.


Plans to Remedy Controller Shortage
The Federal Aviation Administration said there would be no cutbacks in flights to New York City's three major airports this summer, despite a shortage of air traffic controllers in the area.
The F.A.A. said it would provide an extra $800,000 in overtime money to maintain six-day weeks for controllers through the end of the fiscal year, on Sept. 30.
The agency would also transfer 15 controllers to New York City from other parts of the country and hire 10 to 15 new controllers.
Article, page B4.


Continental Is Dropping 'Lite' Service
Continental Airlines said yesterday that it would drop Continental Lite, admitting that the low-fare service it heavily promoted and trumpeted as an industry-leading innovation had been a $140 million mistake.
"It was an awfully expensive experiment," Gordon M. Bethune, the airline's chief executive, said in an interview.
"It was something that started as a pilot project that should have been proven before it was expanded. But once this thing started rolling, it was awfully hard to turn it around."


Chairman Is Retiring At Jordan, McGrath
James J. Jordan Jr. -- the longtime agency executive known for creating such successful slogans as "Schaefer is the one beer to have when you're having more than one" and "Us Tareyton smokers would rather fight than switch" -- is retiring as chairman of Jordan, McGrath, Case &amp; Taylor in New York.
"My plans are to have no plans," Mr.
Jordan, 64, said yesterday.
"I do expect to miss the business, but not quite enough to come back to it." He will sell back his stock in the agency, he added, as part of a transition to a new generation of managers.


CHRONICLE
The talk-show parade grows ever longer.
The Rev.
BENJAMIN F. CHAVIS Jr., the former executive director of the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People, will be the host of a weekly radio talk show, "The Freedom Journal," starting tomorrow on the WOL News Talk Network in Washington.
Mr.
Chavis was ousted from the N.A.A.C.P. leadership in August for his use of $332,400 of the organization's funds to forestall a lawsuit by a former employee who had charged him with sexual harassment.


'Obituary Bandit' Sentenced
They called him the obituary bandit.
Yesterday, a judge added a sentence to the life story of Richard Vennewald, sending him off for seven years in state prison.
Mr.
Vennewald, who pleaded guilty, used information gathered from newspaper obituaries to plot burglaries in his hometown of Lavalette that netted him more than $25,000 in cash and jewelry between 1991 and 1994.


The Inside Track: On the Trail of 50 Natural History Treasures
THE American Museum of Natural History is chock-full of colorful villains -- the monster anopheles mosquito comes instantly to mind -- but the komodo dragon may take the prize for negative charisma.
Short, squat and ugly, it is presented, along with two of its confederates, in the unseemly act of ripping apart a wild boar.
This brutal tableau is an old standby at the museum, but there's more to the drama within the glass case than the wall text tells, a kind of story behind the story that visitors can hear when they follow the high road of adventure mapped out in "Expedition: Treasures From 125 Years of Discovery," an audio guide that the museum has created to highlight 50 of its exhibits.
For $5, a portable CD player with headphones and a color guidebook reveal a route that wanders through four floors and 40 exhibition halls, taking in delights that range from the Newmont azurite to the Tasmanian wolf to the Warren mastodon.


Ball Park Out Of Bankruptcy
Skylands Park, the year-old stadium in Newton, N.J., that filed for Chapter 11 protection from its creditors last June shortly before the minor league New Jersey Cardinals' season began, emerged from bankruptcy yesterday.
Skylands filed for bankruptcy when a severe winter of 1993-94 caused construction cost overruns and $3.5 million in bank financing fell through.


Mr. Iacocca's New Bottom Line
There are no laws against Lee A. Iacocca and Kirk Kerkorian getting together to try to take over Chrysler.
But the public has a right to be concerned about the fate of the country's No. 3 automaker.
Mr.
Iacocca helped talk taxpayers into paying for the bailout of the company in 1980, and Washington has repeatedly responded to his appeals to protect domestic car makers from Japanese competition.
American pride in the recent success of Chrysler and the auto industry rests in no small measure on Mr.
Iacocca's salesmanship and oft-proclaimed commitment to sound management.
It thus comes as a cruel disappointment that after a heroic career building Chrysler up and rescuing it twice from insolvency, Mr.
Iacocca would now ally himself with Mr.
Kerkorian, one of the country's shrewdest but most ruthless corporate raiders.
Their reckless $22.8 billion takeover bid endangers the hard-won financial stability that Mr.
Iacocca helped to create.


Abroad at Home; The Crackpot Factor
In myth there was a sword so sharp that a man decapitated by it did not know until he tried to nod.
Something like that has happened to the Rev.
Pat Robertson, leader of the Christian Coalition, and to the conservative intellectuals who have allied themselves with him.
The sword was wielded by Michael Lind of Harpers magazine.
It was a sword of simple truth.
Mr.
Lind read Mr.
Robertson's 1991 book, "The New World Order." In February, in The New York Review of Books, he told us what was in it.


Libyan Airline Will Defy Flight Ban, If It Can Defy Gravity First
Ten of the 14 passenger jets belonging to Jamahiriya Libyan Arab Airlines can no longer fly.
Delays last for hours and passengers who want to eat on the plane have to bring their own food.
Nonetheless, Libya is planning to use the crippled airline to defy a United Nations ban on international flights to and from Libya.


At the Bar; In law schools, the quest for a high ranking has now reached the highest echelons.
As happens every spring, students from law schools throughout the country recently gathered at bulletin boards to scrutinize a set of numbers.
A familiar-enough scene, anxious students checking their grades.
But wait. Standing alongside them were law school faculty members and deans.


Hobart Rowen, 76, Financial Columnist
Hobart Rowen, an economics and business columnist at The Washington Post whose work was syndicated in other newspapers, died yesterday at Sibley Memorial Hospital in Washington.
He was 76 and lived in Chevy Chase, Md.
The cause was cancer, a spokesman for The Post said.


60 Drawings From the Stanford Museum
The Stanford University Museum of Art has had more than its fair share of ups and downs.
Founded in 1891, it grew rapidly in its first 15 years.
By 1906, it had larger galleries than the Metropolitan Museum of Art.
That year, the earthquake that leveled San Francisco also left the museum, in nearby Palo Alto, in shambles.
In a pithy introduction to the catalogue of the museum's drawings collection, Prof.
Lorenz Eitner writes, "There now followed 50 years of dormancy, during which the university allowed neglect and pilferage to decimate what remained of the collections in the ruinous museum."
Stanford finally decided to renovate its museum in 1963.
Professor Eitner was appointed director, and began rebuilding its collections.
Another earthquake, in 1989, forced the closing of the museum building; it is still being repaired.
Meanwhile, the museum is circulating "Romantics, Neo-Classicists, Realists," an exhibition of European drawings from its collection.


Enron Corp.(ENE,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


In America; School Bus Strike? Go Slow
For those who think New York has been a little quiet lately, hang on.
The school system's spring vacation is looking more and more like the calm before a very ugly storm -- a citywide strike by school bus drivers.
Mayor Rudolph Giuliani, Schools Chancellor Ramon Cortines and the Board of Education are united in their determination to change a system that has guaranteed lifetime jobs for school bus drivers, mechanics and escorts, and thwarted the adoption of real competitive bidding in the awarding of lucrative school bus contracts.


Couple in New Hampshire Convicted of Tax Evasion
Three days before the deadline for filing 1994 income taxes, a Federal jury today convicted a couple of evading Federal income taxes for four years.
Stuart Tulchinsky, 47, and his wife, Cathie Schneider, 41, of Chester, N.H., the owners of what prosecutors called two drug paraphernalia shops, put forth a defense that they "sincerely believe" that the Federal income tax system is voluntary.


Corrections
A front-page article on April 3 about a debate over whether doctors or family members should decide when further treatment of a dying patient is futile misstated the results of a survey by Dr.
David A. Asch of the University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine.
He found that more than 80 percent of doctors said they had unilaterally withheld or withdrawn care from dying patients, not that 80 percent had done so over the objections of family members.


Cowboys' Williams Still Free
ERIK WILLIAMS, an All-Pro offensive tackle for the Dallas Cowboys in 1993, will remain a free man until his latest brush with the law is resolved in court, his probation officer, ROSE HARRIS, said yesterday.
Williams, arrested Thursday on allegations that he and a companion sexually assaulted a 17-year-old girl at his North Dallas home, is serving two years' probation for an Oct. 24 drunken driving accident.
Through his attorney, DONALD GODWIN, Williams said he is not guilty of Thursday's incident.
If Williams is convicted of the sexual assault charge, which is expected to be formally filed Monday, Harris said the Dallas County District Attorney's office would pursue revocation of the probation.


Milutinovic Quits As Soccer Coach
Bora Milutinovic, who piloted the United States into the second round of the World Cup last summer, stepped down as coach of the Americans yesterday, just days after the American soccer leaders insisted that Milutinovic had been offered a contract through the 1998 World Cup.
Differences of opinion arose when officials from the United States Soccer Federation, the nation's governing body of the sport, asked Milutinovic to oversee the development of coaching and players in this country in addition to his duties as coach of the national team.


Cue Magazine Paved Way for Arts Guides
To the Editor:
Re "Conversations" with Clay Felker (Week in Review, April 9): Even when asked if a magazine about New York life had "been done before," Mr.
Felker omits mention of Cue magazine, founded by my father, Mort Glankoff, in 1932.


Cornell Offers Right to Choose Living-Learning Experiences
To the Editor:
In the strongest possible terms, we reject the inaccurate and damaging assertions made by Kenneth B. Clark and Michael Meyers in "Separate Is Never Equal" (Op-Ed, April 1).


Hope, Heavily Guarded, Prevails in Holy Land
All was quiet and hopeful in the Old City of Jerusalem today, like a prayer.
As every year on Good Friday, thousands of Christian pilgrims walked the Via Dolorosa, believed to be the route Jesus took to His Crucifixion.
A few hundred yards away, Jews prayed midday at the Western Wall, although their numbers were small because most Israelis were home preparing for the weeklong Passover holiday that began tonight.
Above the wall, Muslims attended Friday services at Al Aksa Mosque.


Brazil's Chief Due in U.S. Riding Boom
With exports and investment surging into Brazil from the United States, this nation's new President plans to open a campaign next week to shift Americans' attention from Mexico to his country.
"We have sustained a 5 percent economic growth rate for the last three years," said President Fernando Henrique Cardoso, who arrives in New York on Monday on a five-day visit to the United States.
"Mexico never had this."


Washington Acts to Aid Haitian Minors
To the Editor:
An April 6 letter from the executive director of the National Center for Haitian American Legal Defense and Education claims that the United States is forcing unaccompanied Haitian minors at Guantanamo Bay Naval Station in Cuba to return to Haiti without families to care for them.
This is not true.


Belated Regrets About Vietnam Create a Consensus of Antipathy
Robert S. McNamara's recently expressed regrets about United States involvement in the Vietnam War seem to be reopening old wounds and reviving a raw debate that was beginning to slip into history.
Reaction to the former Defense Secretary's revised views, published in his new book, "In Retrospect: The Tragedy and Lessons of Vietnam," has mostly been relentlessly negative, with little credence or charity accorded Mr.
McNamara's comment that "we were wrong, terribly wrong."


Quake Gives West Texas a Tintinnabulary Time
An earthquake with a magnitude of 5.6 that rattled much of West Texas on Thursday night was literally a bell ringer in the quiet university town of Alpine, near the epicenter.
"It set off every burglar alarm in town," said Shannon Rudine of the Alpine Volunteer Fire Department.
"And lots of folks got in their cars and starting driving around to look at the damage."


Higher U.S. Rates Urged
The head of International Monetary Fund, Michel Camdessus, advised the United States today to raise interest rates, in some of the most pointed comments the international lending agency has ever directed at American policy makers.


Familiar Face, in Debut
The word is not quite out on Pamela Frank.
She is one of the finest violinists of her generation, a young artist who has melded a brilliant technique with a strikingly mature interpretive intelligence.
Yet there were many empty seats when she played in Carnegie Hall on Tuesday night, and some of those who came did not have the well-fed look prized by concert presenters.
The problem might be that Ms.
Frank is a little too much the all-round musician.
She plays in New York constantly, in all manner of halls small and large, very often in chamber settings.
So her appearance on Tuesday, her Carnegie recital debut, did not have much mystery or fascination about it.
She also does not indulge in gaucheries or strike a pose.
She walks on stage, smiles ruefully at the straggling latecomers, plays the music, beams at the applause and walks off.


THEATER
Dancing Feet And a Fashion Parade  The Easter Show Radio City Music Hall


Another High-Level Executive at Salomon Resigns
Salomon Brothers is continuing to lose high-level executives, with Richard J. Barrett, its investment banking chief, being the latest to resign from the troubled Wall Street firm.
Indeed, as a member of Salomon's 13-member executive committee, Mr.
Barrett was one of the highest-ranking executives of the firm and the most senior person to leave in two years.
Salomon is expected to announce Mr.
Barrett's resignation on Monday and to appoint Eduardo Mestre, currently a managing director, as the new head of investment banking, people at the company said.


Kernels of Faith: The Passion and the Exodus


Prosecutor to Help Jordan Case
The Morris County prosecutor, Michael Murphy, plans to fly to Jordan tomorrow to help in the prosecution of Mohammad Abequa, a United States citizen charged with murdering his wife in their Parsippany apartment last July 4.
Mr.
Abequa was arrested in Jordan a few weeks later, after leaving the country with the couple's two children.


Tax Returns Are Released By Giulianis
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani and his wife, Donna Hanover Giuliani, did better financially last year, the Mayor's first in office, than they did in 1993, largely because of Mrs.
Giuliani's appearances on television, radio and in films, according to income tax returns released by the Mayor's office yesterday.
The couple earned $250,343 in taxable income last year -- almost $90,000 more than in 1993, when Mr.
Giuliani was running for Mayor -- and paid about a third of it in income taxes.
But the Giulianis were still earning far less than in 1992, when Mr.
Giuliani was in private law practice.


Case Casts Wide Light On Abuse By Police
Fighting back against the shoves of her drunken husband, Shawn Hart called the police on the morning of July 5 last year, pleading for help to throw him out of their Bronx apartment once and for all.
Officer Francis X. Livoti took the radio call and arrived quickly.
But as Ms.
Hart tells it, he entered her home in University Heights in such an uncontrolled rage that she wished she had never called 911.


Offspring of Guns 'n' Roses Arrives
It's probably not easy being a musician with a compulsion to work in a band with a tempestuous lead singer who can take anywhere from four months to four years to get around to working on a new album.
So the guitarist Slash, the Odysseus to the singer Axl Rose's Poseidon in Guns 'n' Roses, decided to put his own band together, Slash's Snakepit.
The band threw an album together in a couple of weeks and hit the road for a five-month tour, which brought it to Irving Plaza on Thursday night for a sold-out show.
For quick work, Slash's Snakepit held together well live.
Backed by a powerful and proficient rhythm section (James LoMenzo on bass and Brian Tichy on drums), none of Slash's serpentine solos seemed indulgent.
Most of them were performed in Slash's typical guitar hero pose, with the instrument vertical and Slash's left hand as low on the neck as possible.
Gilby Clarke, who used to play rhythm guitar in Guns 'n' Roses, was a perfect foil, adding punk-driven blues to Slash's classic rock.
The group tore through most of the songs on its first album on Geffen Records, "It's 5 O'Clock Somewhere" (most notably "Beggars and Hangers-On" and "Neither Can I"), stretched out a couple of songs from Mr.
Clarke's recent solo album, "Pawnshop Guitars" (Virgin) and murdered the Who ("Acid Queen") and Queen ("Tie Your Mother Down").


COMPANY BRIEFS
AMERICA ONLINE INC., Vienna, Va., an on-line computer service, plans to open a customer service center in Jacksonville, Fla., that will hire 1,000 people in the next two years.


Former Executives Indicted in Airline Parts Fraud
Two former executives of a major aircraft repair company were indicted today by a Federal grand jury, accused of intentionally cutting corners and doing shoddy repair work on hundreds of engine parts, then assuring the air carriers that the parts had been properly serviced, Federal prosecutors said.
The two executives, James M. Gabriel and Gerard E. Vitti, were formerly employed by Chromalloy Research and Technology of Orangeburg in Rockland County, a leading supplier of refurbished engine parts to the airline industry.


CLASSICAL MUSIC
Contemporary Works With a Lyrical Touch  Ensemble 21 Christ and St. Stephen's Church


An Ellington Celebration
The 96th anniversary of Duke Ellington's birth is to be celebrated with a big-band concert on April 29 at 8 P.M. at the Miller Theater, Columbia University, Broadway at 116th Street, Morningside Heights.
David Berger is to lead the 16-member ensemble, which includes the saxophonists Frank Wess and Jerome Richardson and the pianist Sir Roland Hanna, in a program featuring Ellington's "Sepia Panorama," "Paris Blues" Suite and works composed with his longtime partner, Billy Strayhorn.
Tickets are $18; $14 for students.
Information: (212) 854-7799.


Strong-Arming the Homeless
A report yesterday in The Times by Bruce Lambert offers disturbing evidence that an outreach program run by the Grand Central Partnership has evolved into a vigilante operation against the homeless.
The account cries out for an immediate investigation by the organization's board of directors -- and by New York City's Department of Homeless Services, which contracts with the Partnership to provide social services.
The Partnership, a business improvement district that taxes and provides services to properties in midtown Manhattan, began the program several years ago to disperse the homeless congregating in Grand Central Terminal.
Under the leadership of the Partnership's president, Daniel Biderman, the program has expanded to provide outreach workers for banks and other property owners throughout Manhattan.


Sweeping Powers for State In School-Takeover Rules
The state-appointed school superintendent in Jersey City wields something granted no one else in the entire municipal government: veto power.
Superintendent Frank M. Sinatra can use it to jettison any plan under discussion by the school board if he thinks it doesn't help meet the state prescription for improving the schools.
It is this absolute control over everything from hundreds of millions of dollars in the budget to who gets hired as a janitor that has engendered widespread hostility to state takeover in Jersey City and Paterson, a process now looming in Newark.


Up in Central Park
Even on a rainy April morning, even though the tulips' bloom seems tentative and most of the trees remain naked, Central Park's Conservatory Garden is lush.
It is lush because the mind's eye supplies the missing.
In another month the walkways will be carpeted with crabapple blossoms and the just-marrieds posing for photographs in their once-in-a-lifetime glad rags.
Wistaria will be spilling over the pergola and roses crowding their supports and wherever one looks there will be a New Yorker, or a crowd of them, out for a stroll.
Harlem Meer, several hundred yards north of the Garden, is quiet today, the water smooth as silk.
A few maintenance men are out with rakes and shovels and a class of schoolchildren is going into the old boathouse, now the Charles A. Dana Discovery Center, for a science class.
Give it a month and warmer weather, though, and the pond will be puckered with the lines from bamboo fishing poles and the air thick with the sound of kids playing.


2 Pianos, 4 Hands And a Couple of Elbows
"Not to worry," said Joseph Kalichstein as he stood in front of a lone piano at the 92d Street Y on Wednesday evening and changed his piano-duo program with Yefim Bronfman.
"We are not going to play the Brahms on one piano."
But far more worrisome than Brahms's "Haydn Variations," which was replaced in the first half of the program by Schubert's F-minor Fantasy for piano, four hands, was Stravinsky's "Rite of Spring" in the second half.
Would these players do what Leonard Bernstein and Michael Tilson Thomas did in 1981 at Alice Tully Hall, elbowing each other aside as necessary to snatch distant, obstructed handfuls of keys?
The results then were more amusing than compelling.


Beliefs; Timely stories that sustain Jews and Christians but do not join them.
In the beginning was the story.
That is the premise of what is known as narrative theology.
It is also an apt motto for these days when Jews and Christians are retelling and re-enacting what Rabbi Michael Goldberg calls their "master stories."
By "master story," Rabbi Goldberg means a core foundational story that gives adherents of a religious faith their basic model for understanding the world, their elementary convictions about reality, all the deep-seated assumptions and expectations that guide their actions.


Inexperienced Bus Drivers Risk Student Safety;
To the Editor:
The New York City administration's effort to bring competition to school bus contracts is laudable.
As Comptroller, I pointed out that the absence of competitive bidding since 1979 was unjustifiable and that about $100 million a year could be saved by requiring competitive bidding.


Medicine on a Good Friday 6 Score and 10 Years Ago
NEVER before had so many people attended a dinner of the Lincoln Group as turned out on Wednesday night at the Seventh Regiment Armory on Park Avenue.
Usually no more than 25 to 35 Lincoln enthusiasts come, but this time there were more than 100 on hand to witness a debate between two eminent doctors over whether medical malpractice contributed to Lincoln's death after he was shot 130 years ago on what was then also Good Friday.
The issue had been touched off by an article in the February issue of American Heritage magazine, in which Dr.
Richard A. R. Fraser, a neurosurgeon at New York Hospital, contended that the 16th President need not have died from the wound inflicted by John Wilkes Booth, even by medical standards of the time.


Inexperienced Bus Drivers Risk Student Safety;
To the Editor:
The New York City administration's effort to bring competition to school bus contracts is laudable.
As Comptroller, I pointed out that the absence of competitive bidding since 1979 was unjustifiable and that about $100 million a year could be saved by requiring competitive bidding.


Julie Wilson: Chic Yet Fierce
There isn't a cabaret performer alive who couldn't learn something from Julie Wilson about the relationship between style and self-expression.
The 71-year-old performer, who is playing her first extended nightclub engagement in several years at the Oak Room of the Algonquin Hotel, presents an image of svelte, sultry elegance that is a stylized exaggeration of classic chic.
From behind her almost clownlike mask, the rail-thin singer dramatizes songs with a wracking honesty that turns each one into a primal emotional blueprint.
After more than a decade of building individual shows around the song books of this or that Broadway composer, Ms.
Wilson has changed musical directors and concepts.
Mark Hummel has replaced William Roy as her accompanist.
And her format has become more varied, her repertory more playful, incorporating racy special material from her early years as a supper-club performer.


Embargo Against Belgrade Has a Major Leak
In spite of appeals from the United States, a senior official in the Italian Foreign Ministry says Rome can do little to stop Italian oil companies from selling fuel to Albania, though most of the fuel is apparently being smuggled to Serbia in violation of a United Nations embargo.
The official said it was up to Albania to control the diversion.


CHRONICLE
DONNA E. SHALALA, the Secretary of Health and Human Services and a former president of Hunter College, will pay tribute to SAMUEL SILBERMAN, the winner of the school's Athena award, at a dinner Monday night at Tavern on the Green.
Mr.
Silberman, who is known as Buddy, financed the building on East 79th Street that houses the Hunter College School of Social Work.
After the dinner, he will give a champagne-and-dessert birthday party for himself.
It's his 80th.


Yvette Hawkins; Actress Was 54
Yvette Hawkins, a stage, film and television actress, died on Monday at St.
Luke's-Roosevelt Hospital in Manhattan.
She was 54.
The cause was lung cancer, the hospital said.


End of the I.R.S. Pipeline; Tax Returns of 90's Meet I.R.S. Technology of 60's
For taxpayers wondering about the chances of an audit, the Internal Revenue Service centers here and in nine other places around the country are good news.
The I.R.S. relies on a system that is a throwback to an era when most cars lacked air-conditioning, prime time was black-and-white and merchants posted accounts by hand.
To visit the agency's pink-brick processing center in this community across the Ohio River from Cincinnati is to be reminded of how much harder it can be to conduct business without computers.
The I.R.S. has only a rudimentary system for electronic filing and examining of returns, making it far less likely that a cheater will be caught.


It's Early, but Green Is Already Perturbed
Dallas Green didn't bother to wait for the Mets to play a handful of games and perhaps get their bearings.
The spring exhibition season is only two games old, but already the manager does not like what he has seen, and he made that abundantly obvious today.
Shortly after the Mets lost, 8-4, to the Florida Marlins in a sloppily played game at Space Coast Stadium, Green accused his players -- particularly his major league players -- of taking a nonchalant approach to their work in recent days.
According to Green, the re-signing of John Franco and the much-heralded arrival of Brett Butler as a free agent center fielder have resulted in a tendency among the players to overestimate team talent and underestimate the value of hard work.


Clinton Feels He's Vindicated on Vietnam by McNamara Book
President Clinton believes that former Defense Secretary Robert S. McNamara's autobiographical confession that the Vietnam War was a terrible mistake vindicates his own youthful opposition to the war, the White House said today.
In an off-camera discussion with reporters from CNN after an interview on Thursday, Mr.
Clinton also said that his understanding of the war was deepened by information not available to the public at the time -- information he got as a Georgetown University student working as a junior aide to J. William Fulbright, the Democratic Senator from Arkansas who opposed the war.


Lehman's Putting Leads the Way
There may be no bigger frustration in golf, that most frustrating of games, than striking the ball perfectly and putting it poorly.
It is a malady that has made strong men weep and weak men quit.
It can even force touring professionals to look to one another for help, desperately seeking any hint that will change their fortunes on the greens, which is, after all, where fortunes are made.
This is what it did to Tom Lehman last week, and that is part of the reason he was leading the MCI Classic today.


Salvador's Poor Still Poor, and Angry
In the opening days of the Salvadoran civil war, villagers here were among the first to abandon their hovels and fields to join a Marxist-led guerrilla army in what they thought was a search for justice.
Today, more than two years after a peace agreement ended the war, this village and others are seething with feelings of betrayal.


Traffic Alert
TODAY
Alternate-side parking rules are suspended because of Passover.


A Homecoming for 'Good Ol' Bob'
There was no standard campaign speech today for Senator Bob Dole, the majority leader and Presidential candidate.
He did not need one.
Fifty years to the day that Second Lieut.
Bob Dole of the 10th Mountain Division was grievously wounded on an Italian hillside in World War II, he returned to his prairie hometown to win the blessing of old friends and family as he embarks on what he calls his one last mission.


Question in Bombing Trials: Can Two Masterminds Exist?
Ever since Ramzi Ahmed Yousef was arrested in Pakistan two months ago on charges that he engineered the World Trade Center explosion, Federal prosecutors have found themselves in a predicament in their efforts to prosecute Sheik Omar Abdel Rahman and 10 others in a related terrorism case.
On the one hand, the Government is trying to prove that Mr.
Abdel Rahman, a blind Egyptian cleric, was the spiritual leader of a band of terrorists who plotted to blow up not only the World Trade Center but also the United Nations and the Hudson River tunnels.


Higher U.S. Rates Urged
The head of International Monetary Fund, Michel Camdessus, advised the United States today to raise interest rates, in some of the most pointed comments the international lending agency has ever directed at American policy makers.


Rap Artist in a Video Bind
The rapper and television actress Queen Latifah was charged in a municipal misdemeanor complaint after city police and movie trade association agents said they found 240 illegally copied tapes in a video store she sold last April.
The man who bought the shop alerted authorities after he said dealers in pirated videos approached him to do business.
The rapper's lawyer, Paul W. Bergrin, said his client had no knowledge that the 240 pirated tapes were among the store's 4,000-tape stock when she sold the business.


Canada's Borrowing, With Its Fat Fees, Lures Wall Street
This city's compact financial district, overlooking Lake Ontario, bisected by lower Bay Street and occupying less than a square mile of real estate, so resembles its counterpart in lower Manhattan that movie companies looking for a Wall Street location often shoot here.
While film makers are attracted by the striking resemblance and a cheaper Canadian dollar, Wall Street's investment powerhouses in recent months have been lured to Bay Street by the fat underwriting commissions from one of the world's largest borrowing countries.


Familiar Face, in Debut
The word is not quite out on Pamela Frank.
She is one of the finest violinists of her generation, a young artist who has melded a brilliant technique with a strikingly mature interpretive intelligence.
Yet there were many empty seats when she played in Carnegie Hall on Tuesday night, and some of those who came did not have the well-fed look prized by concert presenters.
The problem might be that Ms.
Frank is a little too much the all-round musician.
She plays in New York constantly, in all manner of halls small and large, very often in chamber settings.
So her appearance on Tuesday, her Carnegie recital debut, did not have much mystery or fascination about it.
She also does not indulge in gaucheries or strike a pose.
She walks on stage, smiles ruefully at the straggling latecomers, plays the music, beams at the applause and walks off.


Giving Away the Dump
Who wants this old dump?
The city is willing to give away a 150-acre former landfill in the marina district to a casino or resort developer who comes up with an acceptable proposal.
In 1987, when the city tried to auction the land, no one offered the minimum bid of $16 million.
"It's on the waterfront," Mayor James Whelan said hopefully.
"Part of it is zoned casino." The Las Vegas casino owner Steve Wynn is among those who have expressed interest.


Clintons Earn Less but Donate More
Both are baby-boomer Southerners with Ivy League educations and six-figure incomes.
But Vice President Al Gore disclosed some big differences with President Clinton when they released their 1994 income tax returns today: Mr.
Gore earned quite a bit more last year and was a lot less generous.
Mr.
Clinton and his wife, Hillary, claimed $30,125 in charitable contributions, or 11 percent of their adjusted gross income of $263,900, with most of it, their aides said, given to churches they attend.


Columbia Says It Also Accepted Slayer
The high school honors student whose admission to Harvard University was revoked after Harvard found that she had killed her mother has been accepted by Columbia University, a Columbia official said yesterday.
The acceptance letter, however, went out before Harvard took its action last week, and it is unclear if Columbia will stand by its decision.


U.N. COUNCIL VOTES TO EASE SANCTIONS AGAINST BAGHDAD
The Security Council voted unanimously today to offer Iraq easier terms under which to sell oil to meet its urgent need for medicine, food and other essentials.
If Iraq accepts the plan, it would be the first break in the wall of sanctions that has surrounded the country and constricted its economy since Iraq invaded Kuwait in 1990.


Rwanda Jails: No Space, No Food, No Justice
The prisoners cannot sit or lie down because there is no room.
So they stand, four to a square yard, in the muddy central courtyard.
It takes hours to reach the latrines, or the cooking fires where they eat.
There is no protection against the daily downpours, and many of the prisoners' bare feet are rotting from gangrene.
Every day 5 to 10 die and many more are taken to a local hospital with pneumonia and dysentery.


Offspring of Guns 'n' Roses Arrives
It's probably not easy being a musician with a compulsion to work in a band with a tempestuous lead singer who can take anywhere from four months to four years to get around to working on a new album.
So the guitarist Slash, the Odysseus to the singer Axl Rose's Poseidon in Guns 'n' Roses, decided to put his own band together, Slash's Snakepit.
The band threw an album together in a couple of weeks and hit the road for a five-month tour, which brought it to Irving Plaza on Thursday night for a sold-out show.
For quick work, Slash's Snakepit held together well live.
Backed by a powerful and proficient rhythm section (James LoMenzo on bass and Brian Tichy on drums), none of Slash's serpentine solos seemed indulgent.
Most of them were performed in Slash's typical guitar hero pose, with the instrument vertical and Slash's left hand as low on the neck as possible.
Gilby Clarke, who used to play rhythm guitar in Guns 'n' Roses, was a perfect foil, adding punk-driven blues to Slash's classic rock.
The group tore through most of the songs on its first album on Geffen Records, "It's 5 O'Clock Somewhere" (most notably "Beggars and Hangers-On" and "Neither Can I"), stretched out a couple of songs from Mr.
Clarke's recent solo album, "Pawnshop Guitars" (Virgin) and murdered the Who ("Acid Queen") and Queen ("Tie Your Mother Down").


Learning the Drill, 50 Years Later


Washington Acts to Aid Haitian Minors
To the Editor:
An April 6 letter from the executive director of the National Center for Haitian American Legal Defense and Education claims that the United States is forcing unaccompanied Haitian minors at Guantanamo Bay Naval Station in Cuba to return to Haiti without families to care for them.
This is not true.


Cue Magazine Paved Way for Arts Guides
To the Editor:
Re "Conversations" with Clay Felker (Week in Review, April 9): Even when asked if a magazine about New York life had "been done before," Mr.
Felker omits mention of Cue magazine, founded by my father, Mort Glankoff, in 1932.


Players Take Field, But Umpires Walk The Picket Lines
Just when you thought it was safe to go to the ball park again, the labor-lashed game of baseball still threatens to put replacements on the field.
With the delayed opening of the season 10 days away, the real players are playing for the first time since last August, but the real umpires are picketing instead of calling balls and strikes.
The National and American leagues locked out their 64 umpires Jan. 1 and do not intend to ask them back to work until the two sides negotiate a new collective bargaining agreement.
No one knows when that might be because bargaining is progressing as slowly and fruitlessly as the languorous talks between the owners and the players, who also have no agreement.


JAZZ
Governing the Flow of Time With a Precise Bass Line  Milt Hinton Iridium


Maryland's Smith Turning Pro
JOE SMITH tearfully said yesterday that he was giving up his final two years of college eligibility at Maryland and entering the National Basketball Association draft.
"Basically, my family is not in financial straits," Smith said in a news conference at his alma mater, Maury High School in Norfolk, Va.
"It's not the money. But my mom raised seven kids and it's time for me to give something back."


Cornell Offers Right to Choose Living-Learning Experiences
To the Editor:
In the strongest possible terms, we reject the inaccurate and damaging assertions made by Kenneth B. Clark and Michael Meyers in "Separate Is Never Equal" (Op-Ed, April 1).


In America; School Bus Strike? Go Slow
For those who think New York has been a little quiet lately, hang on.
The school system's spring vacation is looking more and more like the calm before a very ugly storm -- a citywide strike by school bus drivers.
Mayor Rudolph Giuliani, Schools Chancellor Ramon Cortines and the Board of Education are united in their determination to change a system that has guaranteed lifetime jobs for school bus drivers, mechanics and escorts, and thwarted the adoption of real competitive bidding in the awarding of lucrative school bus contracts.


Couple in New Hampshire Convicted of Tax Evasion
Three days before the deadline for filing 1994 income taxes, a Federal jury today convicted a couple of evading Federal income taxes for four years.
Stuart Tulchinsky, 47, and his wife, Cathie Schneider, 41, of Chester, N.H., the owners of what prosecutors called two drug paraphernalia shops, put forth a defense that they "sincerely believe" that the Federal income tax system is voluntary.


Phils' Greene Injures Shoulder
TOMMY GREENE, whom the Philadelphia Phillies were counting on as their No. 2 starter, will miss at least the first week of the season after reinjuring his right shoulder.
The 28-year-old said that he began experiencing pain in the shoulder during an intrasquad game this week but that it got worse following his two-inning stint in yesterday's 7-6 exhibition victory over the Pittsburgh Pirates in Clearwater, Fla.


Spanish Stirred by 'War' Over a Fish They Don't Eat
In the Corral de la Moreria, a tiny nightclub specializing in flamenco, the lights were dim, the drinks half drunk and the walls still reverberating from the pounding of heels and the staccato clatter of castanets.
It was time for some light repartee.
A dancer sauntered across the stage and asked another, "Say, can you tell me how to get to Newfoundland?"


Bridge
The American Bridge Association, which was founded by black players in 1932 to counter discrimination that has since been banned in the bridge world, is still going strong.
Its Spring National Championships begin today at the Riviera Hotel in Las Vegas, Nev., and will continue for a week.
Some association players warmed up for the Nationals at a recent tournament in Los Angeles, where the diagramed deal was played in an open pairs event.
It was supplied by Robert Friend of Irvine, Calif., and it helped Sara Pearson of Los Angeles, one of the organization's highest-ranked players, to win the event.


Simpson Accusers Try to Save Witness
Prosecutors today continued their attempted rehabilitation of Dennis Fung, the police evidence collector, where O. J. Simpson's lawyers left off with him: Mr.
Fung's handling of a vial of Mr.
Simpson's blood.
Prosecutors tried to prove that Mr.
Fung got the vial when he said he did, on June 13, and not on the next day as Mr.
Simpson's lawyers contend.
The distinction is important because defense lawyers have maintained that corrupt police officers spent the intervening time spreading Mr.
Simpson's blood over many of the items on which the case against him is built.


METRO DIGEST
NEW MEDICAL SPECIALTY: UNEMPLOYMENT
A growing number of young doctors are finding themselves un- or underemployed, stranded in their profession's equivalent of flipping burgers or pumping gas.
Managed care has decreased the demand for specialists, particularly in places like New York.
Page 1.
NEW YORK CITY


Transactions
Baseball  American League
BOSTON RED SOX -- Agreed to terms with Derek Lilliquist, pitcher, on a minor-league contract.
Claimed Troy O'Leary, outfielder, off waivers from the Milwaukee Brewers.
Designated Bill Selby, infielder, for assignment.
Agreed to terms with Steve Rodriguez, infielder, and Glenn Murray, outfielder, on one-year contracts.


Markets Closed
Financial and commodity markets in the United States will be closed today in observance of Good Friday.
Many markets overseas will also be closed.


End of the I.R.S. Pipeline; Tax Returns of 90's Meet I.R.S. Technology of 60's
For taxpayers wondering about the chances of an audit, the Internal Revenue Service centers here and in nine other places around the country are good news.
The I.R.S. relies on a system that is a throwback to an era when most cars lacked air-conditioning, prime time was black-and-white and merchants posted accounts by hand.
To visit the agency's pink-brick processing center in this community across the Ohio River from Cincinnati is to be reminded of how much harder it can be to conduct business without computers.
The I.R.S. has only a rudimentary system for electronic filing and examining of returns, making it far less likely that a cheater will be caught.


Young America Finds Cure For Its Ills
The PACT 95 team was back in stride today, recapturing the winning edge that had solidified Young America's top standing going into this final round of races to determine an America's Cup defender.
In its wake were an unsettling two races marked by gear failures, missed tactics and below-par boat speed.
During two days off in the middle of the week, the syndicate altered the boat in time for today's third match of the Citizen Cup defense finals.
With the change appearing to have made at least part of the difference today, Young America defeated Mighty Mary by 1 minute 24 seconds.


INSIDE
Criticism for McNamara
The public reaction to Robert S. McNamara's regrets about the war that the United States waged in Vietnam has been broadly and almost relentlessly negative.
Page 7.
The 1040 of the Top 2
Their 1994 tax returns show that Vice President Al Gore earned a lot more than the President last year and was a lot less generous.
Page 8.
A Soldier's Anniversary
Fifty years after being badly wounded in combat, Senator Bob Dole received his hometown's blessing of his quest for the Presidency.
Page 8.


Burl Ives, the Folk Singer Whose Imposing Acting Won an Oscar, Dies at 85
Burl Ives, whose sweet, strong, mournful way with folk ballads made him an international singing star in the 1940's and whose earthy acting won him an Academy Award in the 1950's, died yesterday at his home in Anacortes, Wash.
He was 85.
The cause was complications of mouth cancer, said Marjorie Schicktanz Ashley, his agent and friend.


Texas Approves Couple's Adoption of 2 Black Boys, Official Says
A Texas couple whose fight to adopt two black children has prompted a lawsuit over the constitutionality of limits on interracial adoptions will be given custody of the youngsters, a state official said today.
"We hope to be able to sign the adoption papers on Monday," said Linda Edwards, spokeswoman for the Texas Department of Protective and Regulatory Services, which oversees foster care and adoption services for the state.


Legitimizing Music Theft
The only way to protect a copyright is to police it vigorously.
The White House showed this by example when it threatened China with trade sanctions for permitting piracy of copyrighted American movies, computer software and recorded music.
The licensing agencies that protect copyrighted music in this country work with lesser tools but similar tenacity.
A bill pending in Congress now threatens to undermine that work, weakening copyright law in the process.
The two largest licensing agencies are the American Society of Composers, Authors and Publishers, known as Ascap, and Broadcast Music Incorporated, or BMI.
Ascap is the larger of the two, with four million songs in its catalogue.
It collects $420 million annually in licensing fees, most of it from television, cable and radio broadcasters.


Julie Wilson: Chic Yet Fierce
There isn't a cabaret performer alive who couldn't learn something from Julie Wilson about the relationship between style and self-expression.
The 71-year-old performer, who is playing her first extended nightclub engagement in several years at the Oak Room of the Algonquin Hotel, presents an image of svelte, sultry elegance that is a stylized exaggeration of classic chic.
From behind her almost clownlike mask, the rail-thin singer dramatizes songs with a wracking honesty that turns each one into a primal emotional blueprint.
After more than a decade of building individual shows around the song books of this or that Broadway composer, Ms.
Wilson has changed musical directors and concepts.
Mark Hummel has replaced William Roy as her accompanist.
And her format has become more varied, her repertory more playful, incorporating racy special material from her early years as a supper-club performer.


Official Secrets, Officials' Privacy
In the wake of the Aldrich Ames case, the Federal Government wants new powers to pry into the private affairs of officials who have access to sensitive secrets.
The executive order awaiting President Clinton's signature appears to establish a reasonable balance between the need to protect secrets and the right to privacy.
The new regulations would make it easier to detect and prosecute spies.
At same time, the rules would establish the important principle that officials cannot be denied a security clearance because they are gay or have had psychiatric care.
Given the institutional hostility toward homosexuals in the military and intelligence services, Mr.
Clinton will have to insist that the new policies be faithfully instituted.


2 Pianos, 4 Hands And a Couple of Elbows
"Not to worry," said Joseph Kalichstein as he stood in front of a lone piano at the 92d Street Y on Wednesday evening and changed his piano-duo program with Yefim Bronfman.
"We are not going to play the Brahms on one piano."
But far more worrisome than Brahms's "Haydn Variations," which was replaced in the first half of the program by Schubert's F-minor Fantasy for piano, four hands, was Stravinsky's "Rite of Spring" in the second half.
Would these players do what Leonard Bernstein and Michael Tilson Thomas did in 1981 at Alice Tully Hall, elbowing each other aside as necessary to snatch distant, obstructed handfuls of keys?
The results then were more amusing than compelling.


Torricelli's Little Leaguers
The children's baseball jerseys used to say "Nick's Hot Dogs," but another sponsor came up with the $250 franchise fee for the Washington Park Little League team when Nick's dropped out.
This year the jerseys say "Torricelli's Capitals." The new sponsor, Representative Robert G. Torricelli, threw out the first ball, accompanied by his frequent companion Bianca Jagger.


Inexperienced Bus Drivers Risk Student Safety; What of Staten Island?
To the Editor:
"Saying No to Bus Drivers," your April 11 editorial on the school bus contracts and the threatened school bus strike, again demonstrates how little you care about the special circumstances of the citizens of New York City's smallest borough.


Up in Central Park
Even on a rainy April morning, even though the tulips' bloom seems tentative and most of the trees remain naked, Central Park's Conservatory Garden is lush.
It is lush because the mind's eye supplies the missing.
In another month the walkways will be carpeted with crabapple blossoms and the just-marrieds posing for photographs in their once-in-a-lifetime glad rags.
Wistaria will be spilling over the pergola and roses crowding their supports and wherever one looks there will be a New Yorker, or a crowd of them, out for a stroll.
Harlem Meer, several hundred yards north of the Garden, is quiet today, the water smooth as silk.
A few maintenance men are out with rakes and shovels and a class of schoolchildren is going into the old boathouse, now the Charles A. Dana Discovery Center, for a science class.
Give it a month and warmer weather, though, and the pond will be puckered with the lines from bamboo fishing poles and the air thick with the sound of kids playing.


In Churches, the Organ Pipes Call (But Few Answer)
When Reginald Greet became a church organist in 1940, he ungrudgingly played for free.
The grandiose organ at St.
Patrick's Church in Richmondtown, Staten Island, beguiled him, he said.
And the exhilaration of playing graceful preludes, hymns and anthems was payment enough.


Studying in Israel: Shaken Youths, Unshaken Resolve
In October, fresh out of Westchester Hebrew High School in Mamaroneck, N.Y., Matthew Binstock left his home in New York to study for a year at Bar-Ilan University just outside Tel Aviv.
A month later, a terrorist's bomb blew up a bus, killing 22 people, at a spot in Tel Aviv where he had been standing only hours earlier.
And last Wednesday, while home for the Passover holiday, he watched the televised report of the funeral of Alisa Flatow, the 20-year-old from Brandeis University who was killed in a bombing in the Gaza Strip.


THEATER
Dancing Feet And a Fashion Parade  The Easter Show Radio City Music Hall


An Ellington Celebration
The 96th anniversary of Duke Ellington's birth is to be celebrated with a big-band concert on April 29 at 8 P.M. at the Miller Theater, Columbia University, Broadway at 116th Street, Morningside Heights.
David Berger is to lead the 16-member ensemble, which includes the saxophonists Frank Wess and Jerome Richardson and the pianist Sir Roland Hanna, in a program featuring Ellington's "Sepia Panorama," "Paris Blues" Suite and works composed with his longtime partner, Billy Strayhorn.
Tickets are $18; $14 for students.
Information: (212) 854-7799.


Politician's Nephew Shot Dead in Feud On Staten Island
The nephew of Ralph J. Lamberti, the former Staten Island Borough President, was fatally shot yesterday in what the police said was the violent conclusion of a longtime feud between the victim and a former classmate.
Michael Lamberti, 24, was shot as many as seven times in the chest and stomach about 1 P.M. on the corner of Mundy and Egbert Avenues in Port Richmond, Staten Island, a few blocks from his house, said Detective Mark Patterson, a Police Department spokesman.


Groveling in Extremis as in a Samurai Past
Devotion doesn't get much sicker than that shown by the title character of "The Fall Guy," a savage comedy by the Japanese playwright Tsuka Kohei.
The adulation of Yasu, a stuntman in Kyoto's film industry, for Ginshiro, a leading man in samurai movies, takes hero worship to servile extremes unknown even in star-crazed America.
When Ginshiro's mistress becomes pregnant, for example, Yasu obligingly marries the woman to save the star from scandal and then invites him along on the honyemoon.
"Miss Konatsu would have a much better time with you than with me," he tells his mentor.


Brotherly Love Proves Disarming For the Yankees' Perez
Melido Perez's first outing of the spring today proved that pitching against five baseball-playing brothers in an informal setting is no substitute for facing big league hitters in a competitive situation.
Especially when the brothers are all pitchers, too.
Perez, pegged as the Yankees' No. 3 starter, pitched in his first real game in more than eight months and looked so-so as the Yankees were beaten by the Los Angeles Dodgers, 6-1, at Holman Stadium.


Bridge
The American Bridge Association, which was founded by black players in 1932 to counter discrimination that has since been banned in the bridge world, is still going strong.
Its Spring National Championships begin today at the Riviera Hotel in Las Vegas, Nev., and will continue for a week.
Some association players warmed up for the Nationals at a recent tournament in Los Angeles, where the diagramed deal was played in an open pairs event.
It was supplied by Robert Friend of Irvine, Calif., and it helped Sara Pearson of Los Angeles, one of the organization's highest-ranked players, to win the event.


General Managers Squabble
Get the feeling that there is more than a little bad blood between Rangers General Manager Neil Smith and his Boston counterpart, Harry Sinden?
After the Rangers defeated the Bruins in Boston on April 1, Sinden criticized Brian Leetch and anybody who has ever compared the Rangers' defenseman to two Boston legends, Bobby Orr and Ray Bourque.
Sinden then said of newly acquired Pat Verbeek: "They picked up a guy there who is perfect for that team. Absolutely perfect: overpaid."


No Headline
"It sure would have been helpful in May of 1967, when I volunteered for Vietnam, if he had said then that the war was unwinnable." -- MAX CLELAND, former V.A. director, who lost both legs in Vietnam, referring to Robert S. McNamara.  [ 7:1. ]


Harper's Broken-Play Bomb Breaks Pacers' Hearts
It was a special victory, captured in dramatic fashion.
Derek Harper hit the game-winning shot, a 3-point jumper from deep in the left corner with 7.5 seconds left off a broken play to lift the Knicks to an 88-84 victory over the Indiana Pacers tonight at Market Square Arena.


Talkin Man and Thunder Gulch On Homestretch to Churchill Downs
Talkin Man was flown from Lexington to New York today to run in Saturday's Wood Memorial, where he is the 4-5 favorite.
Thunder Gulch, who arrived in Louisville from California last Tuesday with his trainer, D. Wayne Lukas, and his stablemates Timber Country and Tabasco Cat, will ship by van Saturday to Lexington, where he is the 8-5 favorite to win the Blue Grass Stakes.
And amid all this traveling, Suave Prospect galloped this morning on the track at Keeneland and waited for the final dress rehearsals for the Kentucky Derby.
They are the Wood at Aqueduct and the Blue Grass at Keeneland, both worth $500,000, both at a mile and an eighth, both major springboards to Churchill Downs, where Saturday's winners and some losers will gather on May 6 for America's most prestigious horse race.


Joseph Villa, Pianist, 46
Joseph Villa, a pianist who specialized in the Romantic repertory and who was regularly heard in chamber music and as a recital accompanist, died on Thursday at St.
Vincent's Hospital in Manhattan.
He was 46 and lived in Manhattan.
The cause was AIDS, said Steven Gray, his companion.


Abortion Foes Plan to Rally In New York
Abortion foes from across the country are planning a rally in New York City next month, seeking to amend or repeal a year-old Federal law that bars protesters from blocking entrances to abortion clinics.
The plan has alarmed abortion rights advocates, who say they are afraid that radical elements among the anti-abortion protesters could resort to violence.


Spotlight on French Horn Players
Many orchestras give their concertmasters and principal players occasional moments in the spotlight, but the New York Philharmonic takes a more aggressively democratic approach.
During Zubin Mehta's tenure as music director, the orchestra established an agreeable tradition of devoting one or two of its springtime subscription series to programs in which both principals and section players are presented as soloists.
The program that Kurt Masur conducted on Wednesday evening and repeated on Friday fulfilled that mission: four of the orchestra's French horn players -- Philip Myers, R. Allen Spanjer, Erik Ralske and Howard Wall -- stepped forward to play Schumann's "Konzertstuck" (Op. 86), and Judith LeClair, the principal bassoonist, gave the world premiere of "The Five Sacred Trees," a concerto written for her by John Williams as part of the Philharmonic's series of 150th anniversary commissions.


Robert W. Crawford, 89, Father Of Philadelphia's Parks System
Robert Wilson Crawford, who helped to build and expand Philadelphia's parks and whose ideas and methods were widely copied in other cities, died on Tuesday, his 89th birthday, at the Manor Care nursing home in Walnut Creek, Calif.
He had moved to Walnut Creek in 1981 after retiring as Philadelphia's Commissioner of Recreation.


Inexperienced Bus Drivers Risk Student Safety; What of Staten Island?
To the Editor:
"Saying No to Bus Drivers," your April 11 editorial on the school bus contracts and the threatened school bus strike, again demonstrates how little you care about the special circumstances of the citizens of New York City's smallest borough.


Conflicting Orders on Mine Cleanup Sow Anger
A small coal mine set in a treeless expanse of grass and sand on the Navajo reservation in northwestern New Mexico has become the subject of a bureaucratic skirmish that could affect the very survival of the Federal agency charged with overseeing strip mines.
The dispute began, all the parties agree, with a simple act of Government inconsistency: Two regional branches of the Interior Department's Office of Surface Mining gave a big coal company conflicting directions for cleaning up its 135-acre mine here.
The case, which has become widely known in the West, has been used by the agency's critics in the House of Representatives to help justify legislation that would cut the agency's work force in half and eliminate its inspection and enforcement program.


Legitimizing Music Theft
The only way to protect a copyright is to police it vigorously.
The White House showed this by example when it threatened China with trade sanctions for permitting piracy of copyrighted American movies, computer software and recorded music.
The licensing agencies that protect copyrighted music in this country work with lesser tools but similar tenacity.
A bill pending in Congress now threatens to undermine that work, weakening copyright law in the process.
The two largest licensing agencies are the American Society of Composers, Authors and Publishers, known as Ascap, and Broadcast Music Incorporated, or BMI.
Ascap is the larger of the two, with four million songs in its catalogue.
It collects $420 million annually in licensing fees, most of it from television, cable and radio broadcasters.


Young Doctors Find Specialist Jobs Hard to Get
Five years ago, Dr.
Jonathan Boniuk would have been guaranteed overnight success.
An eye surgeon trained at top medical schools, he would have walked into a busy practice and earned over $150,000 a year.
But in the last month he has talked to friends, colleagues, friends of friends, recruiters, health maintenance organizations and drug company representatives who make the rounds of doctors' offices, all with the dwindling hope of finding a permanent job.
He has had little success.


House Lights Dim, But Vaughan Shines
At the very end of "We Remember Sarah Vaughan," a tribute on Thursday evening to the great jazz singer who died five years ago at the peak of her powers, the lights dimmed in the Pace University Downtown Theater, and a recording of Vaughan singing "Fly Me to the Moon" was played.
The moment was a thrilling reminder that Vaughan possessed the most formidable vocal endowment of any jazz singer.
An operatic intonation and range coincided with an improvisatory brilliance and rhythmic drive that made the most casual Vaughan performance an exercise in virtuosity.
The show's hosts and star performers were Bobby Short and Ruth Brown, two singers who embody narrower musical ideals.
Mr.
Short, whose singing has reached new heights of expressiveness in the last three years, exemplifies a high-styled joie de vivre.
And his performances of such Vaughan-identified songs as "Tenderly" and "Street of Dreams" found a pleasing blend of lighthearted elegance and romantic insight.


Is a Trans-Atlantic Pact Coming Down the Pike?
An idea that seems self-evident economically, but almost impossible politically, has recently caught the attention of politicians, trade experts and business executives in Europe and North America -- a trans-Atlantic free-trade agreement.
Yes, it has been considered before and put aside.
Yes, it would take years to negotiate.
Yes, it might have to exclude agricultural subsidies.


POP
Enter Suave Betrayal And Even a Shark or Two  Morphine Irving Plaza


POP
Enter Suave Betrayal And Even a Shark or Two  Morphine Irving Plaza


Maurice Cohen, 80, Brandeis Benefactor
Maurice Mayer Cohen, a retailer who was a supporter of Brandeis University and other educational and cultural institutions, died on Thursday at his home in Newton, Mass.
He was 80.
Mr.
Cohen, who also had a home in Palm Beach, Fla., suffered a long illness, his family said.


CHRONICLE
CYNDI LAUPER (of "Girls Just Want to Have Fun" fame) is having fun once again.
She will make her second appearance on the NBC situation comedy "Mad About You" on April 27, and her new record, "12 Deadly Cyns," which has sold 2.5 million copies abroad, will be released in this country in June.


Japan's Plan To Help Dollar Doesn't Impress Tokyo Markets
Japan's emergency plan to stem the fall of the dollar against the yen and to stimulate the nation's economy failed to impress the financial markets today, raising fears here that the dollar's fall could resume next week.
Critics said the measures, announced today, were vague and lacked teeth.
"I'm a little bit shocked at seeing today's package," said Masaru Takagi, chief economist of the Fuji Research Institute, associated with the Fuji Bank.
"There are no concrete figures yet, no concrete features at all."


Auditing the Navy's Numbers
A Federal audit urges the Pentagon to examine thoroughly the Navy's calculations for estimating the short-term costs of its plan to reduce the work force at the Lakehurst naval air center by 80 percent.
Representative Chris Smith, whose district is home to the base, hailed the report, which suggests the Navy might be underestimating relocation and other expenses, as a "tremendous victory" for those hoping to block the move.
The Navy says downsizing Lakehurst will cost $97 million and will be recouped with that much in savings within three years.
Representative Smith claims the costs are more like $200 million.


Canada's Borrowing, With Its Fat Fees, Lures Wall Street
This city's compact financial district, overlooking Lake Ontario, bisected by lower Bay Street and occupying less than a square mile of real estate, so resembles its counterpart in lower Manhattan that movie companies looking for a Wall Street location often shoot here.
While film makers are attracted by the striking resemblance and a cheaper Canadian dollar, Wall Street's investment powerhouses in recent months have been lured to Bay Street by the fat underwriting commissions from one of the world's largest borrowing countries.


The Faithful Observe Holy Days Around the World


Daniel Howard Cohen, Journalist, 45
Daniel Howard Cohen, a journalist and former member of the militant leftist group the Weather Underground, died on Wednesday at St.
Luke's-Roosevelt Hospital Center in Manhattan.
He was 45.
The cause was complications from AIDS, said his father, Sidney Cohen.


Out, Out, Darn Dust


World News Briefs; U.S. and North Korea Recess Nuclear Talks
Negotiators for the United States and North Korea have returned to their capitals to prepare for what could be a final round of talks next week on a deal aimed at preventing North Korea from developing nuclear weapons.
The two sides met on Wednesday and Thursday in Berlin.
Although talks had been expected to resume today, a terse announcement said they would recess until Tuesday.


Remembering New Jersey's Veterans


CHRONICLE
ALEXANDER KORSANTIYA, a 29-year-old pianist from the Republic of Georgia, has won the Arthur Rubinstein International Piano Competition in Tel Aviv.
The competition, a round of eliminations, began on March 26 with 38 contestants and culminated with Mr.
Korsantiya's victory on Tuesday.


Small Satellite May Read Atmospheric Temperature
For seven years an $8 billion galaxy of Air Force Navstar satellites has been a reliable and precise navigation aid to airline pilots, sailors, truckers, adventurers, surveyors, geologists and oceanographers, among many other users.
But a new development may allow scientists to use the 24 satellites in this Global Positioning System, or G.P.S., in an unplanned application: measuring the temperature of the atmosphere at altitudes up to 80 miles.
This could allow them to forecast the weather with greater accuracy and to detect subtle symptoms of long-term global warming.


Marguerite Duras Films At the Modern Museum
An exhibition of 15 films by Marguerite Duras, the French novelist, screenwriter, director and occasional actress, began yesterday at the Museum of Modern Art.
Included in the series, which was organized by Joshua Siegel of the film department, are "Hiroshima Mon Amour" (1959); "Nathalie Granger" (1972), starring Jeanne Moreau and Gerard Depardieu; "Moderato Cantabile" (1960), with Miss Moreau and Jean-Paul Belmondo; "India Song" (1974), with Delphine Seyrig, and several television interviews with Miss Duras.


Designing a Tradition, Perhaps to Transcend
It is astounding how unsettled the American art-music tradition is.
Attempts are constantly made to rediscover neglected figures and trace new strands of influence.
In recent years, there have been waves of advocacy: for the unappreciated American symphonists of the 1940's, the pioneering composers of the 1890's, the eccentric figures who pepper the 20th-century avant-garde.
But there is hardly a compositional canon to speak of, let alone a coherent interpretation of the past.
Certain figures keep reappearing, however, and on Tuesday night at St.
Paul's Chapel at Columbia University, a superb recital by the Perspectives Ensemble again turned the spotlight on Charles Tomlinson Griffes.
He died of pneumonia in 1920, a 35-year-old music teacher in an upstate New York boarding school with just 13 years of composition behind him.
But he is often cited as one of the most original American composers. ("First class all through," Virgil Thomson wrote.) This recital, with its broad sampling of works, left the impression that Griffes (pronounced GRIFF-iss) shared an approach that has helped define American music: first he had to custom design his own musical tradition; then he tried to transcend it.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 2-5  OFFER TO EASE IRAQ SANCTIONS
The Security Council voted unanimously to offer Iraq easier terms under which to sell oil to meet its urgent need for medicine, food and other essentials. 1  RWANDA'S PRISON SQUALOR
A filthy, overflowing prison underscores the crisis facing Rwanda; a year after thousands died in massacres, the judicial system is still non-functioning. 1  BOSNIA ARMS SHIPMENTS IGNORED
The United States has chosen to ignore weapons shipments from Iran to the Bosnian Government that in the last year have added considerably to its firepower. 3  UNPLUGGABLE LEAK IN SANCTIONS
A senior official in the Italian Foreign Ministry said that Rome can do little to stop Italian oil companies from selling fuel to Albania, even if much of it is smuggled to Serbia. 3  PRECAUTIONS IN TOKYO
After a cult leader's prophecy that something horrible would happen in Tokyo on April 15, the police and residents took precautions against a possible terrorist attack. 5  DISAPPOINTMENT IN EL SALVADOR
More than two years after a peace agreement ended the civil war in El Salvador, a poverty-stricken village, like others, is seething with feelings of betrayal. 5  Holy Week in Spain: Seven days, seven nights of spectacle. 4  Fergana Journal: Life on a tightrope for God and money. 4  National 6-9, 25  LITTLE SYMPATHY FOR McNAMARA
The public reaction to Robert S. McNamara's regrets about the war that the United States waged in Vietnam has been almost relentlessly negative.  7  The young Bill Clinton is vindicated, the White House said. 7  CLINTON, GORE AND THEIR 1040'S
Their 1994 tax returns show that Vice President Al Gore earned a lot more than the President last year and was a lot less generous.  8  A SOLDIER'S ANNIVERSARY
Fifty years to the day after being badly wounded in combat, Senator Bob Dole of Kansas returned to his hometown to receive the blessing of family and old friends in his quest for the Presidency.  8  The New Yorker who rescued Lieut.
Bob Dole.8  SIMPSON PROSECUTORS PRESS ON
Prosecutors in the Simpson trial continued their effort to rehabilitate a crucial witness, the police evidence collector Dennis Fung.  6  THE BIG EFFECTS OF A LITTLE MIX-UP
A small coal mine on a Navajo reservation has become the subject of a bureaucratic skirmish that could cripple the agency charged with overseeing strip mines.  6  TEXANS WIN ADOPTION FIGHT
A Texas couple whose battle to adopt two black children prompted a lawsuit over limits on interracial adoption will be given custody of the boys after all.  8  MORE WOES FOR MAYOR BARRY
Washington's Mayor has become embroiled in a Federal investigation of possible money laundering and in a fierce battle over pay cuts for municipal workers.  9  An earthquake in Texas caused more surprise than damage.  6  Beliefs: The bedrock stories of two faiths.25  Metro Digest 21  TIGHTENING RULES ON SHELTERS
The Pataki administration has proposed new regulations that would require local governments to evict the homeless from shelters if they do not follow a variety of rules, including participating in treatment and training programs. 1  TWO THEORIES ON TRADE CENTER
Prosecutors are trying to prove that Sheik Omar Abdel Rahman masterminded a plot to blow up the World Trade Center.
They will also soon try to prove that Ramzi Ahmed Yousef masterminded the plot.
Can both theories be right?  1  DEMAND DECLINES FOR SPECIALISTS
With the popularity of managed care, many young doctors are finding themselves unemployed, particularly in places like New York, where specialists are already in abundant supply.  1  Business Digest 31  Sports 26-30  WHO WILL SAY 'PLAY BALL'?
Official secrets, officials' privacy.
Up in Central Park.
Legitimizing music theft.
Letters  Russell Baker: Better not tried.
Bob Herbert: School bus strike?
Go slow.
Mitchell L. Moss: Empty promises for Harlem.
Pamela S. Falk: Trapped in Cuba.
Chronicle 20  Bridge 16  Crossword 14


Brooklyn Officer Accused of Stealing Gun
A Brooklyn police officer has been arrested and suspended on charges of stealing a shotgun from an upstate New York sporting goods store in 1991, a spokesman for the transit police bureau said yesterday.
Police Officer Daniel Menezes, who has been on the transit force for nine years, surrendered on Thursday to the New York State police.
He was charged with grand larceny in the fourth degree and released without bail.


Charges Unfairly Blemish Colombian Leaders
To the Editor:
Your March 3 editorial "Whose Drug Problem?" was one of the few sensible, impartial opinions on the reality of the war on drugs.
It concluded that Colombia and other countries can do more to stop the flow of drugs, but "Americans fool themselves if they continue to blame their drug problem on foreign devils and fail to take steps to dry up the demand."


U.S. Looks Away as Iran Arms Bosnia
The Clinton Administration has chosen to ignore weapons shipments from Iran to the Muslim-led Bosnian Government that in the last year have added considerably to Bosnia's military firepower, American officials said today.
They said the United States has ample evidence of the Iranian deliveries, which are in violation of the United Nations embargo that bans arms shipments to all combatants in the Bosnian civil war.
But they said the Administration had not tried in any way to cut off the flow.
The Administration said last fall that it would no longer take part in efforts to enforce the embargo on shipments to the Bosnians.


Paris Court Rejects Appeal By the Chairman of Alcatel
A court today rejected an appeal by Pierre Suard, the chairman and chief executive of Alcatel Alsthom, of a temporary injunction that prevents him from working at the company.
With the appeal having failed, French press reports suggested that Mr.
Suard, who has been accused of misusing funds of the giant transportation, telecommunications and energy company, could be asked to stand down when Alcatel's board of directors meets next Tuesday.


Inexperienced Bus Drivers Risk Student Safety
To the Editor:
The Times has missed the bus.
We represent the bus drivers and attendants who drive New York City's children to school safely every day and whose desire for job security "Saying No to School Bus Drivers" (editorial, April 11) challenged as extortionate.


Corrections
A listing of Easter events in Weekend yesterday and a report in the Guide column in the Westchester Weekly last Sunday gave incorrect dates and imprecise times for the New York Botanical Garden egg hunt.
The celebration is today on the Conservatory Lawn of the Garden, Southern Boulevard and 200th Street, the Bronx.
Events last from 1 to 4 P.M.; the egg hunt begins about 2.


Observer; Better Not Tried
The legal extravaganza now playing in Los Angeles exposes American law as comically and perhaps dangerously archaic.
The need for reform is obvious.
For instance:
1.
The modern age requires a new verdict.
At present only two verdicts are possible for a defendant charged with crime: "guilty" or "not guilty." We now need a third verdict: "not tried."


Corrections
A brief report in the Company News column of Business Day on Tuesday about the proposed purchase of an asset of Western Atlas Inc. by Input/Output Inc. described Western Atlas incorrectly.
It is an independent, publicly traded company; it is not a subsidiary of Litton Industries and Dresser Industries.
Western Atlas was spun off by Litton in March 1994.


U.N. Sex Harassment
To the Editor:
An April 10 news article reports on abuses suffered by United Nations women staff members at the hands of their colleagues and government representatives.
You fail to ask, How can this be stopped?


Coleman Is Unlikely To Play Last 5 Games
The longest season of Derrick Coleman's career unofficially ended today.
The Nets forward, who has missed the last six games with a sprained left (shooting) wrist, said after the team's practice at Fairleigh Dickinson University that he saw no reason to come back for the final five games of a lottery-bound season.


Observer; Better Not Tried
The legal extravaganza now playing in Los Angeles exposes American law as comically and perhaps dangerously archaic.
The need for reform is obvious.
For instance:
1.
The modern age requires a new verdict.
At present only two verdicts are possible for a defendant charged with crime: "guilty" or "not guilty." We now need a third verdict: "not tried."


Strong-Arming the Homeless
A report yesterday in The Times by Bruce Lambert offers disturbing evidence that an outreach program run by the Grand Central Partnership has evolved into a vigilante operation against the homeless.
The account cries out for an immediate investigation by the organization's board of directors -- and by New York City's Department of Homeless Services, which contracts with the Partnership to provide social services.
The Partnership, a business improvement district that taxes and provides services to properties in midtown Manhattan, began the program several years ago to disperse the homeless congregating in Grand Central Terminal.
Under the leadership of the Partnership's president, Daniel Biderman, the program has expanded to provide outreach workers for banks and other property owners throughout Manhattan.


Robert W. Crawford, 89, Father Of Philadelphia's Parks System
Robert Wilson Crawford, who helped to build and expand Philadelphia's parks and whose ideas and methods were widely copied in other cities, died on Tuesday, his 89th birthday, at the Manor Care nursing home in Walnut Creek, Calif.
He had moved to Walnut Creek in 1981 after retiring as Philadelphia's Commissioner of Recreation.


CHRONICLE
ALEXANDER KORSANTIYA, a 29-year-old pianist from the Republic of Georgia, has won the Arthur Rubinstein International Piano Competition in Tel Aviv.
The competition, a round of eliminations, began on March 26 with 38 contestants and culminated with Mr.
Korsantiya's victory on Tuesday.


Japan's Plan To Help Dollar Doesn't Impress Tokyo Markets
Japan's emergency plan to stem the fall of the dollar against the yen and to stimulate the nation's economy failed to impress the financial markets today, raising fears here that the dollar's fall could resume next week.
Critics said the measures, announced today, were vague and lacked teeth.
"I'm a little bit shocked at seeing today's package," said Masaru Takagi, chief economist of the Fuji Research Institute, associated with the Fuji Bank.
"There are no concrete figures yet, no concrete features at all."


Is a Trans-Atlantic Pact Coming Down the Pike?
An idea that seems self-evident economically, but almost impossible politically, has recently caught the attention of politicians, trade experts and business executives in Europe and North America -- a trans-Atlantic free-trade agreement.
Yes, it has been considered before and put aside.
Yes, it would take years to negotiate.
Yes, it might have to exclude agricultural subsidies.


CLASSICAL MUSIC
Contemporary Works With a Lyrical Touch  Ensemble 21 Christ and St. Stephen's Church


Medicine on a Good Friday 6 Score and 10 Years Ago
NEVER before had so many people attended a dinner of the Lincoln Group as turned out on Wednesday night at the Seventh Regiment Armory on Park Avenue.
Usually no more than 25 to 35 Lincoln enthusiasts come, but this time there were more than 100 on hand to witness a debate between two eminent doctors over whether medical malpractice contributed to Lincoln's death after he was shot 130 years ago on what was then also Good Friday.
The issue had been touched off by an article in the February issue of American Heritage magazine, in which Dr.
Richard A. R. Fraser, a neurosurgeon at New York Hospital, contended that the 16th President need not have died from the wound inflicted by John Wilkes Booth, even by medical standards of the time.


Official Secrets, Officials' Privacy
In the wake of the Aldrich Ames case, the Federal Government wants new powers to pry into the private affairs of officials who have access to sensitive secrets.
The executive order awaiting President Clinton's signature appears to establish a reasonable balance between the need to protect secrets and the right to privacy.
The new regulations would make it easier to detect and prosecute spies.
At same time, the rules would establish the important principle that officials cannot be denied a security clearance because they are gay or have had psychiatric care.
Given the institutional hostility toward homosexuals in the military and intelligence services, Mr.
Clinton will have to insist that the new policies be faithfully instituted.


Walter E. Miller, 81, Chemistry Professor
Walter E. Miller, professor emeritus of chemistry at City College and a consultant on chemical warfare, died on Monday at the Fallston General Hospital in Bel Air, Md.
He was 81 and had lived in Haworth, N.J., before he retired to Bel Air in 1983.
The cause was complications from diabetes, a son, Michael Miller, said.


House Lights Dim, But Vaughan Shines
At the very end of "We Remember Sarah Vaughan," a tribute on Thursday evening to the great jazz singer who died five years ago at the peak of her powers, the lights dimmed in the Pace University Downtown Theater, and a recording of Vaughan singing "Fly Me to the Moon" was played.
The moment was a thrilling reminder that Vaughan possessed the most formidable vocal endowment of any jazz singer.
An operatic intonation and range coincided with an improvisatory brilliance and rhythmic drive that made the most casual Vaughan performance an exercise in virtuosity.
The show's hosts and star performers were Bobby Short and Ruth Brown, two singers who embody narrower musical ideals.
Mr.
Short, whose singing has reached new heights of expressiveness in the last three years, exemplifies a high-styled joie de vivre.
And his performances of such Vaughan-identified songs as "Tenderly" and "Street of Dreams" found a pleasing blend of lighthearted elegance and romantic insight.


Spotlight on French Horn Players
Many orchestras give their concertmasters and principal players occasional moments in the spotlight, but the New York Philharmonic takes a more aggressively democratic approach.
During Zubin Mehta's tenure as music director, the orchestra established an agreeable tradition of devoting one or two of its springtime subscription series to programs in which both principals and section players are presented as soloists.
The program that Kurt Masur conducted on Wednesday evening and repeated on Friday fulfilled that mission: four of the orchestra's French horn players -- Philip Myers, R. Allen Spanjer, Erik Ralske and Howard Wall -- stepped forward to play Schumann's "Konzertstuck" (Op. 86), and Judith LeClair, the principal bassoonist, gave the world premiere of "The Five Sacred Trees," a concerto written for her by John Williams as part of the Philharmonic's series of 150th anniversary commissions.


Henry Mautner, 70, Expert on Selenium
Henry G. Mautner, a biochemist who specialized in selenium chemistry, died last Friday at Deaconess Hospital in Boston.
He was 70 and lived in Newton, Mass.
The cause was complications from leukemia and kidney failure, said Susan Erickson, a family friend.


CHRONICLE
CYNDI LAUPER (of "Girls Just Want to Have Fun" fame) is having fun once again.
She will make her second appearance on the NBC situation comedy "Mad About You" on April 27, and her new record, "12 Deadly Cyns," which has sold 2.5 million copies abroad, will be released in this country in June.


COMPANY BRIEFS
AMERICA ONLINE INC., Vienna, Va., an on-line computer service, plans to open a customer service center in Jacksonville, Fla., that will hire 1,000 people in the next two years.


Off for the Weekend


Cult's Prophecy of Disaster Draws Precautions in Tokyo
The police and residents took precautions today against a possible terrorist attack because of a prophecy by a religious cult's leader that something horrible would happen in Tokyo on April 15.
At least two shopping centers in the capital said they would be closed, and many railway lines shut the coin lockers in their stations.
More than 10,000 police officers were patrolling railway stations, roads and other places in Tokyo.


N.B.A. Union Leader Quits Amid Discord
Charles Grantham, the executive director of the National Basketball Association players union since 1988, announced yesterday that he was resigning, a sudden departure that heightened the uncertainty surrounding the league's unsettled labor situation.
Citing "irreconcilable differences" over matters of governing the players organization, Grantham and the union's president, Buck Williams, released a terse, joint statement announcing the resignation.


CHRONICLE
DONNA E. SHALALA, the Secretary of Health and Human Services and a former president of Hunter College, will pay tribute to SAMUEL SILBERMAN, the winner of the school's Athena award, at a dinner Monday night at Tavern on the Green.
Mr.
Silberman, who is known as Buddy, financed the building on East 79th Street that houses the Hunter College School of Social Work.
After the dinner, he will give a champagne-and-dessert birthday party for himself.
It's his 80th.


Sports of The Times; Springtime Heats Up The Knicks
THERE is much about Derek Harper that makes him the personification of his team, that makes him appear to be Every Knick, a proud if unfulfilled warrior whose time seems measured more by an hourglass than by conventional basketball minutes.
Like the Knicks, dug in defensively for four years now, Harper demands respect because he has been consistently good at what he does.
Never great, or flashy, nobody's TV sneaker pitchman.
Harper has just been one tough guy on whom you couldn't turn your back.


Rangers Are Revved Up for a Playoff Push
At yesterday morning's skate, Brian Leetch approached the Rangers' coaching staff and offered to play more minutes.
"I just told those I guys I had been feeling really good, if you need to play me more, I can play more," Leetch said.


JAZZ
Governing the Flow of Time With a Precise Bass Line  Milt Hinton Iridium


Groveling in Extremis as in a Samurai Past
Devotion doesn't get much sicker than that shown by the title character of "The Fall Guy," a savage comedy by the Japanese playwright Tsuka Kohei.
The adulation of Yasu, a stuntman in Kyoto's film industry, for Ginshiro, a leading man in samurai movies, takes hero worship to servile extremes unknown even in star-crazed America.
When Ginshiro's mistress becomes pregnant, for example, Yasu obligingly marries the woman to save the star from scandal and then invites him along on the honyemoon.
"Miss Konatsu would have a much better time with you than with me," he tells his mentor.


Islanders' Quick Start Is Snuffed by Terreri
The Devils overcame the shock of allowing three goals on the first five shots by the Islanders tonight and rallied for a 6-3 triumph.
The Islanders are not expected to overcome the shock of blowing a 3-0 lead and, in all probability, their chance of making the playoffs.
With nine games left, the Islanders are 9 points from the last playoff spot in the Eastern Conference, which is a picture far less bright than the one they faced after two goals by Steve Thomas and a goal by Ray Ferraro gave them a swift three-goal cushion tonight.
Not only that, but the onslaught knocked Devils goaltender Martin Brodeur out of the game with six minutes left in the opening period at Byrne Meadowlands Arena.


U.N. Sex Harassment
To the Editor:
An April 10 news article reports on abuses suffered by United Nations women staff members at the hands of their colleagues and government representatives.
You fail to ask, How can this be stopped?


Results Plus
N.B.A.
Rodman and Spurs Roll  David Robinson scored 32 points and had 16 rebounds and Dennis Rodman returned from his shoulder injury to grab 15 rebounds in 22 minutes in the San Antonio Spurs' 98-88 victory against the visiting Sacramento Kings.
The Spurs held the Kings scoreless for 5 1/2 minutes as San Antonio took a 93-82 lead as Robinson and Rodman dunked to send wild cheers through the Alamodome.
The victory improved the Spurs' record to 57-20, a franchise best. (AP)


Giants Sign Veteran Safety
Maurice Douglass is not the ideal safety the Giants need but he is still a good pickup.
The Giants agreed to terms yesterday with the 31-year-old Douglass on a two-year deal worth between $1.4 million and $1.6 million.
A fiery player who is known for his tough, consistent play, Douglass led the Chicago Bears in special-teams tackles the last three seasons.
He has played every position in the secondary.


Chicken Pox to Keep Maddux On Sideline for Braves' Opener
GREG MADDUX will miss at least a week of spring training and his starting assignment in the Atlanta Braves' season opener April 26 because he has chicken pox.
Maddux noticed red spots over much of his upper body when he awoke yesterday, his 29th birthday, and the illness was diagnosed by WILLIAM DONOVAN, a Braves physician.
A three-time Cy Young award winner, Maddux said he probably caught the illness from his 16-month-old daughter, AMANDA PAIGE.


Corrections
An article on Thursday about charges of reckless homicide filed against a medical laboratory, the Chem-Bio Corporation of Oak Creek, Wis., misstated the surname of a Wisconsin lawyer involved in the case.
He is Patrick Dunphy, not Dunsee.


Paris Court Rejects Appeal By the Chairman of Alcatel
A court today rejected an appeal by Pierre Suard, the chairman and chief executive of Alcatel Alsthom, of a temporary injunction that prevents him from working at the company.
With the appeal having failed, French press reports suggested that Mr.
Suard, who has been accused of misusing funds of the giant transportation, telecommunications and energy company, could be asked to stand down when Alcatel's board of directors meets next Tuesday.


Inexperienced Bus Drivers Risk Student Safety
To the Editor:
The Times has missed the bus.
We represent the bus drivers and attendants who drive New York City's children to school safely every day and whose desire for job security "Saying No to School Bus Drivers" (editorial, April 11) challenged as extortionate.


Corrections
An article in The Home Section on Thursday about Dr.
Gerre Hancock, the organist and choirmaster at St.
Thomas Episcopal Church, on Fifth Avenue at 53d Street in Manhattan, misstated the time of the third service on Easter Sunday.
Services will be held at 8 and 11 A.M. and at 3 P.M.


Charges Unfairly Blemish Colombian Leaders
To the Editor:
Your March 3 editorial "Whose Drug Problem?" was one of the few sensible, impartial opinions on the reality of the war on drugs.
It concluded that Colombia and other countries can do more to stop the flow of drugs, but "Americans fool themselves if they continue to blame their drug problem on foreign devils and fail to take steps to dry up the demand."


Fergana Journal; Life on Tightrope for God and Money
There can't be many people who work harder for the Lord than Ulbas Muhamayan.
Nearly every day for the past 45 years, or since he was 5, Mr.
Muhamayan has risen at dawn, bowed toward Mecca to pray, then pulled on his purple brocade trousers and walked the tightrope.
His routine never varies.
He slips on a turban and a simple pair of shoes.
Then he grabs his 21-foot metal balance bar and makes the 36-foot climb to the top of the poles where the rope is strung.
He hooks himself to a flimsy safety line and the rest is up to Allah.
Mr.
Muhamayan has never worked with a net, preferring to fall to the ground, as he has done nearly a dozen times in the course of his distinguished career.


Designing a Tradition, Perhaps to Transcend
It is astounding how unsettled the American art-music tradition is.
Attempts are constantly made to rediscover neglected figures and trace new strands of influence.
In recent years, there have been waves of advocacy: for the unappreciated American symphonists of the 1940's, the pioneering composers of the 1890's, the eccentric figures who pepper the 20th-century avant-garde.
But there is hardly a compositional canon to speak of, let alone a coherent interpretation of the past.
Certain figures keep reappearing, however, and on Tuesday night at St.
Paul's Chapel at Columbia University, a superb recital by the Perspectives Ensemble again turned the spotlight on Charles Tomlinson Griffes.
He died of pneumonia in 1920, a 35-year-old music teacher in an upstate New York boarding school with just 13 years of composition behind him.
But he is often cited as one of the most original American composers. ("First class all through," Virgil Thomson wrote.) This recital, with its broad sampling of works, left the impression that Griffes (pronounced GRIFF-iss) shared an approach that has helped define American music: first he had to custom design his own musical tradition; then he tried to transcend it.


Another High-Level Executive at Salomon Resigns
Salomon Brothers is continuing to lose high-level executives, with Richard J. Barrett, its investment banking chief, being the latest to resign from the troubled Wall Street firm.
Indeed, as a member of Salomon's 13-member executive committee, Mr.
Barrett was one of the highest-ranking executives of the firm and the most senior person to leave in two years.
Salomon is expected to announce Mr.
Barrett's resignation on Monday and to appoint Eduardo Mestre, currently a managing director, as the new head of investment banking, people at the company said.


Troubles Mount for Mayor of Washington
With President Clinton scheduled to sign legislation on Monday creating a board to control the finances of the District of Columbia, the city's Mayor, Marion S. Barry Jr., has become embroiled in an investigation of possible money laundering and a fierce battle with the City Council over pay cuts for workers.
Appearing today at what he described as a "one issue" news conference to discuss the Council's rejection of contracts Mr.
Barry had negotiated with unions, he warned that "the first reporter who asks a non-labor question, I'm out the door." True to his word, when he was asked about the investigation, he said, "That's it," and left.


Pataki Proposes to Deny Shelter To Homeless Who Break Rules
The Pataki administration wants homeless people to be ejected from shelters if they fail to follow a variety of rules, including participating in drug treatment and job training programs, state officials said today.
The State Social Services Department plans to issue regulations that would for the first time make the right to emergency shelter in New York State contingent on the willingness of recipients to comply with a strict code of conduct.
The new rules would also require individuals and families in homeless shelters to search for permanent housing and to avoid drugs and violence.


BUSINESS DIGEST
U.N. Offers to Ease Sanctions Against Iraq
The Security Council voted unanimously to offer Iraq easier terms under which it could sell oil to meet its need for medicine, food and other essential items.
If Iraq accepts the plan, it would be the first break in the sanctions that have constricted the Iraqi economy since Iraq invaded Kuwait in 1990.


Court-Martial Nears in Case of Helicopters Shot Down
One year ago, Capt.
Jim Wang of the Air Force was in the belly of an Awacs surveillance plane over the no-flight zone in Iraq when two United States Air Force F-15 jets mistakenly shot down two American Army Blackhawk helicopters, killing 28 people.
Today he is the only man facing a court-martial.
Neither the F-15 pilots, who mistook the American aircraft for the enemy and fired on them, nor the officers who failed to inform the pilots that the helicopters would be in the area are being blamed.


Marguerite Duras Films At the Modern Museum
An exhibition of 15 films by Marguerite Duras, the French novelist, screenwriter, director and occasional actress, began yesterday at the Museum of Modern Art.
Included in the series, which was organized by Joshua Siegel of the film department, are "Hiroshima Mon Amour" (1959); "Nathalie Granger" (1972), starring Jeanne Moreau and Gerard Depardieu; "Moderato Cantabile" (1960), with Miss Moreau and Jean-Paul Belmondo; "India Song" (1974), with Delphine Seyrig, and several television interviews with Miss Duras.


New Charges for Defendant in Hired Killer Case
A man charged with trying to hire a hit man to murder his father's business partner was indicted yesterday on new charges that he illegally collected welfare benefits from New York City while living in New Jersey.
Steven Fine, who has been in prison since his arrest Feb. 21 on the attempted-murder charge, pleaded not guilty.
Mr.
Fine, 42, looked sickly and frail as his lawyer, Barry E. Schulman, told a Manhattan court that his client had been suffering from pneumonia and had had internal bleeding while in custody on Rikers Island.


Whitman's Remarks Denounced
Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman's remarks to a British newspaper that young black males play a game called "jewels in the crown," which refers to the number of children they can father out of wedlock, exemplify her administration's "cultural ineptness," State Assemblyman LeRoy J. Jones Jr. said yesterday.
Mr.
Jones was one of several black politicians and clergymen who denounced the Governor during Good Friday services at Messiah Baptist Church.


Convention Hall's New Manager
A management company that operates convention centers, sports arenas and theaters in the United States and Europe was designated to manage the deficit-ridden Atlantic City Convention Center and its $254 million replacement, now under construction.


Simpson Accusers Try to Save Witness
Prosecutors today continued their attempted rehabilitation of Dennis Fung, the police evidence collector, where O. J. Simpson's lawyers left off with him: Mr.
Fung's handling of a vial of Mr.
Simpson's blood.
Prosecutors tried to prove that Mr.
Fung got the vial when he said he did, on June 13, and not on the next day as Mr.
Simpson's lawyers contend.
The distinction is important because defense lawyers have maintained that corrupt police officers spent the intervening time spreading Mr.
Simpson's blood over many of the items on which the case against him is built.


Easter Week in Spain: A Tradition of Rejoicing
Along with perhaps 7,000 others, Jose Luis de Vicente Almodovar stood at 1 A.M. on San Fernando Street, outside the mammoth 18th-century building that now houses Seville University.
In an earlier incarnation it was the tobacco factory where Prosper Merimee imagined Carmen at work, rolling cigars on her dusky thighs.
He surveyed with an expert air the huge golden litter with a life-sized wooden statue of the Virgin Mary, resplendent in a purple robe, her face frozen in grief and glowing in the light from 100 flickering white candles.


Daniel Howard Cohen, Journalist, 45
Daniel Howard Cohen, a journalist and former member of the militant leftist group the Weather Underground, died on Wednesday at St.
Luke's-Roosevelt Hospital Center in Manhattan.
He was 45.
The cause was complications from AIDS, said his father, Sidney Cohen.


UP FRONT: CHATTER - Half Empty? Half Full?; The Place to Be
Did you ever consider why so many people choose to live in New Jersey?
It all happens here.
Even New Yorkers who try to make Jersey the butt of jokes move here as soon as they have the down payment.


Israel's Likud Will Back Any Peace That's Real; Rabin's Paralysis
To the Editor:
It took great courage for Amos Oz ("The Hamas-Likud Connection," Op-Ed, April 11) to speak the truth about the cynicism of the Likud, which by exploiting Israeli grief over the victims of Hamas and Islamic Jihad terrorism seeks to undermine the Israel-P.L.O. agreement.


Topics of the Times; Panning the House
A task force on television coverage of House proceedings reminded members last February of Speaker Newt Gingrich's new openness policy with a jovial warning: "Smile, You Could Be on Camera!" But many legislators were not amused when the official House camera operators began panning the chamber.
The old policy had forced cameras to focus tightly on the person speaking while ignoring any activity, or lack thereof, in the rest of the chamber.
The result for viewers watching on C-Span, the public affairs cable service that provides gavel-to-gavel coverage of House and Senate sessions using the official feed, was a livelier and more realistic view of the floor action.
Yet 31 Republican members wrote to Mr.
Gingrich to protest that lawmakers might be shown in unflattering poses or negotiating deals.


Source of State Power Is Pulled From Ashes
Long considered a dead letter, the 10th Amendment to the Constitution is being revived as a source of state power by Congress, governors and judges who mean to redefine the contours of Federal-state relations.
The amendment is still more a political rallying cry, a source of political inspiration, than a binding legal constraint on Congress or the President.
But lawmakers and judges increasingly cite the amendment as a basis for efforts to limit Federal encroachments on state sovereignty.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League  BALTIMORE ORIOLES -- Agreed to terms with Kevin Bass, outfielder, on a minor-league contract.
BOSTON RED SOX -- Assigned Scott Wade, outfielder, to Pawtucket of the International League.
CALIFORNIA ANGELS -- Agreed to terms with Ricky Jordan, first baseman, on a minor-league contract.
CHICAGO WHITE SOX -- Sent Larry Thomas, pitcher, and Glen DiSarcina, infielder, outright to Birmingham of the Southern League.
Named Gabe Morell visitors clubhouse manager and Joe McNamara, Jr. visitors clubhouse assistant manager.
CLEVELAND INDIANS -- Agreed to terms with David Bell, infielder; Joe Roa, Carlos Crawford, John Carter, Jim Lewis, and Chad Ogea, pitchers, and Brian Giles, outfielder, on one-year contracts.
SEATTLE MARINERS -- Agreed to terms with Alex Diaz outfielder, and Roger Salkeld and Kevin King, pitchers.
TORONTO BLUE JAYS -- Agreed to terms with Paul Gibson, pitcher, on a minor-league contract.
National League  ST.
LOUIS CARDINALS -- Agreed to terms with John Frascatore, Sean Lowe and T.J.
Mathews, pitchers; Tripp Cromer, Darrell Deak, Mike Gulan, Aaron Holbert and Keith Johns, infielders; and Allen Battle and Terry Bradshaw, outfielders.
SAN FRANCISCO GIANTS -- Optioned Marcus Jensen, catcher, to Shreveport of the Texas League.
Basketball  National Basketball Association  CHARLOTTE HORNETS -- Activated Michael Adams, guard, from the injured list.
Waived Tom Tolbert, forward.
NEW JERSEY NETS -- Placed Benoit Benjamin, center, on the injured list.
Activated Chris Morris, guard-forward, from the injured list.
Football  National Football League  NEW YORK GIANTS -- Signed Maurice Douglass, safety, to a two-year contract.
SAN FRANCISCO 49ERS -- Traded a 1995 fifth-round draft choice to the Detroit Lions for Derrick Moore, running back.
Hockey  National Hockey League  PITTSBURGH PENGUINS -- Recalled Rusty Fitzgerald, forward, from Cleveland of the IHL.


The Boulez Academy Of the High Modern Updates Its Syllabus
"I THINK I WAS FAIRLY QUICK to define the world that preceded me," Pierre Boulez said in an interview some years ago.
"Once the past has been got out of the way, one need think only of oneself." Mr.
Boulez, the most formidable living figure in 20th-century music, makes no apologies for the selfish strictness of his world view.
His essential tastes, musical and otherwise, gelled by the age of 20.
He has built an impregnable empire of taste, whose borders have changed little in five decades.
He has mellowed a bit in recent years, but his likes and loathings are implacable.
Mr.
Boulez conducts the London Symphony in three concerts at Carnegie Hall beginning on Saturday, and his programming holds no surprises.
There are canonic modern works by Stravinsky, Berg and Webern; exemplars of the post-Debussy French tradition from Ravel and Messiaen, and three of the conductor's own standard-bearing Serialist compositions.
Recently released or forthcoming CD's complete the Boulezian syllabus: revolutionary turn-of-the-century works by Mahler, Debussy and Schoenberg; the slightly more conservative modernism of Bartok; select contemporaries (Gyorgy Ligeti, Harrison Birtwistle, Iannis Xenakis), and two lone 19th-century voices, Berlioz and Wagner.


CRIME
Colin Dexter, that puzzlemeister without peer, has devised another infernal brainteaser in THE DAUGHTERS OF CAIN (Crown, $21).
His detective, the brilliant, abrasive Inspector Morse, does the tricky stuff in his head.
Readers are advised to get out their pencils, timetables and aspirin.
The crime is the murder of a retired Oxford don, and the stratagem is to make the homicide seem easy to solve.
Before being pastured, the professor had dislodged a dormitory scout who was supplying the students with drugs and prostitutes.
But this "fearsomely cruel man," who also beat his wife and abused his stepdaughter, had not reformed his wicked ways, and the don was about to take stronger measures against him.
Open-and-shut.
A breeze.
A snap.


UP FRONT: CHATTER - Half Empty? Half Full?; Litter: A Statement . . .
It may seem like a minor point, but a barometer that I use to gauge the state of the state is the increasing amount of litter I see when I'm driving around.
If you look at every piece of litter as a statement that "I don't care and let somebody else pick up after me," what other conclusion can I come to?
Just look along the exit ramps of our state to see that there are an awful lot of these negative statements being made.
New Jersey, like the rest of American society, will be an increasingly worse place to live and raise our families.
What does it take to throw trash where it belongs?
It takes some degree of thought, responsibility and concern for our quality of life.
GENE R. SOWER Montclair


When a Stroke Severs Speech and Understanding
To The Editor:
Robert Lipsyte's moving column, "For Better or for Worse: Life as a Caretaker" (March 26) was not only about life as a caretaker but about stroke.
I found disturbing the statement, "Mr. Kidd sits in a lounge chair and seems to listen . . . " There's every chance Mr.
Kidd does not merely seem to listen, he may well listen, period.
In the case of many stroke victims who have difficulty speaking, there is no serious loss of comprehension.
They may not only understand the speech of others but also know what they want to say themselves.
However, they may be unable to express it in words.


Grantham Didn't Want To Become An Issue
There was a time when he could not push the wrong button, decrease his leverage, make the wrong move at a bargaining table.
Charles Grantham knew he would eventually make mistakes.
But he always viewed his position in the context of a long season, like a coach who could follow up a dreadful slump with a magnificent 10-game roll.
Yet, as negotiations between the union and the National Basketball Association dragged on, and as the executive director of the players association failed to persuade the athletes he represented of the wisdom of his plan for a new collective bargaining agreement, Grantham's grip and influence began to loosen.


As Earth Day Turns 25, Life Gets Complicated
WHETHER they pulled tires out of the Bronx River in White Plains, set up recycling booths in Chicago or marched in San Francisco, the millions of Americans who celebrated the first Earth Day in 1970 were bound by two principles: the environment was a mess, and the Government needed to do something about it.
This week, America marks Earth Day's 25th anniversary.
But that cracking sound heard across the country is more than the breaking up of old notions about environmental protection.
It also is a shattering of the dominance that the large national conservation groups have exerted over America's environmental priorities and laws.


Eisenhower, and 415 Women, Back in Port


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
EXHIBIT ITEMS SOUGHT
Historic Hudson Valley has put out a call for objects to be included in an exhibition called "Under the North Star," opening in September next year.
An identification session is to be held next Saturday from 10 A.M. to 2 P.M. at Union Church of Pocantico Hills, during which people with suitable objects are invited to bring them in.
They will be photographed and discussed, then returned to the owner until needed.
The exhibition will focus on the black experience in the North during slavery.
From 1624 to 1860 there were innumerable artworks, utilitarian objects and writings produced by slaves and free blacks living in New York State.


Wide Appeal
To the Editor:
I am not an architect or an artist.
I am a scientist.
A biophysicist and physiologist to be specific.
Herbert Muschamp's insights and articulation of ideas are not only inspiring but also provocative.
CAROL DEUTSCH  Philadelphia


For Adventurers 50 and Older
TRAVELERS over 50 are moving into adventure travel in a major way.
Their choices are less rugged than the 18-year-olds', to be sure, but this group is increasingly stepping out of air-conditioned buses and taking to the trail.
The trend is not without safety concerns.
Elderhostel last year instituted an 18-month moratorium on new adventure offerings while it established safety guidelines for its participating educational organizations.
The moratorium ends in June.


Problems Insuring A Co-op
IS your wallpaper insured?
How about your new parquet floor?
Better yet, how about your downstairs neighbor's wallpaper and parquet floor?
Or that original Picasso hanging over their fireplace?
If you're a single-family homeowner, you probably don't have to worry about such details because your homeowner's insurance typically covers floors and walls, and because your downstairs neighbors are your teen-age children in the finished basement.


Floyd Finds Old Form And a Lead
For Raymond Floyd, today was the day when he regained the feeling that produced 22 PGA Tour and 9 PGA Senior Tour victories.
"I am so pleased internally with what happened," the 52-year-old said after his 67 gave him a two-shot lead after three rounds of the PGA Seniors Championship at PGA National.


Corrections
An article in Styles last Sunday about hats made of braided hair by Daisy Curbeon misstated the address of Curbeon International, her salon in Manhattan.
It is at 45 East 34th Street.
The article also misstated the name of a store in Pasadena, Calif., that sells the hats.
It is Bemo, not Beno.


Dear Sketchbook


The Easy Route? Not for John Prine
JOHN PRINE'S LUMINOUS NEW album, "Lost Dogs and Mixed Blessings," takes you on a journey.
It goes from hope to despair -- Mr.
Prine's favorite trail -- with side trips that give him time to mull over bittersweet love and his own wayward career.
The album opens with "New Train," one of the sunniest tunes this veteran singer-songwriter has ever composed.
Mr.
Prine has long specialized in turning bad love affairs and a dour philosophy of life into rollicking music festooned with witty wordplay.
On "New Train" he uses those skills to compose a song about fresh beginnings and redoubled inspiration.
After nearly a quarter century of frequently superlative recordings that have never found a mass audience, his catchy little song about the ways people can repair the damage of their tough lives carries the weight of a manifesto -- but a jaunty, exhilarating manifesto.


New &amp; Noteworthy Paperbacks
CONQUEST: Montezuma, Cortes, and the Fall of Old Mexico By Hugh Thomas.
Touchstone/Simon &amp; Schuster, $16.
Disease and divergent religious beliefs played as great a role as the forces of war in the 16th-century defeat of the Aztecs by the Spaniards.
Selected as one of the best books of 1994 by the editors of The New York Times Book Review, this study employs previously unavailable original sources.
Our reviewer, David J. Weber, called it "thorough, erudite and nuanced," and capable of guiding the reader "toward a deeper understanding."


Around the State
Music CAPE MAY JAZZ FESTIVAL The Marlon Jordan Quintet, the Lenore Raphael Quintet, Reenie Upchurch, the Radam Schwartz Quartet and the Rosella Clemmons Washington Quartet.
Friday, Saturday and next Sunday.
Tickets: $40, $15 and $12.
The Marquis de Lafayette Hotel and Carney's Tavern.
Beach Drive, Cape May. (609) 884-7277.
CHURCH OF ST.
JOHN THE EVANGELIST The Riverside Symphonia presents pieces spanning two centuries.
Piano Concerto No. 2 by Saint-Saens, Symphony No. 94 by Haydn, and the "Creatures of Prometheus" Overture by Beethoven.
Saturday, 8 P.M.
Tickets: $20 and $15.
Bridge Street, Lambertville. (215) 862-3300.
RESURRECTION PARISH CHURCH "An Evening of Irish Music." Saturday, 8 P.M.
Tickets: $10 and $6. 651 Mill Avenue, Randolph. (201) 503-1569.
STATE THEATER Four young soloists perform with the New Jersey Symphony Orchestra at the Award Concert of the 1995 Young Artists Auditions.
Friday, 8 P.M.
Free; reservations required. 19 Livingston Avenue, New Brunswick. (800) 255-3476.
SYMPHONY HALL The New Jersey Symphony Orchestra presents Andre Watts, pianist.
The program will include Scarlatti's Three Sonatas for keyboard, Mozart's Fantasie in D minor and others.
Next Sunday, 3 P.M.
Tickets: $65, $50, $35, $25. (201) 624-8203. 1030 Broad Street, Newark.
UNITY CONCERTS "The Maestro Series of Unity Concerts." Stephen Hough, pianist, makes his first solo appearance.
Next Sunday, 3:30 P.M.
Tickets: $25, $20, $15.
Montclair High School Community Auditorium, Park and Chestnut Streets, Montclair. (201) 744-6770.
WESTMINSTER CHOIR COLLEGE The Westminster Concert Bell Choir spring concert.
Saturday, 8 P.M.
Tickets: $5; students and the elderly, $3.
The Playhouse at Westminster Choir College of Rider University, at Hamilton Avenue and Walnut Lane, Princeton. (609) 921-2663.
Theater BURGDORFF CULTURAL CENTER A full-staged reading of Haris Orkin's "Baggage" by the Playwrights Theater of New Jersey and Arts.
Maplewood.
Saturday, 8 P.M.
Tickets: $6. (201) 378-2133.
COUNT BASIE THEATER "The Secret Garden," the musical adapted from Frances Hodgson Burnett's children's novel.
Friday, 8 P.M; Saturday, 3 and 8 P.M.; next Sunday, 3 P.M.
Tickets: $18 and $14.
The elderly get a $2 discount. 99 Monmouth Street, Red Bank. (908) 747-0014.
CROSSROADS THEATER COMPANY "Two Hah Hahs and a Homeboy," with Ruby Dee, Ossie Davis and their son, Guy Davis.
Previews run Tuesday through Friday, 8 P.M., with opening night on Saturday, 8 P.M.
Through May 21.
Tickets: $20, $25; opening night, $35. 7 Livingston Avenue, New Brunswick. (908) 249-5560.
GEORGE STREET PLAYHOUSE "Off-Key," a musical by Richard Adler and Bill C. Davis.
Today and Saturday, 2 and 8 P.M.; Tuesday through Friday, 8 P.M.; next Sunday, 2 P.M.
Through April 30.
Tickets: $30. 9 Livingston Avenue, New Brunswick. (908) 246-7717.
McCARTER THEATER The Triangle Club presents "Rhyme &amp; Punishment," a musical revue.
Friday and Saturday, 8 P.M.
Tickets: $17, $19, $20 and $22.
Next Sunday, 7:30 P.M.
Tickets: $15, $17, &amp;18 and $20. 91 University Place, Princeton. (609) 683-8000.
PAPER MILL PLAYHOUSE Lerner and Loewe's "Brigadoon." Through May 28.
Tickets: $29-$44.
Wednesday through Sunday, 8 P.M.; matinees Thursday, 2 P.M., and Saturday and Sunday, 3 P.M.
Brookside Drive, Millburn. (201) 376-4343.
Museums and Galleries BERGEN MUSEUM A series of photography exhibitions created by teen-agers.
Through May 21.
Suggested admission: adults, $2.50; children, $1. 327 East Ridgewood Avenue, Paramus. (201) 265-1248.
COMMON BOUNDARIES Visitors to the gallery can pick up a brush and paint over someone else's painting.
It's all part of "Art Amok," an experiment in creative anarchy.
Through next Sunday.
Monday to Friday, 7 to 10 P.M.; Saturday and Sunday, 11 A.M. to 7 P.M.
Free admission. 68 Mercer Street, Jersey City. (201) 333-0949.
MONMOUTH MUSEUM "Japanese Expression in Paper." The upper gallery will be devoted to five sculptors from the paper-making town of Imadate in the prefecture of Fukui in Japan.
Opens Tuesday.
Admission: $3.
Tuesday through Saturday, 10 A.M. to 4:30 P.M.; Sunday, 1 to 5 P.M.
Through June 11.
Brookdale Community College, 765 Newman Springs Road, Lincroft. (908) 747-2266.
MONTCLAIR ART MUSEUM "Native American Jewelry" surveys the evolution of this Southwestern art.
Through June 25.
Tuesday through Saturday, 11 A.M. to 5 P.M., Thursday and Sunday, 1 P.M. to 5 P.M.
Admission, $4; the elderly and students with ID, $3. 3 South Mountain Avenue. (201) 746-5555.
MORRIS MUSEUM "Star Trek: Federation Science," an interactive exhibition based on the themes of "Star Trek." Daily, 10 A.M. to 5 P.M.
Through April 30.
Admission: $9, the elderly, $8; students, $7; children under 12, $6. 6 Normandy Heights Road, Morristown. (201) 538-8069.
NEWARK MUSEUM "Explore Korea," will allow young vistors and families to experience the traditional lifestyle of a Korean household.
The exhibit will feature an orientation area and a re-creation of a 1930's Korean farmhouse.
Opens Thursday in the Junior Museum.
Through January 1995.
"Project 4: William T. Williams," an African-American artist who made a series of large-scale abstract paintings, recognized as some of the best abstract work of his generation.
Twelve of the series on display.
Through May 14.
"A World of Their Own: 20th-Century American Folk Art," a show focusing on art made in isolation.
Through May 14.
"Gods and Goddesses in Indian Art" features paintings, cloth hangings and tiny brass icons from the 11th to 19th centuries.
Through June.
"The Arts of Nepal" includes sculptures and paintings of the Himalayan kingdom.
Through June.
"African Design: Heirs to the Trans-Saharan Trade" examines the shared designs in North and Sub-Saharan African arts in the last 100 years.
Through June 1996.
Wednesday through Sunday, noon to 5 P.M. 49 Washington Street. (201) 596-6550.
NOYES MUSEUM "Messages From the Planet: Artists Work to Save the Earth," two- and three-dimensional works by artists in the mid-Atlantic region.
Through June 18.
"Looking Due South: Paintings of South Jersey by Glenn Rudderow." Through July 9.
Wednesday through Sunday, 11 A.M. to 4 P.M.
Admission, $3; the elderly, $1.50; students and children under 18, 50 cents.
Free admission on Fridays.
Lily Lake Road, Oceanville. (609) 652-8848.
PATERSON MUSEUM "Transitions" are painting and computer photo constructions by Robert Anderson.
Through April 30.
"Songs of My People," an exhibition featuring 31 African-American photojournalists.
Closes today.
Tuesday through Friday, 10 A.M. to 4 P.M.; Saturday and Sunday, 12:30 to 4:30 P.M. 2 Market Street. (201) 881-3874.
SETON HALL UNIVERSITY An exhibition of Ukrainian folk art, showing samples of pysanky (Ukrainian Easter eggs), ceramics, woodcarvings, clothing and embroidery.
Through May 28.
Monday through Friday, 9 A.M. to 5 P.M.
Walsh Library Gallery.
South Orange. (201) 761-9476.
SHEILA NUSSBAUM GALLERY "Masters' Vision," featuring the paintings of Ruth Gikow.
Opens Friday with a lecture by Jack Levine.
Free.
Through May 20.
Monday through Saturday, 10 A.M. to 5 P.M.; Thursday, until 8 P.M. 341 Millburn Avenue, Millburn. (201) 467-1720.
TRENTON CITY MUSEUM The Trenton Artists Workshop Association presents the mixed-media work of Katharine Bruce.
Through May 28.
Tuesday through Saturday, 11 A.M. to 3 P.M.; Sunday, 2 to 4 P.M.
Parkside Avenue and West State Street, Trenton. (609) 989-3632.
ZIMMERLI ART MUSEUM The Rutgers Collection of Original Illustrations for Children's Literature: "Riders Up! Preparing for a Pony Race," an exhibition of photographs and other materials by Barbara Beirne for her book about a young girl and her pony as they prepare for their first race.
Through July 31.
Wednesday through Sunday, noon to 5 P.M.
Free.
Rutgers, corner of George and Hamilton Streets, New Brunswick. (908) 932-7237.
Spoken Word CLOSTER NATURE CENTER Horst Krekeler, a bonsai master from Germany, will demonstrate how to create a bonsai.
Free.
Next Sunday, 10 A.M.
Piermont and Ruckman Road, Closter. (201) 568-3650.
FAIRLEIGH DICKINSON UNIVERSITY Anna Quindlen, novelist, will discuss "Living Out Loud: Life in the 1990's" in a Literary Society Lecture.
Wednesday, 8 P.M.
Tickets: $5.
Wilson Auditorium, Dickinson Hall, Hackensack. (201) 692-7031.
JOHN HARMS THEATER "Poetry and Prose Series." Molly Peacock, author of three collections of poetry, will be the featured reader.
Wednesday, 8 PM.
Free. 30 North Van Brunt Street.
Englewood. (201) 567-5797.
MONTCLAIR KIMBERLEY ACADEMY Dr.
Farouk El-Baz, a geologist, will present a lecture on his book, "The Gulf War and the Environment." Thursday, 7:30 P.M.
Free. 201 Valley Road, Montclair. (201) 746-9800.
NEW JERSEY STATE MUSEUM "New Jersey in World War I." Gerald E. Shenk, an assistant professor of history at Marymount College, discusses the agencies that most affected New Jersey citizens, including the Selective Service System, the Council of National Defense and the American Protective League.
Saturday at 2 P.M.
"New Jersey in World War II" John T. Cunningham, a historian of the state will discuss the scientific, industrial and social effects of the war on the state.
Next Saturday at 2 P.M.
Free. 205 West State Street, Trenton. (609) 292-6464.
SETON HALL UNIVERSITY Hanna Suchocka, Prime Minister of Poland from 1992 to 1993, will speak on "Eastern Europe: The Present and Future Political and Economic Landscape." Thursday, 6:30 P.M.
Free.
Chancellor's Suite of the Bishop Dougherty Student Center, South Orange. (201) 761-9098.
SOUTH ORANGE-MAPLEWOOD ADULT SCHOOL "Fifty Years Later: Reconstructing the Legacies of World War II," with Dr.
Ralph Buultjens, an economics and political science professor at the New School.
Wednesday, 7:30 P.M.
Columbia High School, 17 Parker Avenue, Maplewood. (201) 378-7620.
Sports FIGURE SKATING Tom Collins Presents "Tour of World Figure Skating Champions." April 29, 1 P.M.
Tickets: $45 and $30.
The Meadowlands. (201) 935-3900.
ICE HOCKEY Devils vs.
Hartford, today; vs.
Philadelphia, Saturday; vs.
Pittsburgh, April 26; vs.
Florida, April 28; vs.
Quebec, April 30.
The Meadowlands. (201) 935-3900.
MINOR LEAGUE BASEBALL Trenton Thunder vs.
Bowie Bay Socks, April 24 at 7:05, and April 25 at 12:35 P.M.; vs.
New Haven Ravens, April 28 at 7:05 P.M. and April 29 and 30 at 1:35 P.M. 1 Thunder Road, Trenton. (609) 394-3300.
PRO BASKETBALL Nets vs.
Atlanta, Wednesday; vs.
Washington, Friday; vs.
Boston, next Sunday.
The Meadowlands. (201) 935-3900.
For Children FORUM THEATER GROUP "Free to Be . . . You and Me," conceived by Marlo Thomas.
Wednesday, Saturday and next Saturday, 1 P.M. $8. 314 Main Street, Metuchen. (908) 548-0582.
NEWARK MUSEUM "Cosmic Questions," for ages 6 to 10, at 1 and 3 P.M., and "Journey Through Time and Space," for ages 9 and older, at 2 and 4 P.M.
Saturday and Sunday through June 25.
Adults, $2; children under 12, $1. 49 Washington Street. (201) 596-6550.
STATE THEATER Big Bird is missing in Sesame Street Live's "Where's the Birdie?" Today, 2 P.M.
Tickets: $10.50, $12 and $15. 19 Livingston Avenue, New Brunswick. (908) 247-7200.
ETC.
BROOKDALE COMMUNITY COLLEGE "Internet Basics." Bill Crosbie, PC specialist at the college, will offer an overview on the Internet, including the jargon, how to get on line and what to expect.
Monday, 7 P.M. $35. 765 Newman Springs Road, Lincroft. (908) 224-2880.
DINNER AND THEATER The $42 ticket price includes a four-course meal and "Deep Space Noir," an interactive and futuristic detective story.
Saturdays, 8 P.M.
Il Giardino Restaurant. 41 Ridgedale Avenue, Cedar Knolls. (201) 301-0562.
EARTH DAY WALKING TOUR "The Signs of Spring." The National Park Service celebrates the 25th Earth Day by closing Morristown National Historical Park to traffic.
Saturday, 1 P.M. (201) 539-2085.
ROTHMAN CENTER "Native American Arts Festival." Traders and artists will display rugs, pottery, stone carvings, blankets and orginal artwork.
Saturday, 10 A.M. to 8 P.M.; next Sunday, 10 A.M. to 7 P.M.
Tickets: $8, and $6 for the elderly.
Fairleigh Dickinson University, Hackensack. (914) 357-3252 ST.
LUKE'S EPISCOPAL CHURCH Six panels of the Names Project AIDS Memorial Quilt are on display.
Through next Sunday.
Weekdays, 8 A.M. to 4 P.M.
Main Street, Gladstone. (908) 234-0002.
NEW JERSEY FILM FESTIVAL "North by Northwest," Friday; "Hoop Dreams," Saturday.
All show times 7 P.M.
Tickets: $4.
Rutgers University in New Brunswick, Milledoler Hall, George Street and Seminary Place. (908) 932-8482.
A Night of Dance The Alvin Ailey Repertory Ensemble will perform at a benefit for the Arts Council of the Essex Area.
The ensemble was founded in 1974 by Mr.
Ailey to showcase the talents of dancers at his school, the American Dance Center.
MONTCLAIR HIGH SCHOOL Park and Chestnut Streets, Montclair.
Saturday, 8 P.M.
Tickets: $50, $30, $25 and $20. (201) 744-1717.
Art of the Print Works by Andy Warhol, Sondra Freckelton (pictured above), Jacob Lawrence and others are on display at the "What is a Print?" exhibit.
Browsers and art collectors have until June 25 to see or purchase the prints, which range from early 19th century to contemporary works.
MONTCLAIR ART MUSEUM 3 South Mountain Avenue.
Admission, $4; the elderly and students with ID, $3. (201) 746-5555.
A Bipartisan Romance James Carville and Mary Matalin, political consultants on opposing sides of the 1992 Presidential campaign, share their experiences in a lecture titled "He Says, She Says: An Inside View of the Presidency."  WILLIAM PATERSON COLLEGE 300 Pompton Road, Wayne.
Friday, 8 P.M.
Tickets: $15, $12 for senior citizens and $10 for students. (201) 595-2371.


NEWS ABOUT THE MAGAZINE
Starting today, the Magazine welcomes two new columnists, James Gleick and Michael Lewis, each to appear monthly.
Fast Forward, Jim Gleick's commentary on technology and the future, appears on page 20.
Next Sunday, in the same space, Michael Lewis will begin The Capitalist, a column on money and American life.
For Jim Gleick, the new column renews a regular relationship with The Times, where he was a highly regarded reporter and editor for 10 years before leaving to write books.
He quickly made a name for himself as an author.
"Chaos: Making a New Science," published in 1987, has been translated into more than 20 languages.
It, and his 1992 book, "Genius: The Life and Science of Richard Feynman," were nominated for the National Book Award.
Nearly two years ago, he started the Pipeline, an Internet access service and software company and was its president until the company's sale in February.


On Starrett City TV, Viewers Are Also the Stars
Somewhere between a proud parent's video camera and a cable public access channel is SCTV Channel 3, a television station for the residents of Starrett City.
With a "let's-put-on-a-show" spunkiness, SCTV (no relation to the Second City comedy troupe's television show) serves up eclectic -- and very provincial -- programming solely for Starrett's 20,000 residents.


The Hamptons Tune Up for a Music Festival of Their Own
THE daffodils are barely in bloom in the Hamptons, but the summer cultural calendar is filling up.
Classical music promises to be more prominent than ever, thanks to Eleanor Sage Leonard and Mark P. Malkovich 3d.
They have joined forces to present nine days of concerts, recitals and parties for the Newport Music Festival of the Hamptons in East Hampton and Southampton, from July 29 to Aug. 6.


U.S. Is Critical Of Tokyo Plan To Rein In Yen
Treasury Secretary Robert E. Rubin told his Japanese counterpart this morning that the emergency financial package Japan issued last week was so vague that it had failed to reverse the fall of the dollar against the yen.
And the Secretary pressed for far more action before the currency gyrations threaten the economic stability of the world's biggest trading region.
The meeting with Japan's Finance Minister, Masayoshi Takemura, came at the opening of a meeting of finance ministers from around the Pacific on the resort island of Bali.
A senior Administration official who took part in the session said that Mr.
Takemura, a politician with no financial background prior to assuming his post last year, conceded that the package announced by Tokyo had "not been received favorably by the market and by market analysts."


The Nanny Wars
OTHER PEOPLE'S CHILDREN By Julia Wrigley. 177 pp. New York: Basic Books. $21.


Western Pacific to Start Air Service April 28
Western Pacific Airlines, a new carrier, is scheduled to begin service on April 28 from Colorado Springs to Los Angeles, San Francisco, Las Vegas, Phoenix, Kansas City, and Oklahoma City.
Introductory fares, for travel through May 7, are $49 one way for all seats.
Once the sale ends, the carrier will offer a range of fares.
For example, a one-way ticket purchased 21 days in advance for off-peak travel from Colorado Springs to Los Angeles will be $69.
The unrestricted fare will be $129 one way.


The Great Ballet Partnerships Are All but Gone
"Frightened?"
"Not with you, mate."
A spot of color burned on his cheeks.
I nuzzled against him.
He held me silently, for some seconds.
Then I broke away.
The overture was beginning."
From "Lynn: An Autobiography," by Lynn Seymour


NEW YORKERS &amp; CO.
A Store for Those Who Like Their Levi's With Past Lives
Some people look for vintage wines; others for vintage jeans.
Those seeking the jeans can find them at SoHo Jeans, which sells used 501 button-front Levi's at its new store on the East Side.


John Paul Reaches Out In Holy Rites
Pope John Paul II ended the period of Christian mourning with an Easter vigil service tonight.
It was the culmination of three days of religious observance in which the Pope, who is unusually aware of the opportunities the liturgy affords for symbolic messages, sought greater involvement for women in the church and for Christians outside the Roman Catholic fold.
On Good Friday evening, the Pope made an impassioned plea for Christian unity after praying through the Way of the Cross, Christ's path to crucifixion, with meditations composed by a Protestant nun.


A New Latin American Cuisine Arrives on L.I.
YOUNG couples and large family groups engaged in animated Spanish and English conversations as they devoured pupusas, tamales, plantains, fried yucca, churrasco, redfish with onions, imported beer, wine and tropical-fruit milkshakes.
All the while two musicians in blue dinner jackets and bow ties played tunes with a Latin American beat.
San Salvador?
Manhattan?
No, Long Island.
Rincon Guanaco, a gleaming, luncheonette-style storefront at 915 Merrick Road, Copiague (842-2544), is the newest, largest and most accessible of a growing number of Central and South American restaurants to open on the Island.


NOBLESSE OBLIGE
David Seidner's photographs in your Style feature "Noblesse Oblige" (March 19) were exquisite.
Move over, John Singer Sargent.
You've met your match!
ANN HERRMANN Ocean City, Md.


BEHIND THE WHEEL/Nissan 200SX SE-R; Flying Comfortably on the Cheap
UNTIL Nissan phased out the model last year, its little Sentra SE-R held undisputed claim to the title of poor man's Porsche: it was a bit Spartan inside and zilch to look at, but oh could it fly.
Now the SE-R is back, this time as the serious driver's version of the 200SX, Nissan's new line of budget-priced sports coupes.
And while it is no longer an ugly duckling, it can still fly.
Nissan, like the other Japanese car companies, is caught between the rising yen and formidable competition from a newly invigorated Detroit.
Unlike most of them, though, Nissan has responded with a slew of new models for the American market that are affordable, yet cut no important corners.


Hospital Is Disciplined By Agency After Errors
In an unusual disciplinary action, a Harvard teaching hospital, the Dana-Farber Cancer Institute in Boston, where two patients received large overdoses of an anti-cancer drug, has been put on probation by the country's leading agency for certifying hospital quality.
The action has no immediate effect on the cancer center's care.
But if the unspecified problems that led to the action are not corrected within six months, the institute could lose accreditation and risk losing payments from the Federal Medicare and Medicaid health insurance programs.


A Little Spice From Southern Climes
NO parrot is in residence at the Green Parrot in Norwalk, but the storefront restaurant certainly is green -- in ceiling, carpet, sponged walls and cafe curtains at the windows.
It is only when you open the menu that you realize the name's tropical significance: many dishes have a Caribbean accent.
A few others, like Maryland crabcakes (with a jalapeno-spiked tartar sauce) and red beans and rice (too bland by half) reflect the American South.


Burial Trappings From China
Funerary treasures spanning 2,500 years and seven dynasties will be displayed in "Imperial Tombs of China," an exhibition at the Memphis Cook Convention Center that is scheduled to open on Tuesday.
The more than 250 artifacts, on view until Sept. 18, were excavated from tombs dating from 605 B.C. to A.D. 1911, and represent the collections of 18 museums scattered over nine Chinese provinces.


IF IT'S TUESDAY, IT MUST BE DAD'S HOUSE
It's unfortunate that "experts" are helping to impose this life of limbo on kids.
Do we need research to tell us we could be creating a whole new generation of problem adults, with no stability or concept of commitment?


Victoria Rostow, Anthony Freedman
Victoria P. Rostow and Anthony S. Freedman, partners in Powell, Goldstein, Frazer &amp; Murphy, a law firm in Washington, were married last Sunday.
Judge Judith Bartnoff of the Superior Court of the District of Columbia officiated at the Carlton Hotel in Washington.
Ms.
Rostow is keeping her name.
She is a graduate of Yale University, from which she also received her law degree.
She received a master's degree in economics from Cambridge University.
She is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Ralph Rostow of Sarasota, Fla.


When Politicians Cut Taxes: The Winners and the Losers
To the Editor:
Senator Bill Bradley recites a laundry list of liberal shibboleths as to why the people of New Jersey should fear the Republican agenda in the 104th Congress ("New Jersey Can't Live With the Gingrich Revolution," Soapbox, April 2).
He suggests that huge numbers will freeze or starve without his beloved, expensive and failed welfare state.
I get the distinct impression that he would vote against the House's recent tax-cut bill.
But that measure, with its tax credit of $500 per child, would clearly benefit middle-class families in New Jersey.
In this borough alone, the credit would bring benefits of $1.2 million.


Sports of The Times; When P.O.W.'s Kept Sane With Golf's Help
THE hazard was a little unique.
If the drive went close to the fence, the golfer would signal to the watchtower, and the German guard with the gun would motion that it was all right to pick up the ball.
There were no caddies in this prison camp in Poland called Stalag Luft III.
"We played for Canadian candy bars," recalls Joseph Boyle, 50 years after his liberation.
"A hole-in-one would be worth half a candy bar."


The Briefcase as Bookshelf: What Commuters Are Reading
For the reading commuter, mornings are for newspapers, but evenings are for escape.
That is the consensus of an unscientific survey last week at the Port Authority Bus Terminal.
"Espionage and suspense are top reading for the bus," said Joseph Guyton, the buyer and manager of B. T. Books, a store on the second level of the terminal.
"People who have an hour or an hour-and-a-half ride want a good, thick book that's going to last them for a week."


More Patrols For Kings Plaza After Movie Melee
Police patrols at the Kings Plaza Shopping Mall are being reinforced in the wake of a melee that broke out when a crowd of more than 100 was turned away from the mall's theaters after the movie "Bad Boys" had sold out.
The brawling, which left two police officers and a security guard injured, shook merchants, workers and shoppers at Kings Plaza.
Fifteen adults and a juvenile were charged in the April 7 disturbance, including four charged with assaulting a police officer.


Sit Down. Breathe Deeply. This Is Really Scary Stuff.
SALLYE GAUTHIER-WASHINGTON was 9 when her father sat her down and told her it was time to take over the household budget, pay all the bills for her family of 12 and balance the checkbook.
That was 48 years ago, and she's still anxious.
In her mind's eye she can see the grim, gray-bound ledger book that symbolized her childhood burden, and recall the stomach-churning anxiety.
Investments?
Even the word, with its connotations of risk and uncertainty, could set her pulse racing.
"I always wanted to be just very safe," she said.
"Holding onto the money in such a way, so tightly and so tensely -- that was the unhealthy part, the dysfunctional part. For a long while I was very angry."


In Sri Lanka, Glimmer of Peace After Years of War
After years of war between the Sri Lankan Government and ethnic Tamil nationalists that have left more than 34,000 people dead and led to the effective secession of a large Tamil-inhabited region around Jaffna, the country's second largest city, this island nation passed a milestone this week on the way to what many hope will be a permanent peace.
For three months, the country has been under a cease-fire, the longest since the war began in 1982.


Habitats/212 West 71st Street; Jimmy Walker Lived Here. . . . Well, Maybe He Did.
PART of the lore of the ornate house at 212 West 71st Street is that Jimmy Walker, New York City's flamboyant Mayor in the Roaring 20's, lived there and did his extravagant entertaining there.
The heavy iron gate -- unusual in this block of mixed uses -- kept the nosy citizens out.
Or Houdini might have lived there.
Or Caruso.
Or both.
Or the downstairs housed a speakeasy called The Iron Gate, another explanation of the heavy iron fence.


Deregulator Has Mutuals in His Sights
REPRESENTATIVE JACK FIELDS, a Texas Republican who is a point man on securities legislation in the House, says he is wary of new regulation and is even interested in dismantling some laws that he says hamper mutual funds and investment advisers.
Regulation stifles financial innovation, Mr.
Fields said in a recent speech to members of the mutual fund industry.
And as the new chairman of the House telecommunications and finance subcommittee, Mr.
Fields will soon oversee an extensive review of the Federal securities laws.


F.Y.I.
Sullivan's Skyscraper Q.  I recently heard that the great American architect Louis Sullivan designed only one building in New York.
True?
A.
Yep.
And Sullivan, who was considered the founder of the Chicago School of architecture and responsible for many of that city's finer buildings, left his only mark on the city in a rather unusual spot: tucked away on the less traveled segment of eastern Bleecker Street.
Sullivan, who helped create skyscraper design (a hallmark of early Chicago architecture), designed the the Bayard-Condict Building, which was built at 65 Bleecker Street at Crosby Street in 1898.
Standing 12 stories tall (yes, that was a skyscraper at the time), the building was considered a radical departure from the more ornate New York style, according to the AIA Guide to New York City.
It sports a white terra-cotta fronting and is crowned by a sextet of angels supporting the cornice. (According to legend, the first owner, Silas Alden Condict, insisted that Sullivan include the angels in his design, despite the architect's protests.) Sullivan never built another building in New York City; the exact reasons are unclear.
According to "Architecture, Ambition and Americans," by Wayne Andrews (Harper &amp; Bros., 1947), rivalry and territorialism were rife between New York and Chicago architects and may have discouraged Sullivan, whom Frank Lloyd Wright referred to as his "lieber Meister." And he may have chafed at complications in constructing the Bayard-Condict that were caused by New York's conservative building codes, says the Blue Guide New York by Carol von Pressentin Wright.
Or, suggests Carl Condit, an architectural historian, the building may simply have been overlooked.
"Who would expect," Mr.
Condit says in the AIA Guide, "an esthetic experience on Bleecker Street?"  Monument to Obstinacy Q.  In front of the Village Cigars shop at the corner of Seventh Avenue and Christopher Street, there's a bewildering triangular mosaic in the sidewalk that reads "Property of the Hess Estate which has never been dedicated for public purpose." What is the story behind this tessellated tease?
A.
The mosaic is the result of a bitter dispute between the former owner of the property, the estate of David Hess, of Philadelphia, and the City of New York.
This is the story, according to "Greenwich Village and How It Got That Way," by Terry Miller (Crown, 1990).
The Voorhis, a five-story apartment building at that corner owned by the Hess estate, was condemned when the city built the IRT subway lines during the late 1910's.
The city wanted the Hess estate to donate the rest of that property, a triangle measuring about 500 square inches, for part of the sidewalk.
The Hess estate obstinately refused and took legal action to keep their tiny plot, leaving the smallest piece of private property in the city.
And they covered it with the headstrong message that you saw.
The Hess estate got out of the miniature business in 1938 when they sold the plot to the owners of Village Cigars for $1,000.
Or about $2 a square inch. Divided, a Park Stands
Q.
There's a park in two pieces on Second Avenue between 16th and 17th Streets.
Has it always been divided?
A.
Numerologists will love this one.
Stuyvesant Square is two equal two-acre chunks that have always been split by Second Avenue, according to the trusty Blue Guide.
It used to be a part of Peter Stuyvesant's farm before the family made the land a gift to the city (for a nominal $5) in 1836.
It was landscaped, with Second Avenue flowing through, in 1936, an even 100 years later.
JESSE McKINLEY


Study in Contrast


More to Learn
To the Editor:
Ever since a college course with Vincent Scully, I have been a serious student of Frank Lloyd Wright's architecture.
I have even given slide lectures on his work to American Institute of Architects groups.
But Herbert Muschamp's sensitive insights, almost understated in his essay, made me realize how much I have to learn.
GEORGE R. SCHUMANN  Whitefish Bay, Wis.


Corrections
The Streetscapes column last Sunday, about a pair of 1904 town houses on Fifth Avenue below 52d Street known as the "Marble Twins," misstated a geologist's assessment of the facade material.
The geologist, Sidney Horenstein, said that the original buildings were faced with Indiana limestone.
Only some details on the ground floor of the surviving building, from a much later alteration, are of Cremo Italian marble.


Essex Backs Mountain Bikers' Bid To Share Park Trails With Hikers
For months, hikers who frequent Essex County parks have accused the mountain bikers of scaring them and tearing up the foliage.
Cyclists have accused the hikers of sabotage, placing dangerous impediments like logs around blind corners.
On Wednesday night, Essex County freeholders weighed in on the conflict -- and unanimously granted cyclists limited access to trails in three county parks, undoing a 1988 ordinance banning the bikes from all county grounds.


In the Region/Connecticut; Dairy Farms Drying Up in the Town of Washington
A HUNDRED years ago there were about a hundred dairy farms in the Town of Washington.
Soon there will be only two.
By mid-September Davie's Hollow Farm, operated by John Nye, a 34-year-old native of the town, a 4-H Club member in his youth, an agriculture major in college and a tenant dairy farmer since 1981, will move his family and 600 Holstein cows to 80 acres in Delta, Utah.


Soviet-Style Rule in Uzbekistan Provides a Bearable Life 'if We Are Quiet'
Life in the countries of the former Soviet Union just keeps getting messier.
There are civil wars and tentative stabs at democracy; there is economic mayhem and the political chaos that goes with it.
There are also many new freedoms.
Not here, though.
Here they rely on the old ways: simplicity, fear and repression.


S.R.O.'s 2d Revival Wins Fans
The once-squalid Holland Hotel has stood empty since the city closed it in 1988, a hulking symbol of the bureaucratic bungling and waste associated with the city's homeless policies through the 1980's.
Now, in a new life indicative of the city's current move to shift homeless care to private nonprofit groups, the building on West 42d Street is about to be resurrected as Holland House, with 306 apartments for needy people.


NEIGHBORHOOD REPORT: KINGSBRIDGE
SHOWTIME A divided Community Board 4 has approved the use of DeWitt Clinton Park for a dinner theater.
The show, Pomp, Duck &amp; Circumstance, will occupy part of the park for seven months starting next fall . . .
LOSING THE NEWS Publishers of three newspapers -- the Upper West Side Resident, the Manhattan Pennysaver and Manhattan Spirit -- say about 30 of their news boxes have disappeared from the Upper West Side, amid complaints about clutter. . .
TRY AGAIN Housing Works, a support group for people with AIDS, hopes to open a day treatment program at 320 West 13th Street after losing sites in SoHo and the East Village to local opposition.
"There was a lot of misinformation," said Deputy Director George McNeely.
"There will be no needle exchange program; this will not be a drop-in center."


Apostle of Freedom
To the Editor:
In her review of John Keane's book "Tom Paine: A Political Life" (March 12), Pauline Maier notes several earlier biographies of Thomas Paine, including David Freeman Hawke's "Paine" (1974) and Eric Foner's "Tom Paine and Revolutionary America" (1976).


No Headline
"We're all vulnerable. The system is based on trust. There are no metal detectors in this business." LEE STETSON, dean of admissions at the University of Pennsylvania.  [ 19:1. ]


It's a Despicable Attitude. Good Thing It's All Around.
IT'S been a tough month for cynics.
First the speaker of the House, Newt Gingrich, raised sand about them 10 days ago in a broadcast speech marking his first three months in office.
He savaged "the cynics in the press" and scoffed at "the skepticism, even cynicism of Washington beltway insiders." "Idealism is American," Mr.
Gingrich advised viewers.
"To be romantic is American. Don't be a cynic."
Not to be outdone, President Clinton flew to Georgia last week to memorialize Franklin D. Roosevelt, and devoted much of a speech to denouncing cynics.
Mr.
Clinton mourned "a country encrusted with cynicism" and noted tartly that in FDR's time, cynicism was "a luxury no one could afford." He wished aloud that Roosevelt were around today "to deride those who are cynical." Back in the White House, he refused to board the no-new-taxes juggernaut, saying "a President runs the risk of breeding cynicism to sign that kind of pledge."


Betting the Farm On the Company Stock
Somewhere not far below motherhood and apple pie on the roll call of all American virtues in employee stock ownership.
It os, after all, a kind of marriage of democracy and capitalism.
Give employees a stake in their company, the logic goes, and thay will work harder, thereby increasing productivity, driving the stock price up and making themselves, and outside shareholders, richer.
And some evidence suggests that this thesis is broadly true.
But there is a flip side.
As more companies lavish more stock on their employees, some analysts worry the trend may lead to a dangerous financial overdependence.
They are concerned that a significant number of corporations allow their employee no other investment option at all in their retirement plan.
And even when companies exibit what seems like pure generosity, selling stock at a discount to employees or awarding them options to purchase securities at below-market prices, experts fear that some of the beneficiaries will be lulled into a false sense of security that can be dashed if the share price collapses.


Bosnia Jews Glimpse Book and Hope
The Sarajevo Haggadah, one of the world's most beautiful illustrated Jewish manuscripts, emerged today from the chaos of the Bosnian war at a Passover ceremony that offered a moment of reconciliation in a shattered city.
The fate of the richly illustrated 14th-century Haggadah, or Passover ceremonial book, had been unknown since the war began in 1992.
Rumors circulated that the medieval book, perhaps the best known Hebrew illustrated manuscript in existence, had been destroyed, lost or sold.


For a Touch of Spring, Add Herbs, Garlic, Cream and Cheese
FEATHERY herbs, a whiff of garlic and perhaps a judicious splash of cream or a touch of cheese are all it takes for that light, quick springtime touch.
Pasta, potatoes and rice all benefit from such treatment.


An Apocalyptic Moose
To the Editor:
As the editor and translator of Andrei Bitov's "Life in Windy Weather," I would like to reply to D. M. Thomas's review of Mr.
Bitov's novel "The Monkey Link" (March 26).


Palermo Waits For Umpires
Steve Palermo, the former American League umpire who is beginning his first year as a Yankee broadcaster for the Madison Square Garden Network, said today that he would not work game telecasts until the 64 major league umpires return to work.
Replacement umpires are being used during the lockout.


A Job Opening in Brooklyn: Poet Laureate
The Brooklyn poet laureate's study is unused now.
There are an old memo pad, books and photographs in the tiny, lamplighted Brooklyn Heights den.
A walking stick, polished but untouched, stands in a corner.
And there is a poem taped to the bulletin board. It opens:


ALSO INSIDE
MAKING IT WORK 3 In search of New York's cigar smokers: a photographer's tribute to her grandfather.
NEW YORKERS &amp; CO. 4 Beyond memorial walls: Three graffiti artists in the Bronx make a business of expressing themselves.
MOVIE CLOCK 9 What's showing at the local movie houses, today through Thursday.
PLAYING IN THE NEIGHBORHOOD 10 An earth day challenge at Prospect Park; commemorating the end of World War II at the Japan Society.
GOOD EATING 10 Touring the West Village; the antique tables of Anglers and Writers; the authentic-looking Cafe de Bruxelles; the relaxed atmosphere at Dix et Sept.
SOAPBOX 11 A survival kit for the elderly.
And letters.


Transformation
To the Editor:
Herbert Muschamp's essay brought to mind my own transforming experience with the Guggenheim Museum.
In the 1940's, growing up in Pittsburgh and believing myself to be an artist, I went to each successive Carnegie International with increasing apprehension and dismay as I saw more and more abstract, cubist and expressionist art replacing the representational portraits and landscapes that I admired.
In 1950, I left the exhibition crying because I couldn't cope with the art.


Cindy I. Klein, Sean N. D. Roche
Cindy Ileah Klein, an agent at the Georges Borchardt Literary Agency in New York, was married last Sunday to Sean Nicholas D'Arcy Roche, an assistant district attorney in the Bronx.
Rabbi Alfred B. Landsberg performed the ceremony at Fiddler's Elbow Country Club in Bedminster, N.J.
Mrs.
Roche, 28, graduated summa cum laude from Princeton University, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa.
She is a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Sanford S. Klein of Martinsville, N.J.
The bride's father is an internist at the Somerset Medical Center in Somerville, N.J.


April 9-15; The Collapse After the Collapse


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
By the Pond, by the Pond
I GO away for a week and this happens," Tina Fredericks, a Realtor, said. "This" is the latest news in East Hampton real estate. Steven Spielberg is said to have bought for $3.35 million the adjoining property to his Georgica Pond estate just so he can have more privacy.
As Ms.
Fredericks is considered Ms.
Georgica Pond in the Hamptons real-estate business she was shocked she didn't know that the deal was under way.
Her deals are legendary.
Last year she sold Ron Perelman of Revlon fame the 58-acre Creeks estate adjoining the pond.


Joy Ride


Barkley Is Suspended
CHARLES BARKLEY of the Phoenix Suns, whistled for his sixth flagrant foul of the season on Friday night, was suspended for last night's crucial game against the Los Angeles Lakers.
Under a National Basketball Association rule instituted last season, players receive an automatic one-game suspension for any flagrant fouls over five in one season.
Officials ruled yesterday morning that Barkley flagrantly knocked down Denver guard Bryant Stith with a forearm in the third quarter of the Suns' 102-87 loss.
Barkley said he had been shoved by Stith at the other end of the floor. (AP)


Cuban Rallies Will Oppose A U.S. Bill
The Cuban Government, alarmed that a bill in the United States Congress would allow Cuban-Americans to lay new claims to property abandoned or seized when the Communists took power in 1959, is planning a series of huge public meetings in Havana and other cities to drum up opposition, the president of Cuba's National Assembly said in an interview on Friday.
The official, Ricardo Alarcon, a former Foreign Minister of Cuba and now its chief negotiator with Washington in immigration talks, said the Congressional effort could severely worsen already bad relations with the United States.
Mr.
Alarcon added that the bill could produce more illegal immigration but denied that Cuba would use the meetings to promote a new wave of migration in retaliation.


Plant Greens, Take Walks, Don't Prune
If you didn't get around to renovating lilacs and other shrubs this winter, hold off on heavy pruning until next February.
Once there is bud break and new growth starts, woody plants pump most of their energy into growing leaves and new stems.
Drastic pruning will weaken the plant.
Light pruning after spring-flowering shrubs have bloomed is fine.
Spring is finally here (we hope!), so clean up the perennial beds, rake the old thatch out of the lawn (if you still have one), plant lettuce and greens in your salad patch, and sprinkle California poppy seeds on a bare patch of ground.


Private Collections in the Spotlight
LAST year, it was "Why Collect?" at the Hudson River Museum.
This year, it is "Crossing State Lines: 20th-Century Art From Private Collections in Westchester and Fairfield Counties" at the Neuberger Museum on the Purchase College campus here.
It so happens that the spotlight has also been focused on connoisseurs in New Jersey for about the same period.
Collectors seldom want for encouragement from the dealers who sell them their treasures or, for that matter, from the museum curators who covet them.
Nevertheless, the heavy emphasis implied by such shows is new.
It may just be part of the political ground swell against subsidies generally, but it also seems to reflect a determined effort to recruit new collectors.
A panel discussion about collecting is scheduled at the museum on April 27 from 7 to 9 P.M.


The Return of the Babushka
JUST in time for the release of the newly restored print of "Dr. Zhivago," marking the film's 30th anniversary, the babushka has been showing up on runways for such trendy designers as Karl Lagerfeld for Chanel, Anna Sui and Marc Jacobs.


It's All in the Family, But Is That Enough?
BIOGRAPHY AND AUTOBIOGRAPHY ARE the lifeblood of art right now.
We have claimed them the way earlier generations claimed the novel, the well-made play and the language of abstraction.
Literature is filled with memoirs, personal essays, the travel book as a journey into oneself as well as another country.
Theaters, too, are filled with solo performers: those who display and explicate aspects of their lives (Spalding Gray, Wallace Shawn, Laurie Anderson) and those who use impersonation to make other people aspects of themselves (Danny Hoch, Dael Orlander smith, John Leguizamo).


Crossing the Abyss Between TV and Films
David Caruso's face is so familiar that just about everyone in Cicada, a trendy West Hollywood restaurant, stops and stares.
He moves quickly, trailing behind his girlfriend, removing his dark glasses and allowing his fingers to smooth his unruly red hair.
He's 20 minutes late -- hardly a major offense for an actor on the edge of stardom -- but Mr.
Caruso is annoyed at himself and apologizes elaborately.
"When you start as an actor, you spend so much time sitting in rooms waiting, waiting, waiting that I don't like having someone wait for me," Mr.
Caruso said in the Queens accent that so stamped his character, John Kelly, in the ABC series "N.Y.P.D. Blue." He is seated at a corner table with his companion of six months, Margaret Buckley, a shy, soft-spoken former flight attendant in her mid-20's who stares at him as he speaks, absorbing every word.


DIARY
AUTOS  No Frugality Goes Unpunished  Only in corporate America.
A company is prudent, tucks a few billion away for a rainy day and what does it get?
Well, just look.
Chrysler, recalling past woes, socked $7 billion away, but then Kirk Kerkorian, already Chrysler's biggest shareholder with 10 percent of its stock, said he and Lee Iacocca wanted to buy the whole thing -- in a huge $22.8 billion deal.
Not only that, but he wants to reach in and use $5.5 billion of that company nest egg as part of the down payment.
If he's just trying to get the share price up, he succeeded, as the stock rose $9.50 in a day.
And if he really wants to own it, he's betting big that Chrysler won't need that money.
If he's right, he may get more billions; how wonderful for him.
But if he's wrong?
Few people care if a multibillionaire loses a billion, but it's not just Mr.
Kerkorian's gamble.
If Chrysler dances on the precipice again, lots of innocent bystanders will pay.
AIRLINES  Continental Scraps Its Diet  Purists may see it as justice for using that mangled spelling, but the demise of Continental Lite last week was more the failure of an idea that some say was doomed from the start.
Not that low-fare "airlines within airlines" can never work -- United's doing fine with its West Coast shuttle.
But Continental's attempt to go lo-cal -- sorry, low-cal -- just never worked.
Too many planes were added too quickly, resulting in lots of repairs -- and lots of canceled flights.
So the airline, after losing $140 million on the experiment, scrapped it.
The logos on 100 planes will be painted over, the first-class seats brought back -- and no more peanuts, or "peanuts fares." So, like the waistline of an erratic dieter, fares go up, fares go down.
Someday maybe the airlines will get it right.
MARKETING  Happy Birthday Dear Blunder  Do you suppose that Ford Motor, 10 years after offering the Edsel to a resoundingly ungrateful public, celebrated that fiasco's anniversary?
Not likely.
But, hey, this is the 90's -- everything's upside down.
So it was that Coke, far from being red-faced a decade after the "new Coke" follies, last week actually celebrated the anniversary of that too-sweet marketing blunder.
Maybe, as Pepsi unsweetly suggested, Coke was just "trying to put the right spin" on the inevitable anniversary stories.
But then again, as Coke's chairman, Roberto Goizueta, pointed out, the company's market value has grown from $9 billion to $75 billion in that decade.
New Coke -- which Mr.
Goizueta, by the way, decided to introduce -- has not exactly hurt.
NO TRUMP  If Eloise Could See It Now  On Oct. 1, 1907, when the Plaza opened in a blaze of ornate glory, could guests like the Vanderbilts ever have imagined the wild ride the hotel would be taken on by those who held the cash at the century's far end?
Could they, in short, have imagined Donald Trump?
Surely not.
Mr.
Trump, a tireless collector of "trophies," bought the Plaza in 1988 -- with borrowed money -- and then borrowed even more on it to help him buy Eastern Airlines, among other things.
This house of loans tottered in 1992, with Citibank and other banks winding up the true owners -- and Mr.
Trump a 51 percent owner in name only.
The banks wanted out, and last week buyers were found -- a Saudi prince (the same one who put big money in Citicorp a few years back) and a Singapore company.
The price: $325 million (Mr. Trump had paid $400 million).
Eloise, at last report, was cowering in a closet.
CURRENCY  A Little Dollar That Wouldn't  You'd think that if everyone wanted to stop the dollar from falling in value against the yen, something could be done.
But forces greater than mere governments are clearly at work here, for even though both Washington and Tokyo want to even things out, the dollar stays weak -- it now buys just 83 yen, compared with 100 in January.
Just last week Japan -- its goods becoming awfully costly on world markets -- offered an emergency rescue plan, including a cut in its discount rate to an unheard-of 1 percent.
It also moved to promote imports and cut regulations to whittle away at its trade deficit -- seen as the main culprit.
To no avail.
Exchange rates barely budged, and Tokyo stock prices fell sharply.
Back to the drawing boards.
LEGALITIES  His Appeal Was Not Insane  At the 1993 sentencing hearing, the judge in the Crazy Eddie case said his goal from the start had been to redress the wrongs resulting from "the fraudulent activities of this defendant" -- Eddie Antar, that is.
Irate as he may have been at one of the largest stock frauds ever, that's not the way a judge should talk.
At least that's what a Federal appeals panel ruled last week as it overturned Mr.
Antar's stock fraud and racketeering convictions, saying the judge had shown prejudice.
Mr.
Antar may now face a new trial on charges that he inflated the price of Crazy Eddie stock in the 80's.
THE ECONOMY  Inflation Made at the Fed  It really becomes a chicken-and-egg problem: Which came first -- Federal Reserve interest-rate increases or inflation?
Yes, the Fed kept saying it was lifting rates to keep inflation nice and cool.
But a funny thing turned up in the price figures last week.
Yes, inflation was still in check -- producer prices were up just 0.1 percent, consumer prices just 0.2 percent.
But where did a big part of that 0.2 percent come from?
Directly from the Fed -- its rate increases have driven up automobile finance charges by a third in the past year.
And -- surprise! -- that drove transportation costs up far faster than the overall rate.
RESTAURANTS  The Day the Smoke Cleared  "Excruciating and bothersome" -- one can easily imagine such words being uttered by a nonsmoker who felt an enjoyable meal had been ruined by someone else's cigarette smoke.
But last week it was a smoker voicing that sentiment, as a strict New York law went into effect that bars smoking in most city restaurants.
It's "part of the whole Big Brother thing," said another smoker.
Restaurant owners are worried -- and, in some cases, poorer.
One spent $40,000 for renovations to comply with the law.
But is it all fair?
Smokers, of course, can smoke on the sidewalk.
Then again, nonsmokers could always eat on the sidewalk.
TAXES  No Discount on Boardwalk, Yet  Parker Brothers is having a high old time celebrating Monopoly's 60th anniversary.
Here's the latest: After calculating that that pesky $75 "luxury tax" would now, in New Jersey, be $2,746.27, it proceeded to catch today's tax-cut fever.
At a ceremony in New York tomorrow -- tax day, of course -- Parker is scrapping the luxury tax for the whole anniversary year.
Now if the I.R.S. would just let you pass "Go" a few extra times . . .


Hollywood 1, Japanese 0
YOICHI MORISHITA, the president of the giant Matsushita Electric Industrial Company, finally ended a months-long silence last weekend and paid a chilly 35-minute visit to the Beverly Hills home of Lew Wasserman, the chairman of MCA Inc.
With a minimum of small talk, Mr.
Morishita confirmed to the legendary Hollywood chieftain that he had sold control of MCA to the Seagram Co. without consulting MCA's management.
With that, Mr.
Morishita climbed back into his car, closed the door on this bitter chapter in both companies' histories, and jetted back to Japan nursing a big financial loss and memories of a failed strategy.
A Bitter End
Matsushita's flight from a business it had entered with great optimism just five years before marked a humiliating conclusion to the single largest investment a Japanese company has made in the United States; Matsushita had acquired MCA, an entertainment conglomerate that includes Universal Pictures, for $6.6 billion and has now sold 80 percent for $5.7 billion, suffering a big loss in terms of yen because the dollar is far weaker now than it was five years ago.


Cigar Wins At Oaklawn
Cigar cemented his standing as the successor to Holy Bull in racing's senior division yesterday when he outran Silver Goblin, Concern and Best Pal in the $750,000 Oaklawn Park Handicap in Hot Springs, Ark., and won for the sixth straight time.
The 5-year-old grandson of Seattle Slew made a powerful move into the homestretch under the urging of Jerry Bailey and won by 21/2 lengths.
He ran the mile and an eighth in 1:471/5 , paid $5.40 for $2 to win and pushed his career earnings past $1 million.


Count to 10


U.S. Agency Reprimanded Virginia U.
The University of Virginia said this week that it had been required to suspend 35 medical and psychological studies this winter after the National Institutes of Health reprimanded the school for violating regulations governing the use of humans in experiments.
University officials said no one was hurt and no crucial data were lost.
All but a handful of the studies have been resumed, but some professors said the restrictions could have disrupted careers.


The Name of the Rose? Competition!
Aida Soto sees flowers for sale, colorful and convenient, seemingly everywhere in Williamsburg.
Bouquets beckon from carts parked on crowded corners under the elevated train or pushed by vendors who trudge down narrow side streets to do business by churches or bodegas.
Unfortunately, she has lots of carnations, roses and other blooms right behind her, in the refrigerator at the flower shop she has owned for five years.
During that time, she said, unlicensed vendors hawking $5 bunches of flowers on the streets of Brooklyn have taken away much of her walk-in trade, leaving her with wilted blossoms and unpaid bills.


Crestwood Train Station Wins Praise of Commuters
SPRING has brought a fresh face to the Crestwood train station here, which, if not the charming spot Norman Rockwell painted in 1946, is at least no longer an eyesore.
Nearly 150 commuters recently signed a petition thanking Metro-North for the cleanup at the abandoned ticket office, where peeling paint and graffiti had long marred a site regarded as a landmark.


Junior and the Old Dog Try Some Quality Time
Tank Girl  Lori Petty, Malcolm McDowell, Ice-T Directed by Rachel Talalay R 103 minutes


Hell Was Other People
EVELYN WAUGH A Biography.
By Selina Hastings.
Illustrated. 724 pp.
Boston:  Houghton Mifflin Company. $40.


Post-Masters Tourney Is No Picnic This Year
In years past, the MCI Classic has always been a little post-Masters party, a decompression chamber after the stress and strain of the year's first major.
But not this year.
On the way to the beach parties, barbecues and Easter egg hunts, a civilized war broke out today.
On a perfect day for scoring at the Harbour Town Golf Links, golfers roared into contention from everywhere in the field, thicker than a swarm of no-see-ums.
Mark McCumber shot 64, David Edwards shot 66, David Frost shot 66 and Gene Sauers shot 69 and after three rounds that quartet is packed into first place like the yachts in Calibogue Sound, all of them at eight-under-par 205.


The Unwritten Dress Code
To the Editor:
With today's super-casual work environment, we often forget the basic lessons of our formative years: dress is important, you act the way you look, first impressions make lasting impressions ("It's the Gap Once You're Hired, But Job Hunters Must Spiff It Up," Earning It, April 2).
As a professional recruiter, I am appalled by businesses' and candidates' casual attitude toward dress.
You don't change the rules of the interview process overnight.
Looking and acting professional, in conservative business attire, is the rule of the land when it comes to the interview process.
Yes, I reluctantly concur that company dress codes will continue to move toward more casual.
However, for the foreseeable future, the conservative blue business suit is the order of the day, when it comes to the interview process.
Dress casually after you get the job!
DAVID M. RICHARDSON Upper Montclair, N.J., April 5 The writer is vice chairman of DHR International Inc., a Chicago-based executive recruitment firm.


. . . and 'Class' Wasn't
In a move that surprised community advocates and local politicians, the State Liquor Authority late last month granted a West Village bar owner, Alan Whelan, a liquor license for a proposed restaurant at 64 West 10th Street.
The Manhattan Borough President, Ruth W. Messinger, Councilman Thomas K. Duane and Community Board 2 had hoped to defeat the license by invoking an amendment to State Liquor Authority rules that says a license for "on-premises consumption" cannot be issued if an establishment is within 500 feet of three or more such businesses without the approval of the local community board.


Corrections
A caption last Sunday with a photograph of three executives of the Walt Disney Company misstated the status of one of them, Richard H. Frank.
He resigned last month, and is not part of management's "new team."


Both Feet on the Ice, And on Wall Street
LINDA RUNYON vividly remembers her sense of panic when she stepped off the plane from New York City on Nov. 11.
She knew virtually no one in town.
She had brought only four suitcases.
She was moving into a small rental apartment that she had seen only in snapshots.
And the long-familiar settings of her life -- her spacious Greenwich Village apartment, her offices as a top research analyst at Merrill Lynch -- were about to become history.
"Bizarre -- I must be certifiable," she wrote in her journal that day.
"I can't believe I'd just pick up and move to Milwaukee."


CLINTON LAYS OUT THREE PRIORITIES FOR LEGISLATION
President Clinton today laid out a short list of his priorities in his next round of wrangling with the Republican Congress, saying that he was intent on winning passage of tax cuts linked to education, a welfare overhaul that promotes work and anti-crime measures that preserve the ban on assault-style weapons.
The three-point list, which Mr.
Clinton presented in his weekly radio address, offered the sharpest vision yet of his agenda for the months ahead and represented his most forceful attempt to win back control of the capital's agenda.


Talkin Man Runs Away With Wood Memorial and Heads to Kentucky
The road to Kentucky may run through New York after all.
In perhaps the most impressive performance by a 3-year-old colt this year and on the heels of his decisive victory in the Gotham three weeks ago, Talkin Man led every step of the way to win the 71st running of the $500,000 Wood Memorial yesterday at Aqueduct.


A Runner's Victory Is Cultural as Well
When Tegla Loroupe returned to Kenya after winning the New York City Marathon in November, her village was engulfed in victory.
A black African woman had never before won a major marathon.
Loroupe was presented with 9 cattle and 16 sheep by the villagers.
The Government gave her a tract of land.
She was carried along in a convoy and transported by the words of the women in her tribe.
"You did a good job," Loroupe said they told her.
"You showed that we are like the men, we can do things. We are not useless."


Psychoanalyzing Mozart
To the Editor:
"Why did he die in apparent poverty, to be buried in an unmarked grave?" Edward Rothstein asks about Mozart in his review of Maynard Solomon's biography (March 26).
"Was it because of infantile incompetence, nefarious conspiracies, unconscionable gambling debts?" May I suggest that our friend Amadeus may have had bipolar illness, a destabilizing emotional sickness.


Arbitration: Getting Down to Brass Knuckles
THE BEEF Gordon and Marion Newell of Safety Harbor, Fla., say their broker pitched them limited partnerships as secure, conservative investments.
Monthly statements supported that claim, for years listing inflated prices even as the value of the securities was plunging.
The Newells didn't know they were in deep water until they tried to sell and got half the price shown on the statement.
THE BROKER Merrill Lynch says the Newells understood the risks they were taking, turned down a settlement offer and are seeking an unreasonable eight times their losses.
The broker, Arnold Plonski, opened the account with the Newells in 1982, less than a year after he ended a career as a real estate broker.


ROAD AND RAIL: Getting There (and Paying for It) in the Year 2000; In Trenton, a Fund for Transportation Meets With Little Resistance, for Now
If the state's Transportation Trust Fund were a movie, the credits would be rolling, but the last line would read, "To Be Continued."
The fund, which provides about half the $1 billion a year needed to build and maintain New Jersey's transportation infrastructure, expires in June.


A Victorian Nightmare
THE TRIAL OF ELIZABETH CREE A Novel of the Limehouse Murders.
By Peter Ackroyd. 261 pp.
New York: Nan A. Talese/ Doubleday. $22.


Jersey City Gas Spill Forces 20 to Evacuate
Fire investigators were trying today to identify the source of gasoline that spilled into the city's sewage system and forced the evacuation of at least 20 people from their apartments.
"They don't know yet who did it or whether it was deliberate," said Capt.
Michael A. Pirro, a spokesman for the Jersey City Fire Department.


A Victorian Nightmare
THE TRIAL OF ELIZABETH CREE A Novel of the Limehouse Murders.
By Peter Ackroyd. 261 pp.
New York: Nan A. Talese/ Doubleday. $22.


Leading Black Educator Chosen to Head Bank Street
Dr.
Augusta Souza Kappner, an assistant secretary of Education and former president of Borough of Manhattan Community College, is to be named president of the Bank Street College of Education, officials said yesterday.
Dr.
Kappner, 50, who will be the first woman and the first black to head the school, will take over on July 1, said Denise Coleman, dean of external affairs.
She said Dr.
Kappner would replace Dr.
Joseph Shenker, who is leaving after having served as Bank Street's president since July 1988.
Dr.
Shenker's plans have not been disclosed, Ms.
Coleman said.


Hearings Set On Claims Of Beatings
The City Council will hold public hearings on accusations that employees of the Grand Central Partnership beat homeless people to roust them from banks and other sites around Manhattan, Councilman Stephen DiBrienza, a Brooklyn Democrat, said on Friday.
And Ruth W. Messinger, who as the Manhattan Borough President sits on the partnership's board, has called for "an emergency meeting" of the board on the accusations, adding she wanted the partnership to conduct a comprehensive internal inquiry and issue a report.
A partnership spokesman said her request would be considered this week.


THE QUEEN OF THE GREEN
Feminists, myself included, will argue that beauty pageants send an unhealthy message to young women.
But, the Holyoke St.
Patrick's Day Grand Colleen Pageant, as portrayed by Madeleine Blais, in "The Queen of the Green" (March 26), appears to be a very healthy celebration of family and tradition.
The healthiest news of all is that the ball gowns on order for next year are "two size 14's, two 12's and one 10." Beauty, at least in Holyoke, is not judged by how much a young woman is willing to starve herself.
LAUREN JOHN Boston


Bergen County Mayors Seek an Alternate Route
The state's $20 million plan to repave the Palisades Interstate Parkway has not been going smoothly with its neighbors.
The 12-mile New Jersey stretch of the four-lane parkway is to be resurfaced for the first time in 23 years, beginning in August.
But Bergen County residents are worried about the detours the project will require.
In particular, they are concerned about Route 9W, a two-lane highway where four people were injured in a collision last month and two teen-agers died in an accident in December.
Transportation officials say that only a fraction of the Palisades' 65,000 weekday drivers would be affected, because resurfacing would be done from 10 P.M. to 7 A.M., one section at a time.
But several mayors have signed a resolution urging the state to redirect the traffic to the New York Thruway and the Tappan Zee Bridge.
DAVID W. CHEN


Vanguard, a King of Vanilla, Is Mixing Some New Flavors
JOHN BOGLE, the 65-year-old chairman of the Vanguard Group, has spent his career preaching the virtues of low-cost, no-surprise mutual funds.
Given half a chance, he will rail about competitors, a crowd, he thinks, that is too smitten with marketing to prize real value.
"We're never allowed to use the word 'product' -- it sounds like toothpaste and beer," he said recently at Vanguard's headquarters in Valley Forge, Pa.
"The worst thing to use around here is 'new product' and the one thing worse than that is to use 'hot new product,' which makes me sick."
But faced with the tremendous success of hot funds over the last few years, Vanguard is introducing four new products -- sorry, funds -- intended to deliver the kind of high returns that investors can't resist.
The funds will have Vanguard's traditional advantage of extraordinarily low expenses.
But they will also take risks, like investing in unproven small companies or volatile foreign markets, more typical of its archrival, Fidelity Investments.
The new funds have been named the Horizon funds to emphasize their nature as long-term investments and distinguish them from Vanguard's typically conservative offerings.


In Snakeskin, Real and Fake
An exotic look to classic spring clothes, handbags and shoes comes from python and snakeskin patterns in natural, sand and beige colorings.
There are raincoats in a range of colors, from pastels to deep wines, with the serpent markings in black.
There is even a wet-looking python-print cotton blazer.
The sparkle comes from an overlay of clear sequins, bottom left, worn with python-print pants.
The young man, top left, is wearing python-print jeans with a snakeskin jacket.
One of the more popular accessories is the python-print tote bag, right.
The wearing of genuine python -- coat and shoes, far right -- was last popular during the mod and hippie periods.
Most of today's designs are of the fake variety, printed on natural and synthetic fibers.


Staging A Revolution
The countercultural revolution in the United States was personified in the Living Theater, the radical theater collective.
Founded in New York City after World War II by Judith Malina and Julian Beck, the company began by producing the works of Gertrude Stein and William Carlos Williams before embracing the theories of Brecht and Artaud's esthetic of spectacle and "cruelty." The result was a merger of theater, politics and art, John Tytell writes in THE LIVING THEATER: Art, Exile, and Outrage (Grove, $30).
The group gained notoriety with productions of "The Connection," about drug addiction, in 1959 and of "The Brig," about brutality in a Marine prison, in 1963.
Later in that year, the Living Theater was in the news when the Internal Revenue Service seized its 14th Street loft in lieu of back taxes; members of the troupe staged a sit-in in protest.
The company moved to Europe, where members were involved in some of the student strikes of 1968, and did not return to the United States until 1983.
Beck died two years later, but the theater continues under Ms.
Malina and the playwright and director Hanon Reznikov.
Although Mr.
Tytell, who teaches English at Queens College, has captured the spirit of the era, he focuses mainly on the dynamics between Beck and Ms.
Malina, with long accounts of their personal and sexual activities, as well as a pop history filled with a Who's Who of painters, writers and actors whose lives intersected with the Living Theater.
The discussion of the collective's work lacks critical rigor, but the book offers a taste of the times and some insight into the underpinnings of the company.
BEVYA ROSTEN


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: April 16, 1995
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
3
THE CHAMBER, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $7.50.) A lawyer represents a racist who is on death row for his part in a 1967 bombing.
2
3
UNTIL YOU, by Judith McNaught. (Pocket, $6.50.) An American woman who is a chaperone in Georgian England finds romance.
3
12
TOM CLANCY'S OP-CENTER, created by Tom Clancy and Steve Pieczenik. (Berkley, $6.99.) The operations of a secret Government agency.
4
3
DAYBREAK, by Belva Plain. (Dell, $6.99.) Two families are divided and then united by a series of surprising developments.
5
14
CIRCLE OF FRIENDS, by Maeve Binchy. (Dell, $6.50.) The coming of age of women in Ireland.
6
3
ANGEL, by Barbara Taylor Bradford. (Ballantine, $6.99.) The reunion of four people is transformed by two celebrated men.
7
9
ACCIDENT, by Danielle Steel. (Dell, $6.99.) A car collision alters the lives of five families.
8
12
THE DAY AFTER TOMORROW, by Allan Folsom. (Warner Vision, $6.99.) A doctor stumbles into a tangle of conspiracies.
9
4
DECIDER, by Dick Francis. (Jove, $5.99.) An architect gets caught between the warring factions of a clan that owns a racecourse.
10
3
MURDER ON THE POTOMAC, by Margaret Truman. (Fawcett, $6.99.) A law professor discovers a corpse in the Potomac River.
11
7
INCA GOLD, by Clive Cussler. (Pocket, $6.99.) Dirk Pitt contends with a ring of thieves.
12
25
CONGO, by Michael Crichton. (Ballantine, $6.99.) Why did archeologists die among ruins?
13
44
THE SHIPPING NEWS, by E. Annie Proulx. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $12.) A man mourns his adulterous wife in Newfoundland.
14
1
DEAR EMILY, by Fern Michaels. (Zebra/Kensington, $5.99.) After her divorce, a middle-aged woman has to choose between two suitors.
15
7
THE ROBBER BRIDE, by Margaret Atwood. (Bantam, $6.50.) A woman who long manipulated three friends suddenly reappears.
16*
5
MISTRESS, by Amanda Quick. (Bantam, $5.99.) A former schoolteacher's efforts to unmask her aunt's blackmailer in London.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
NonFiction
1
30
EMBRACED BY THE LIGHT, by Betty J. Eadie with Curtis Taylor. (Bantam, $5.99.) A woman's near-death experience.
2
66
CARE OF THE SOUL, by Thomas Moore. (Harper Perennial, $12.) Everyday spirituality.
3
2
THE AGENDA, by Bob Woodward. (Pocket, $6.50.) The inner workings of the White House in the first year of the Clinton Administration.
4
29
HAVING OUR SAY, by Sarah L. Delany and A. Elizabeth Delany with Amy Hill Hearth. (Dell, $5.99.) The reminiscences of two black sisters.
5
597
THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $10.95.) Inspiration.
6*
7
THE HIDDEN LIFE OF DOGS, by Elizabeth Marshall Thomas. (Pocket, $5.99.) An analysis of canine behavior.
7*
3
REVIVING OPHELIA, by Mary Pipher. (Ballantine, $12.50.) The everyday dangers that beset teen-age girls.
8
6
SAVED BY THE LIGHT, by Dannion Brinkley with Paul Perry. (Harper Paperbacks, $5.99.) An account of two near-death experiences.
9*
18
SOUL MATES, by Thomas Moore. (Harper Perennial, $13.) Love and relationships.
10
17
SEINLANGUAGE, by Jerry Seinfeld. (Bantam, $5.99.) Observations on life's pleasures and ordeals by the star of "Seinfeld."
11*
12
HOW WE DIE, by Sherwin B. Nuland. (Vintage, $13.) A surgeon reflects on "life's final chapter."
12
8
MAKES ME WANNA HOLLER, by Nathan McCall. (Vintage, $12.) The life of a young black man in America.
13
39
REENGINEERING THE CORPORATION, by Michael Hammer and James Champy. (Harper Business, $13.) Innovation in business.
14
111
I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS, by Maya Angelou. (Bantam, $4.99.) The poet's depiction of her childhood and adolescence.
15
33
A HISTORY OF GOD, by Karen Armstrong. (Ballantine, $14.) The development of monotheism over the past 4,000 years.
16*
25
WOULDN'T TAKE NOTHING FOR MY JOURNEY NOW, by Maya Angelou. (Bantam, $5.50.) Essays on life and death, good and evil.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Advice, How-To and Miscellaneous
1
29
CHICKEN SOUP FOR THE SOUL, compiled by Jack Canfield and Mark Victor Hansen. (Health Communications, $12.95.) Stories meant to "open the heart and rekindle the spirit."
2
207
THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE, by Stephen R. Covey. (Fireside/S&amp;S, $12.) Principles for success.
3
9
THE CELESTINE PROPHECY: An Experiential Guide, by James Redfield and Carol Adrienne. (Warner, $8.99.) Ways to apply the inspirational message of the novel "The Celestine Prophecy."
4
3
DRIVEN TO DISTRACTION, by Edward M. Hallowell and John J. Ratey. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $12.) Coping with attention deficit disorder.
Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending April 1, at 3,050 bookstores plus wholesalers serving 38,000 other retailers, statistically weighted to represent sales in all such outlets nationwide.
An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.


Marci Rosenwald and Michael Weiss
Marci Beth Rosenwald, a daughter of William and Sandra Rosenwald of Kings Park, L.I. was married on Thursday to Michael Sean Weiss, the son of Murray and Arlene Weiss of Monroe Township, N.J.
Rabbi Howard Beuchler performed the ceremony at Temple Israel of Lawrence, L.I.
The bride, 28, and the bridgroom, 29, graduated from the State University at Albany, she magna cum laude and he summa cum laude.


China Suicide Linked To a Power Struggle
To the Editor:
Your April 10 editorial "Tremors in China" acutely points out the reviving of "the Stalinist ploy of targeting corruption investigations to damage rivals" among competing factions in China in the wake of Deng Xiaoping's imminent demise.
One recent incident may serve to illustrate your thesis: the suicide of a Beijing Deputy Mayor, who was found shot dead by his own hand on April 5, at an official guest house where he had been detained for questioning of wrongdoing.


Taking More Time On Garbage Chores
LANCE AND CAROL SMITH of Remsenburg have been taking more time to put together their garbage since Southampton Town started a pay-per-bag program in January.
Mrs.
Smith now smashes up the garbage as much as she can, and Mr.
Smith gives it the final stomp before placing it in the official green bags.
The couple said they were recycling more items than before in an effort to use fewer bags and save money.
Residents who take their garbage to the four transfer stations have to place nonrecyclable materials in official bags that cost $1 for the 33-gallon size and 50 cents for the 13-gallon size.


Tactics for the Disabled: Niceness Has Limits
DAVID KLOT burst out of the basement at 8:10 and smacked into the morning, a thin smile beneath his rakish moustache.
Zipped into black leather, his tweed cap pulled over his dark glasses, he looked faintly dangerous.
He gunned his Triumph up East 15th Street while I trotted along on the sidewalk.
He can jack that baby up to 5.4 miles an hour.
A bus pulled up on Park Avenue South as we arrived.
Mr.
Klot wheeled the scooter around while the driver lowered the lift.
Mr.
Klot needed half a dozen tries before he was able to back in; the lip of the lift was not flush against the sidewalk.
The driver was not particularly ept, but he was businesslike; otherwise the Metropolitan Transportation Authority would receive one of Mr.
Klot's businesslike letters with date, time, identifying numbers.
Had the driver extended himself in some way, there would also have been a letter, less businesslike, nicer.
This was a routine morning.
None of the passengers delayed four or five minutes by Mr.
Klot's boarding made a snide comment, rolled eyes or heaved a sigh; otherwise Mr.
Klot might have snarled, "You walk, I don't, what's the problem?"


Tiffany Lamps Recapture Their Glow
WILL TIFFANY LAMPS retain their glow for aficionados in the 21st century?
Four years ago, this seemed an unlikely prospect as sales of Louis Comfort Tiffany's works faltered in the recession.
But their popularity was soon restored, auction records were broken, and now a miniboom appears to be developing, set off by the spirited buying of several new collectors.
The real test of the market will come on Saturday, when Sotheby's in New York auctions 75 Tiffany lamps, the largest collection ever to go on the block.
The lamps, which are expected to bring a total of $6 million to $9 million, are owned by John W. Mecom Jr., a Houston oil heir and real estate investor who is the former owner of the New Orleans Saints football team.


New Islander Feels in His Element
Even for hockey fights, this one was unusual.
It occurred between periods of a recent game in the dressing room.
The combatants were teammates on the Montreal Canadiens.
"Two guys on different wavelengths," said Jacques Demers, the coach.


One Ring That Opens Two Doors
One of the few reliable things in life should be that when your doorbell rings, someone is at the door.
Not so on a quiet street in Queens Village.
There, when your doorbell rings, someone may be at the neighbors' door.
Last summer, the Ahees of 89-30 215th Street bought a new-fangled, battery-powered doorbell that uses radio signals instead of wires.
The device rings twice when someone is at the front door and once when someone is at the back door.
No more rushing back and forth trying to get a delivery or greet a friend.
A model of modern convenience.


Corrections
An answer in the Q &amp; A column on March 19 about Christo's wrapping of the Reichstag building in Berlin misstated the fax number of the project's Berlin office.
It is (49 30) 201 95-174.


U.S. Is Critical Of Tokyo Plan To Rein In Yen
Treasury Secretary Robert E. Rubin told his Japanese counterpart this morning that the emergency financial package Japan issued last week was so vague that it had failed to reverse the fall of the dollar against the yen.
And the Secretary pressed for far more action before the currency gyrations threaten the economic stability of the world's biggest trading region.
The meeting with Japan's Finance Minister, Masayoshi Takemura, came at the opening of a meeting of finance ministers from around the Pacific on the resort island of Bali.
A senior Administration official who took part in the session said that Mr.
Takemura, a politician with no financial background prior to assuming his post last year, conceded that the package announced by Tokyo had "not been received favorably by the market and by market analysts."


BEST SELLERS: April 16, 1995
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
1
59
THE CELESTINE PROPHECY, by James Redfield. (Warner, $17.95.) An ancient manuscript, found in Peru, provides insights into achieving a fulfilling life.
2
3
43
POLITICALLY CORRECT BEDTIME STORIES, by James Finn Garner. (Macmillan, $8.95.) Classic tales respun to avoid offending current sensibilities.
3
4
8
BORDER MUSIC, by Robert James Waller. (Warner, $17.95.) A Texas rancher, trying to erase his Vietnam trauma, takes to the road with an exotic dancer.
4
2
5
OUR GAME, by John le Carre. (Knopf, $24.) Espionage, larceny and murder in Eastern and Western Europe in the post-cold war era.
5
12
2
A DOG'S LIFE, by Peter Mayle. (Knopf, $20.) The memoirs of Boy, a shaggy canine in Provence; with drawings by Edward Koren.
6
5
6
THE GLASS LAKE, by Maeve Binchy. (Delacorte, $23.95.) The unspoken ties that bind a woman and her mother in a small Irish town.
7*
13
4
PHENOMENAL WOMAN, by Maya Angelou. (Random House, $10.) Four poems celebrating women.
8
6
140
THE BRIDGES OF MADISON COUNTY, by Robert James Waller. (Warner, $16.95.) A photographer and a farmer's lonely wife in Iowa.
9
7
9
DAISY-HEAD MAYZIE, by Dr.
Seuss. (Random House, $15.) In words and pictures, the story of a girl whose head unexpectedly sprouts a daisy.
10
8
10
ORIGINAL SIN, by P.D.
James. (Knopf, $24.) Adam Dalgliesh probes a case involving intrigue, malice and murder in a prestigious London publishing house.
11
1
THE FOURTH PROCEDURE, by Stanley Pottinger. (Ballantine, $23.95.) A Congressman's romances, the abortion wars and medical mayhem played out in Washington.
12
5
THE JUROR, by George Dawes Green. (Warner, $21.95.) A woman's life takes a fearful turn when she is chosen as a juror for a mob trial.
13
9
26
MUTANT MESSAGE DOWN UNDER, by Marlo Morgan. (HarperCollins, $18.) In Australia's outback, an American woman learns about aboriginal philosophy.
14
11
3
SILENT TREATMENT, by Michael Palmer. (Bantam, $21.95.) A physician is the prime suspect when his estranged wife dies mysteriously in a hospital.
15
14
2
MOO, by Jane Smiley. (Knopf, $24.) Intrigues and machinations on the campus of a Midwestern state university.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Nonfiction
1
1
5
BREAKING THE SURFACE, by Greg Louganis with Eric Marcus. (Random House, $23.) The memoirs of the former Olympic diving champion.
2
2
27
THE HOT ZONE, by Richard Preston. (Random House, $23.) The discovery of a lethal virus, more infectious than H.I.V., and the efforts to keep it from spreading.
3
3
9
THE DEATH OF COMMON SENSE, by Philip K. Howard. (Random House, $18.) How governmental rules and regulations are fettering the lives of all Americans.
4
4
16
SISTERS, by Carol Saline.
Photographs by Sharon J. Wohlmuth. (Running Press, $27.50.) The relationships of 36 sets of sisters, reported in words and pictures.
5
8
58
MIDNIGHT IN THE GARDEN OF GOOD AND EVIL, by John Berendt. (Random House, $23.) The mysterious death of a young man in Savannah, Ga.
6
5
32
COUPLEHOOD, by Paul Reiser. (Bantam, $19.95.) Essays on the ups and downs of marriage by the television star and stand-up comedian.
7
6
5
AN ANTHROPOLOGIST ON MARS, by Oliver Sacks. (Knopf, $24.) Seven tales about people who compensated for their neurological afflictions by constructing worlds of their own.
8
14
3
THE DIARY OF A YOUNG GIRL, by Anne Frank.
Edited by Otto H. Frank and Mirjam Pressler. (Doubleday, $25.) The "definitive edition."
9
7
8
THE DISCIPLINE OF MARKET LEADERS, by Michael Treacy and Fred Wiersema. (Addison-Wesley, $25.) A discussion of competitive business strategies.
10
9
10
I WANT TO TELL YOU, by O.J.
Simpson. (Little, Brown, $17.95.) The former football star, now on trial for murder, responds to letters he has received.
11
10
69
THE BOOK OF VIRTUES, by William J. Bennett. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $30.) Moral stories adapted from the Greeks, the Bible, folklore and elsewhere.
12
11
5
BEING DIGITAL, by Nicholas Negroponte. (Knopf, $23.) How computers will alter our lives in the future.
13
12
20
THE WARREN BUFFETT WAY, by Robert G. Hagstrom Jr. (Wiley, $24.95.) An account of the career of the man said to be the world's most successful investor.
14
11
INSIDE THE WHITE HOUSE, by Ronald Kessler. (Pocket, $23.) Anecdotes about events at 1600 Pennsylvania Avenue during the past 30 years.
15
13
26
DON'T STAND TOO CLOSE TO A NAKED MAN, by Tim Allen. (Hyperion, $19.95.) Meditations on life by the star of "Home Improvement."
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous
1
1
99
MEN ARE FROM MARS, WOMEN ARE FROM VENUS, by John Gray. (HarperCollins, $23.) Communicating.
2
3
5
FIRST THINGS FIRST, by Stephen R. Covey, A. Roger Merrill and Rebecca R. Merrill. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $23.) Ways to organize your life to be successful.
3
2
9
THE BEARDSTOWN LADIES' COMMON-SENSE INVESTMENT GUIDE. (Godin/Hyperion, $19.95.) Tips.
4
1
MARS AND VENUS IN THE BEDROOM, by John Gray. (HarperCollins, $22.) Ways to maintain a long-term, passionate monogamous relationship.
Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending April 1, at 3,050 bookstores plus wholesalers serving 28,000 other retailers (gift shops, department stores, newsstands, supermarkets), statistically weighted to represent sales in all such outlets nationwide.
An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
And Bear in Mind (Editor's Choices of other recent books of particular interest) CLOSEST COMPANION: The Unknown Story of the Intimate Friendship Between Franklin Roosevelt and Margaret Suckley, edited by Geoffrey C. Ward. (Houghton Mifflin, $24.95.) Margaret Suckley's diary shows F.D.R. finding comfort in a distant cousin who could relax, however worshipfully, in his presence.
GENIUS IN DISGUISE: Harold Ross of The New Yorker, by Thomas Kunkel. (Random House, $25.) Forty-four years after Ross's death, this first full-scale biography of the creator of The New Yorker tries to account for the formidable editorial instincts, integrity and self-knowledge that underlay his success.
THE LAST GREAT FRENCHMAN: A Life of General de Gaulle, by Charles Williams. (Wiley, $30.) The career of the much-taller-than-life soldier whose political victories were based on a loathing for politicians and a willingness to chuck his allies.
THE LOVES OF FAUSTYNA, by Nina FitzPatrick. (Penguin, paper, $9.95.) At a sign from heaven, the Polish heroine of this frolicky picaresque novel abandons her virginity; when martial law arrives in 1981, she opens serious negotiations with the powers of political darkness.
MEMOIR FROM ANTPROOF CASE, by Mark Helprin. (Harcourt Brace, $24.) The slowly unfolding self-revelation of Oscar Progresso, the thoughtful, aged eccentric who narrates this novel while planning a fantastical crime.
MOZART: A Life, by Maynard Solomon. (HarperCollins, $35.) A psychologically informed and often brilliant analysis of Mozart (and his father) that complicates rather than simplifies our understanding of Mozart.
As it should.
NANO.
The Emerging Science of Nanotechnology: Remaking the World -- Molecule by Molecule, by Ed Regis. (Little, Brown, $23.95.) Crisp science journalism about a possible world of endless bounty, produced by incredibly tiny machines.
NEW YORK 1960: Architecture and Urbanism Between the Second World War and the Bicentennial, by Robert A.M.
Stern, Thomas Mellins and David Fishman. (Monacelli/Penguin, $125.) A huge book that takes account of the city's development as the world capital of finance and art; with extensive local descriptions.
A VOID, by Georges Perec. (Harvill/HarperCollins, $24.) The letter E never occurs in this 1969 French novel or in its translation by Gilbert Adair; what does occur is a wildly amusing feast of puzzles, mind games and rules broken just to exhibit their latent existence.
WAITING FOR THE DARK, WAITING FOR THE LIGHT, by Ivan Klima. (Grove, $21.) A fine, skeptical novel, published in Prague in 1993; its hero, a cameraman and would-be film maker, fears that the corruption of spirit induced under the old regime may be permanent.
WONDER BOYS, by Michael Chabon. (Villard, $23.) An intelligent, lyrical book whose graceful melancholy and good humor save it from being just a novel about a novelist making a novel.


Using Zoning to Spur Lower-Priced Housing
LYNN ZAMBRANA'S condominium looks out to the tall oak trees and the occasional deer on historic Princeton Ridge, the overlook where the British first spied the Continental Army, a sighting that ignited the Battle of Princeton in 1777.
"It's so pretty I don't even want curtains," Mrs.
Zambrana said of the view from the three-bedroom unit she and her husband, Hector, bought 14 months ago.
Given his $32,000 annual salary as a mail carrier in nearby Lawrenceville and her decision to quit her job as a mail carrier to raise the couple's two children, the Zambranas feel lucky to have found a unit that cost only $70,000.


On Recruitment In Basketball
I would like to commend the well-written, balanced and generally accurate article on March 19 about the Tuckahoe-Dobbs Ferry-Mark Blount incident at the Section 1 Class D basketball finals and its aftermath ("After Star Players Collide, Angry Talk and Lawyers").
However, the claim of the Tuckahoe supporters that the Dobbs Ferry coach, John Costello, recruited players Mark Blount and Dan O'Connor cannot be left unanswered.
Quite simply, the claim is preposterous.
Anyone familiar with Coach Costello's 30-plus years of coaching knows that he does not recruit.
He was as surprised as everyone else in Dobbs Ferry when Blount and O'Connor enrolled at the high school.


Corrections
An article in Styles last Sunday about hats made of braided hair by Daisy Curbeon misstated the address of Curbeon International, her salon in Manhattan.
It is at 45 East 34th Street.
The article also misstated the name of a store in Pasadena, Calif., that sells the hats.
It is Bemo, not Beno.


Use of Hydrogen as Fuel Is Moving Closer to Reality
Buoyed by renewed political interest and technological promise, efforts are being stepped up to make hydrogen an important source of energy in the United States.
For decades, advocates of hydrogen have promoted it as the fuel of the future: an abundant, environmentally clean source of energy for power plants, airplanes, automobiles, homes and just about everything a modern society finds essential.


Home for the Holidays
The imagination of William Joyce has taken many shapes -- books, New Yorker covers, cookie jars, the windows of Saks Fifth Avenue at Christmas.
But none is more sublime than the reinvention of his home on every major holiday.
From the exploding fortress he builds for Independence Day to the Day of the Dead soiree at Halloween, the Joyce household in Shreveport, La., is always in the throes of creative overload.
The author and illustrator who came to prominence with the publication of the children's book "Dinosaur Bob" describes his style -- an amalgam of Art Deco, 50's robotics, and Second Empire -- as "demented Norman Rockwell." An apt description for his wacky decorating approach as well.


April 9-15; Mr. Trump Dumps a Trophy
The world has changed a lot since "Mr. and Mrs. Alfred G. Vanderbilt and servant" were the first to register as guests at the Plaza Hotel in 1907.
Donald J. Trump's world has changed too, and in a much shorter time.
When he bought the landmark at 59th Street and Fifth Avenue near Central Park in 1988 for about $400 million in borrowed money, the real estate market was riding high, and so was Mr.
Trump.
Knowing its history of fashion and glamour, he called the hotel "the ultimate trophy."


New Company Offers A Spring Opera Gala
QUITE a few opera companies have come and gone in Westchester over the years, and now there is a new one: the Westchester Hudson Opera Company, which has high hopes for longevity.
Charles Rosekrans, the music director, brings national connections to the company, including a 17-year association with the Houston Grand Opera and more than 27 years with Opera Carolina.


E-Mail
The Week in Review's electronic mail address is review@nytimes.com.


MTV-Inspired Images, but the Message for Children Is a Moral One
"As some of you know, today you'll be learning Strategy Mode P," a Star Trek-style fleet commander in wraparound sunglasses told the rapt fourth and fifth graders.
"Strategy Mode P is a way to communicate with God, our supreme commander. In short, Strategy Mode P is prayer."
A student playing the role of a skeptical cadet climbed into a flight-simulator chair on stage.
As the big overhead screen dissolved into an asteroid bombardment, the cadet learned to bob and weave between them by calling to God for help.


Let's Look at the Politics of Gambling
To the Editor:
William Safire's ordinarily laudable libertarian impulses seem to fail him whenever he discusses gambling ("Gambling Fever," April 10).
It is true that some gamblers are problem gamblers, just as some drinkers become alcoholics.
We do not reflexively ban the liquor business, nor do we argue that the state should have nothing to do with it.


Corrections
A review on page 21 of The Times Book Review today, about "Departures," by Jennifer C. Cornell, misidentifies the city of the author's upbringing because of erroneous information supplied by the publisher.
Ms.
Cornell was raised in Boston, Mass., not Belfast, Northern Ireland.


Deals and Discounts
WEST COAST SAVINGS The Kimpton Group's 18 hotels on the West Coast are offering summer rates and packages.
In San Francisco, the 144-room Hotel Bedford, 761 Post Street, (415) 673-6040 or (800) 227-5642, has a Critic's Choice rate of $89 a night for one or two persons from May 1 to Oct. 31.
The 106-room Vintage Court, at 650 Bush Street in San Francisco, (415) 392-4666 or (800) 654-1100, offers a Cable Car package from April 30 to Aug. 31 for $110 a night, including Continental breakfast and two one-day cable car passes.


Bonilla Is Fit to Be Tied Until Proved Fit to Play
Bobby Bonilla entered the locker room and headed straight for the bulletin board.
The lineup card for tonight's game against the Atlanta Braves had been posted.
All of the Mets' top players were listed except for Bonilla, who had missed the previous day's workouts with back problems.
Bonilla took one look and headed straight for the manager's office.


IRAQIS DENOUNCE U.N. OIL PROPOSAL
The Iraqi Government yesterday denounced a United Nations plan to allow limited sales of Iraqi oil and organized large anti-American demonstrations in Baghdad.
"I think the voices of the masses have expressed the Iraqi stand," the speaker of the Iraqi Parliament, Saadi Mahdi Saleh, told Associated Press Television during one rally.
"What you heard from the people is rejection of this decision."


April 9-15; You Either Like This Stamp or You Don't
AMERICANS may still be divided about his legacy, historians may still be debating his impact and Oliver Stone may still be mucking around in the dark recesses of his soul, but as far as the United States Postal Service is concerned there is nothing to discuss.
Next week, the Postal Service will issue a 32-cent stamp honoring President Richard Nixon.
Postal tradition has it that such stamps are issued on a president's birthday the year following his death.
Mr.
Nixon's stamp was delayed a few months because his birthday -- Jan. 9 -- fell just at the time postage rates were being raised.
But postal officials say they never gave a moment's thought to the idea -- raised by some philatelists -- that Mr.
Nixon should be denied a spot on a first-class letter simply because he left the White House in disgrace.


UP FRONT: CHATTER - Half Empty? Half Full?; . . . Or a Symptom?
My suspicion is that we are not seeing an increase in littering but rather one effect of the extra $3 you and I get each week in our paychecks.
Of course, another effect is that the road lights are off, so we only have to look at the litter during the daylight hours.
Personally, I don't need tax cuts.
I prefer New Jersey to be a place that people can be proud to say they live in.
JOSH DUBNICK Hopatcong


Do City Drivers Hold Key To Opening Children's Zoo?
To The Editor:
"A No-Zoo Revue" (April 9) states the amounts of money needed to reopen and run the Children's Zoo in Central Park.
Couldn't the city find part of this money by eliminating some of its chauffeured limousines?


New Setback In Renovation Of Hudson St.
The $23.6 million renovation of Hudson Street, plagued by problems for nearly two years, has been set back again, this time because its contractor could not meet its payroll.
The contractor, Land Site, had been scheduled to resume work tomorrow after a winter break but recently dismissed workers, said Richard Ocken, an assistant commissioner at the City Department of Transportation.


It's Still Not Too Late to Start Publishing Comic Strips; 61 Years of Magic
To the Editor:
In your April 9 editorial marking the centennial of newspaper comics, you neglect to mention the two longest instances of a creator still working on his creations.
The oldest is "Mandrake the Magician," created by Lee Falk in 1934.
The second oldest is "The Phantom," created in 1936, also by Lee Falk!


Topics of the Times; In Hot Water Over Hot Sauce
It would not have been the first time food was used as a weapon.
In the famous Roald Dahl story, dramatized on "Alfred Hitchcock Presents," a wife kills her husband with a frozen leg of lamb and then serves the roasted murder weapon to detectives.
But this was surely the first time anyone got arrested on a charge of assault with a deadly pepper.


Whirling Cocteau Plot Gets Staircase to Match
A SUICIDAL WOMAN gathers her bohemian family into her elegantly dilapidated Parisian boudoir, where any number of inelegant emotions will soon fatally ricochet.
Blue-gray and shadowy, like the bottom of the sea, the room is full of visual shocks: clothing cascades from an armoire onto the dim reaches of the carpeted floor.
A table drowns under its cargo of ancient jars and bottles.
Time and its agent, the sun, are strangers to this lushly cool environment in the first and third acts of "Les Parents Terribles." Retitled "Indiscretions" for Broadway, Jean Cocteau's 1938 fever dream of a play is in previews at the Ethel Barrymore Theater, where it opens on April 27.
Starring Kathleen Turner and Eileen Atkins as two sisters, Yvonne and Leonie (called Leo), and Roger Rees as George, a failed inventor whom one married and the other loved, the play traces the complicated relationships among these three, as well as that of Michael -- Yvonne and George's son -- who is all but devoured by his mother, and Madeleine, the young woman with whom Michael falls in love.


Corrections
A chart on April 2 listing stocks that might be bargains included out-of-date per-share earnings figures for two companies.
Adjusting for recent stock splits, Callaway Golf earned $1.06 and Briggs &amp; Stratton Corporation earned $3.54.


Butterflies Are Free but They Do Like Food
ANYONE who has been visited by butterflies knows well their magic.
These lovely creatures visit silently and for only a moment.
The spell is cast.
Then they are gone.
Want to have more of these magic moments?


CLINTON LAYS OUT THREE PRIORITIES FOR LEGISLATION
President Clinton today laid out a short list of his priorities in his next round of wrangling with the Republican Congress, saying that he was intent on winning passage of tax cuts linked to education, a welfare overhaul that promotes work and anti-crime measures that preserve the ban on assault-style weapons.
The three-point list, which Mr.
Clinton presented in his weekly radio address, offered the sharpest vision yet of his agenda for the months ahead and represented his most forceful attempt to win back control of the capital's agenda.


Riding the Wild Surf: Australians and Conner Win in Furiously Contested Cup Races
It was as if an afterburner had been lighted on the America's Cup courses here today, with both challengers and defenders going at each other with so much ferocity that tactics overruled boat speed, and determination set the score.
Not once before in this year of America's Cup trials had a sailboat come off the start line with as much grit and determination as did One Australia, a boat that hadn't much hope.
And for Stars &amp; Stripes, which has seen its own side of a slump, victory came at the expense of an opponent with a fancy new rudder.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
INVENTING EASTERN EUROPE  The Map of Civilization  on the Mind of the Enlightenment.
By Larry Wolff.
Stanford University, $49.50.


Mitterrand: Forgotten Incumbent
The nine candidates vying to replace President Francois Mitterrand, 78 and ailing, as France's chief of state act most of the time as if he isn't even there.
The two conservative candidates, Mayor Jacques Chirac of Paris and Prime Minister Edouard Balladur, hardly ever mention him by name, reserving their heavy guns for each other in a campaign now in its final stages.
What they usually say they want is to sweep away 14 years of socialism rather than the two-term Socialist Party incumbent.


Wetteland Is Just a Closer Who Walks With the Lord
John Wetteland is drinking coffee from a large mug with the words "Jesus Lives" emblazoned across it in big, black letters.
He grins and nods when someone comments on the mug.
His Bible is resting on a shelf in his locker and he has a personal computer at his disposal so he can retrieve morning devotionals from an on-line program and pray before the Yankees begin another day of baseball.
"I honestly try and walk with Jesus Christ every day," he said, describing his most important relationship, more important than his relationship with his wife.


Junior and the Old Dog Try Some Quality Time
Born to Be Wild  Wil Horneff Directed by John Gray PG 98 minutes


Butterflies Are Free but They Do Like Food
ANYONE who has been visited by butterflies knows well their magic.
These lovely creatures visit silently and for only a moment.
The spell is cast.
Then they are gone.
Want to have more of these magic moments?


Toward Training Responsible Drivers
As a high school "Driver and Traffic Safety Education Instructor, the correct title, and chairperson dedicated toward making our roadways safer for drivers young and old, we read "Drivers' Ed Classes: A Debate Heats Up Over Effectiveness"  [ Feb. 26 ]  with much interest.
Are driver and traffic safety education classes effective?
A broad-based study cannot realistically answer this question.
As with any legitimate program, effectiveness is achievable through a well-constructed, detailed and executed program.


IN SHORT: FICTION
NERVOUS DANCER By Carol Lee Lorenzo. University of Georgia, $22.95.


County Is Sponsoring Earth Day Celebration
IN honor of Earth Day's silver anniversary, the county's Department of Parks, Recreation and Conservation will present its fourth yearly Celebrate the Earth activities next Sunday at Lasdon Park and Arboretum in Somers.
The event, which also recognizes Arbor Day, is primarily sponsored by Texaco and to lesser degrees by the International Paper Company Foundation and the Pepsi-Cola Company, assisted by Save-a-Tree.


Prank Is on Piniella
Seattle Mariners Manager LOU PINIELLA thought he had seen everything until he went to his office in Peoria, Ariz., yesterday.
Waiting for him was a 1,200-pound Hereford.
"I lost a steak dinner to Lou on a bet, so there's his steak," said the Mariners' KEN GRIFFEY JR., who pulled the practical joke.


Jodi Levine, Adam Braunstein
Jodi Lynn Levine, the daughter of Joan and Allan Levine of Ocean, N.J., was married last Sunday to Adam Mantel Braunstein, a son of Gilda and Peter Braunstein, also of Ocean.
Rabbi Henry Weiner performed the ceremony at Congregation B'nai Tikvah in North Brunswick, N.J.


Q and A
Going to Greenland
Q.
We are planning a trip to Greenland and we're wondering if there are any inexpensive hotels in Godthaab. -- Ellen Leopold, Reseda, Calif.


Budget Time For County's Schools
SCHOOL budgets come up for a vote on May 3, and the issues surrounding them are many: concern about certiorari settlements, balancing classroom size with increasing enrollment, personnel cuts, a desire to expand technology, uncertainty about state aid and caution about an electorate that often rubber-stamps superintendents' proposals.
For residents in 34 school districts (the cities of Mount Vernon, Peekskill, New Rochelle, Rye, White Plains and Yonkers finance their schools as part of their municipal budgets), the yearly vote offers one of the few opportunities to be heard on a tax proposal.
In recent years, voter frustration with rising tax rates has been expressed by taxpayer groups, which have had particular impact in Yorktown and Irvington.
Similar alliances in other districts have sought measures like linking the superintendent's salary to cost savings and pupil performance and demanding a salary freeze for teachers and clerical personnel.


Giants Sign Douglass
The Giants have signed the veteran Chicago Bears safety MAURICE DOUGLASS to a two-year deal worth a reported $1.4 million.
The 31-year-old Douglass led the Bears in special-teams tackles for three seasons in a row.
He started 12 games since joining the Bears in 1986 as an eighth-round pick out of Kentucky.
Douglass is not expected to start for the Giants. (AP)


Cuban Rallies Will Oppose A U.S. Bill
The Cuban Government, alarmed that a bill in the United States Congress would allow Cuban-Americans to lay new claims to property abandoned or seized when the Communists took power in 1959, is planning a series of huge public meetings in Havana and other cities to drum up opposition, the president of Cuba's National Assembly said in an interview on Friday.
The official, Ricardo Alarcon, a former Foreign Minister of Cuba and now its chief negotiator with Washington in immigration talks, said the Congressional effort could severely worsen already bad relations with the United States.
Mr.
Alarcon added that the bill could produce more illegal immigration but denied that Cuba would use the meetings to promote a new wave of migration in retaliation.


The Cries of Life's Vulnerable Castaways
AUSTIN QUINN, young, good-looking and exceedingly rich, is standing on a bridge, writing.
"Dear Dad,


PRO BASKETBALL: Drive Time for Starks; Knicks Hope Mercurial Guard Has Post-Season Rebound
Say this about John Starks.
He can be inconsistent.
He can be emotional.
But he never runs from pressure.
Take Friday night against the Indiana Pacers.
Starks got a technical foul in the third quarter for kicking a sideline table in frustration.
He had another terrible shooting night, making just 2 of 10 from the field.
But with the score tied, and the outcome hanging in the balance, Starks made something happen.
Unable to get the ball to Patrick Ewing, Starks drove into the lane, drew the defense, then whipped an intelligent pass to Derek Harper standing wide open in the deep left corner.
Harper made the game-winning 3-pointer with 7.5 seconds to play, the Knicks captured a crucial 88-84 victory, and that quickly, a potentially dreadful game for Starks ended in celebration.


A New Son . . . and a Home Equity Loan
Emotionally and financially drained by uninsured infertility testing, Mary Kaye and John Kuzma, both 35, went to an adoption agency in January 1994.
The Minneapolis couple, married nine years, decided "we'd rather be parents and spend our money on a sure thing rather than keep trying for a homemade baby," said Mrs.
Kuzma.
"We never thought we'd be spending $20,000."
They came close.
Bringing 4-month-old Nicholas from an orphanage in Perm, Russia, cost $17,000.


Straight Talk
THE INVENTION OF HETEROSEXUALITY By Jonathan Ned Katz.
Foreword by Gore Vidal. 291 pp.
New York: Dutton. $22.95.


From Egypt to the Vatican: Giving Old Art a New Cast
The Western world is studded with mythic places: primeval forests, rivers of life, sacred mountains.
In this excerpt from his new book, "Landscape and Memory," being published this month by Alfred A. Knopf, Simon Schama, a professor of the humanities at Columbia University, explores the revisions of ancient rites and icons to meet the needs of later cultures.
IN 1512 A COLOSSAL RECLINING statue was discovered in the rubble of a late-Roman temple of Isis on the Monte Cavallo in Rome.
In all respects it corresponded to the river-god types familiar from Greek statuary and Roman coins: bearded, mostly nude but with drapery that seemed to suggest the flowing waters and, most important for the classical tradition, holding the Horn of Plenty.
The fact that this particular statue group included the figures of Romulus and Remus suckled by the she-wolf clinched its identification as the Tiber.
And it was in this auspicious guise that it was brought to the collection of antique statuary in the Vatican.


Police Rotation, or Shakeup?
Since December, new commanders have been assigned to 6 of the Bronx's 10 police precincts -- three in the last month.
Police officials said that it is standard practice to rotate commanders and that it was a coincidence that more than half of the commands changed within a few months.


Lessons Needed
To the Editor:
Herbert Muschamp's loss of his friend is tragic; yet comparing Ross Bleckner as a painter in relationship to AIDS is an insult.
Mr.
Bleckner's art is, at best, freshman high school D+ work (been there, seen it, done it).
There are a group of us (still alive) who truly know what it is like to stay up nightly till 3 A.M. at our easels.
We are learning true discipline and finesse from Van Dyck, Caravaggio, Sir Thomas Lawrence, Lord Leighton and Bouguereau.
This is our foundation; then we will move to the next step.
Ross Bleckner needs drawing lessons.
DOUGLAS RILEY  New York


Buenos Aires
First-time visitors to Buenos Aires are often surprised by its stately turn-of-the-century French architecture, broad avenues, bustling cafes and tranquil parks -- all of which suggest a city more European than Latin American.
Indeed, its residents have long thought of Buenos Aires as the Paris of the Southern Hemisphere, and for good reason.
At the same time, Buenos Aires has its own ethnic flair, particularly evident in the many tango clubs and discos where patrons dance to Salsa and other Latin beats.
With more than a decade of democracy under its belt after brutal military dictatorships in the 1970's and 1980's, Argentina is undergoing a renaissance.
Its cultural and artistic communities, centered in Buenos Aires, are thriving again after years of repression, and economic reforms have attracted new investment dollars.
As a result, old neighborhoods are being gentrified, such as Puerto Madero on the waterfront, where dilapidated brownstones have been turned into some of the trendiest lofts, offices and restaurants in town.


Continental In the West Village
CAFE DE BRUXELLES


Unleashed
IT STARTED WITH FRANK, A DOG BELONGING TO BOB SHACOCHIS, A writer.
During the course of a New Year's fishing trip, Frank composed a poem titled "Wind." It goes, "Leaves -- I thought they were birds." Well, if one dog could write, why not others?


Suicide Threat Ends Peacefully At Penn Station
A woman who said she was distraught over the breakup of her marriage held the police at bay for more than three hours last night with a pistol pointed at her temple in a concourse at Pennsylvania Station, the police said.
The woman, Michelle Moore, 23, of Portland, Maine, pulled out the gun, a .45-caliber Colt semiautomatic, and threatened to kill herself about 6:40 P.M. near a police booth on the mezzanine level of a concourse that houses Amtrak and New Jersey Transit ticket counters.


Out of the Mud, Into the Morass
BOSNIA is famous for its pervasive "glina," the cloying mud in which various armies and peoples have found themselves stuck over the centuries, giving rise to the hybrid society of vivid eyes and lively minds that lies in ruins today.
The latest hostage of the "glina" is the three-year-old Bosnian war itself, stuck in virtual stalemate and ever further from resolution.
As the snow melts on the mountains around Sarajevo, and yet another fighting season begins, it seems clear that, as Bosnia's Prime Minister, Haris Silajdzic, said this month, the war could last another decade.


Waving Goodbye To Ergonomics
IT will never be sound-bite material.
And it seems curiously out of place, alongside "confiscatory taxation" and "welfare cheats," on the list of public evils that conservative Republicans want to eradicate from American society.
Yet ergonomics -- a discipline intended to design jobs and tools to fit the physical and psychological limits of people -- has become a bete noire of the conservative Republicans who control Congress.
As part of their war on Government regulations, they are trying to derail an effort by the Occupational Safety and Health Administration to develop an ergonomic standard to protect workers.


Good History? Perhaps Not, But Good Music
DURING THE FILMING OF "Jefferson in Paris," the Merchant Ivory movie about Thomas Jefferson's years as minister to France, Gwyneth Paltrow showed off a trick she had recently learned.
Ms.
Paltrow, who plays Jefferson's daughter Patsy in the film, went to the harpsichord and gave a stylish reading of "La Lugeac," a brisk showpiece by the 18th-century composer Claude Balbastre.
What was remarkable was that she had taken up the harpsichord only a few months earlier and, unable to read music, had learned the piece by rote.
Similarly, Nick Nolte, who plays Jefferson, learned the rudiments of violin playing, and Greta Scacchi, who portrays Jefferson's paramour, the painter and composer Maria Cosway, learned to sing and to play the harpsichord and the harp.


For a Touch of Spring, Add Herbs, Garlic, Cream and Cheese
FEATHERY herbs, a whiff of garlic and perhaps a judicious splash of cream or a touch of cheese are all it takes for that light, quick springtime touch.
Pasta, potatoes and rice all benefit from such treatment.


American Jews Today
To the Editor:
Phillip Lopate has such a jaundiced view of Seymour Martin Lipset and Earl Raab's "Jews and the New American Scene" (March 26) that I rubbed my eyes and picked up the book again to see why I had thought it interesting and authoritative on the situation of American Jews today, and on the particular dilemma of maintaining separateness in an open and welcoming society.
Not an entirely new topic, of course, but a serious and perplexing one for Jews and their insti tutions.


The Last Days of a Garden Where Memories Grew
It is 67 years old, and no major arena in this country is older.
There are more championship banners than you can count hanging from the rafters and more lasting images than you could ever fit on a page.
It is the place where Red Auerbach lighted up his victory cigars, where Bill Russell swatted away shots, where Bobby Orr made the Bruins the best team in hockey and where an early Celtic, Tony Lavelli, played the accordion on the court at halftime.
When the Knicks meet the Celtics on Friday night at Boston Garden it will be the last regular-season game ever played on that famous parquet floor.
Ten days later, the Bruins and the Ottawa Senators will play the last regular-season hockey game on Boston Garden ice.
It won't end there -- the Bruins, and probably the Celtics, will still have playoff dates this spring in Boston Garden -- but the buzzer is about to sound on a long and colorful era.


A Job Opening in Brooklyn: Poet Laureate
The Brooklyn poet laureate's study is unused now.
There are an old memo pad, books and photographs in the tiny, lamplighted Brooklyn Heights den.
A walking stick, polished but untouched, stands in a corner.
And there is a poem taped to the bulletin board. It opens:


Newspaper Wars: Old vs. New
IS the state heating up for a newspaper war?
Some knowledgeable followers, and sometime-critics, of Connecticut's news media say that seems to be the case following the announcement that the aggressive Journal Register Company of Trenton, N.J., is raising its stake considerably in Connecticut journalism.
The Journal Register, which already owns The New Haven Register, the state's second-largest daily newspaper, and smaller dailies in Bristol and Torrington, now is buying more than 45 publications, mostly weekly newspapers and mostly in Connecticut, from Capital Cities/ ABC Inc.


Alfredo Leonardi, Pharmacologist, 66
Alfredo Leonardi, the founding administrator of the Mario Negri Institute for Pharmacological Research in Milan, Italy, died on Tuesday at Riunite Hospital in Bergamo, Italy.
He was 66.
The cause was myeloma, said Silvio Garattini, director of the institute.


Fashion Dictator
And so, in the end, it was not the fall of the Berlin wall or even the breakup of the Soviet Union that signaled the swan song of Communism.
Rather it was the sight of Fidel Castro having lunch recently at the Elysee Palace in a dark blue business suit and polka-dot necktie.
The old Marxist lion who swore 35 years ago when he marched into Havana that he would not remove his military fatigues until the Cuban revolution was safely insured thus bent to the four-star dress code of the capitalist West.
True, he looked a little stiff reviewing French troops in the single-breasted suit that was created by the Dutch designer Merel van't Wout.
It was even a little sad to see all three buttons closed tight on the fancy jacket.
And his hands were heartbreakingly aligned along the imaginary gig line of his expensive trousers (old habits are hard to break).
But thankfully he avoided his usual accessories -- no boxy, little peaked hat, or holstered sidearms.


Express Service to Wall Street, and Nowhere Else
There is no cab stand like it anywhere else in the city.
Every weekday from 5 A.M. to 10 A.M., taxis swerve over to a designated passenger queue on York Avenue at 79th Street.
Groups of four get into cabs for an express trip down the F.D.R.
Drive to Wall Street at a special fare of $3.50 apiece.


'The New Victorians'
To the Editor:
I'm disappointed that both Rene Denfeld and Michelle Green have such contempt for feminism and its positive impact on their lives.
After years of working with some of our leading feminists and feminist organizations, I honestly have no idea how either of them can come to the conclusions they have.


Basques Find Inspiration as I.R.A. Talks of Peace
Basque nationalists who want to bring an end to 26 years of violence are looking to Northern Ireland for a lesson in how to start talks for an enduring peace.
They are finding that the answer may lie not in the shape of the negotiating table or other details but in the spirit of the enterprise.


Journal; Second-Best Killer of the Week
If I had to choose a favorite killer of the week, give me the teen-age girl who bludgeoned her mother with a lead-crystal candlestick holder and got turned away from Harvard.
Not the man who mastered number-crunching at the Harvard Business School and later took his charts to Washington, where he used them to prolong a war whose body count totaled 58,000 American and some 3 million Vietnamese lives.
Robert McNamara says that he has published his book now to combat the "cynicism" threatening the relationship between Americans and their leaders.
He's right in one respect: Cynicism about this country's institutions, political and otherwise, knows few bounds.
When the news spread a week ago that Harvard had reversed its decision to admit Gina Grant, a star student who had not revealed her crime or court-adjudicated punishment on her admissions application, public sentiment instantly favored Ms.
Grant, not Harvard.
That's Mr.
McNamara's legacy.


Family Values, Wendy's Style
Timothy and Lynn Wade, both 38, were the first recipients to enjoy the raft of benefits that Wendy's, the fast-food company, has offered employees who have adopted since 1989.
Wendy's policy entitles employees up to $4,000 for each adopted child and up to $6,000 for a special-needs child.
In addition, an employee who adopts and has worked for four years or more can take six weeks' paid leave, identical to Wendy's maternity benefits.
"It helped," Mr.
Wade, a franchise area director, said, though the benefit plan defrayed only part of the cost.
The couple paid $10,000 and $8,500 for adopting Brian and Brittany, respectively.


IN SHORT: FICTION
THE ACID HOUSE  By Irvine Welsh. Norton, paper, $11.


'A Lone Voice'
To the Editor:
In all the thousands of words written by critics on the Guggenheim Museum, none has caught the essence as Herbert Muschamp has.
His essay echoes my feelings perfectly.
It feels so good to have one's judgment validated, especially when you find you are a lone voice.


Marketing's Focus Turns to Lawyers
THE advertisement jumps off the Yellow Pages: "Hurt by accident? You've been injured and you're suffering. You're upset and you're angry. What do you do now? Call us." Beside the words is a full-length photograph of John Haymond, a lawyer specializing in personal injury cases, smiling in his pin-stripe suit.
While some lawyers say they think Mr.
Haymond's radio, television, bus and billboard advertisements are in bad taste, a growing number are finding ways to pursue business more zealously than ever.
Many, like Mr.
Haymond, are responding to increasing competition for clients by hiring law firm marketing experts.


Bogus Candidates Sometimes Slip Through the College Admissions Screen
After two widely publicized incidents within a week involving admissions at Harvard and Yale, college administrators were saying that small lies are usually uncovered during the admissions process, but a determined applicant who fabricates a lustrous past or conceals damaging information sometimes slips through.
Yale last week expelled a C-minus community college student who forged an A-plus past and gained admission.
And Harvard, in a less clear-cut case, rescinded its acceptance of a student who beat her mother to death with a lead crystal candlestick four years ago and may have misled officials during the application process.


Their Movies Were 'Beautiful Fantasies'
IF YOU HAVE BEEN procrastinating about catching up with the Powell-Pressburger movies, time is running out.
A retrospective of Powell and Pressburger films, using restored 35-millimeter prints from the British Film Institute, will finish playing at Film Forum in Manhattan later this month.
The last film in the series is one of the team's favorites, the 1946 "A Matter of Life and Death," which was called "Stairway to Heaven" when it was released in the United States.
Michael Powell and Emeric Pressburger have never been household names in the United States.
But their logo as the Archers, a target shot full of arrows, is a stamp of quality for the 14 films they made between 1941 and 1956.
Among those films were "Black Narcissus" (1946), "Tales of Hoffmann" (1951) and the acclaimed "Red Shoes" (1948) with Moira Shearer.


POSTINGS: Parks and Transportation Departments Debate Future of Former Link Between Randalls and Wards Islands; At City Agencies, Troubled Water Over Bridge
It once spanned the Little Hell Gate, a narrow channel separating Randalls and Wards Islands in the East River.
The channel was filled in by the early 1960's, and the Little Hell Gate Bridge deteriorated.
The Department of Transportation closed it and built a service road beside it.
Now the agency has signed a contract to destroy the 1,000-foot steel-arch span, which is not landmarked.
But Parks Commissioner Henry Stern wants to save the bridge from destruction.
The bridge, designed by O. H. Ammann, who designed the George Washington Bridge, "has architectural merit," Mr.
Stern said; "we like it, and we'd like to keep it."


Travel Agent Fees
To the Editor:
In times when travel agents' commissions are capped, why would we look to book a higher fare when there are no higher commissions. ("Agents' Fees: Never Mind," Diary, April 2).
And I take it as a personal insult to insinuate that I would not give my clients the best available options.
I have booked thousands of business trips and vacations for thousands of people.
We are a service business, and when I serve a customer, my integrity is at stake.
A difference of a few dollars more or less commission is not what has made me the quality travel agent that I am.
The services of a travel agent are among the few things that you can still get free.
ELAINE FALBER Yonkers, April 2


Gardeners Squash Roach Movie Plan
They dressed up like roaches and chained themselves to a fence.
They battled a film company and a city agency, all to preserve a community garden for one last season.
And in the end, the gardeners won.
The film company, Roachco Inc., had planned to shoot a movie called "Joe's Apartment" in the ABC Garden on Eighth Street between Avenues B and C. The film, about a Midwesterner who moves to the Lower East Side and, with the help of animated roaches, builds a garden on a vacant lot would have required the demolition of the garden.


April 9-15: Wheeler Dealers; Financiers' Plans to Buy Chrysler Stuns Wall Street
What do Kirk Kerkorian and Lee A. Iacocca want?
The septuagenarian duo astounded the auto industry and Wall Street this week by announcing they hoped to buy the Chrysler Corporation for $22.8 billion, almost half of it borrowed.


A Life of Motion And Anticipation
The Toyota Celica has been replaced by a sparkling, specially ordered white Lexus.
The cramped, one-room dorm room has been left for a nifty two-bedroom apartment in Vicksburg, 20 miles from the Alcorn State campus.
He has 22 hours of classes and is on schedule to graduate next month.
There were recently two workouts on campus, one solely for the Carolina Panthers, who select first in the National Football League draft on Saturday, and then another for the rest of the National Football League that was attended by more than 20 teams.
He shot a commercial last week and the requests for speeches to high schools and civic organizations keep coming.
And now he sports a snappy ring with 22 diamonds, the spoils of winning the Walter Payton Award as the best player in the Southwestern Athletic Conference.


Junior and the Old Dog Try Some Quality Time
Don Juan DeMarco  Johnny Depp, Marlon Brando, Faye Dunaway Directed by Jeremy Levin PG-13 97 minutes


In Some Places, Credit Hogs Have Limits
WHEN merchants reserve more of a consumer's credit than the amount of a purchase, they are engaging in a practice that is not only annoying, but also sometimes illegal, according to the New York State Attorney General's office.
After a customer pushes a credit card across a counter, some merchants routinely send an electronic message to the card issuer to reserve a chunk of the consumer's available credit.
The practice is most common among rental car companies, gasoline stations and hotels, which want to assure that they are paid in full and do not know what the final bill will be.
Hotels, for example, may block off extra credit to cover meals or telephone calls.


Robin M. Gugick, Andrew M. Mayer
Robin Mindy Gugick, the daughter of Leonard and Susan Gugick of Scarsdale, N.Y., was married on April 8 in White Plains to Andrew Michael Mayer, a son of Dr.
Donald Mayer of Scarsdale and the late Dr.
Sondra Mayer.
Rabbi Amiel Wohl performed the ceremony at the Woman's Club of White Plains.
Mrs.
Mayer, 29, graduated from the University of Michigan and received an M.B.A. from Columbia University.
She is a vice president and a senior corporate bond analyst at Prudential Securities in New York.
Her father was formerly a vice president of finance at Lever Brothers, the consumer-products company, in New York.
Her mother, who owns Birch Graphics Inc. in Scarsdale, is an advertising consultant.


The High Energy Never Stops
Go to Sunday service in a megachurch and chances are you will see a fast-paced, scripted production, designed to grab your attention immediately and keep it drawn outward, toward the stage.
High-energy, high-volume music, dramatic skits with staff members as actors, and sermons peppered with real-life examples are common elements of megachurch worship.


ROAD AND RAIL: Getting There (and Paying for It) in the Year 2000; In Bergen County, A Plan to Create Rail Commuters
Few public officials are more involved in questions of road design, traffic congestion and public transportation than Chester Mattson, the planning director of Bergen County, which has one of the nation's most heavily traveled grids of Interstate and commuter highways.
Mr.
Mattson has been a busy man.
Since the last 21-mile stretch of Route 287 was completed in 1992, cutting acoss the northwest corner of the county, he has spearheaded a campaign to expand the access ramps at one of New Jersey's most congested interchanges, the intersection of Routes 4 and 17 in Paramus.


POSTINGS: Regional Plan Association Assembly; How to Improve Quality of Life
Improving the quality of life in the region will be the subject of the day on Tuesday at the Regional Plan Association's Fifth Annual Regional Assembly.
The topic is an "elusive subject," said H. Claude Shostal, president of the 66-year-old association, which has 500 members and is concerned with development in the 31-county tristate area.
Its essence -- "What Does It Really Mean?" -- will be mulled over in fact and fiction, by speakers and in seminars, at the Sheraton New York Hotel and Towers, at 811 Seventh Avenue at 53d Street, from 8:30 A.M. to 2:30 P.M., beginning with breakfast.


Farewell Symphony


Chrysler Bid Shows Cyclicals Are Cheap
Kirk Kerkorian's bid for Chrysler is:
A. A joke, filled with assertions that cannot be maintained with a straight face.


O Canada. Oh, Canada. Oh . . .
WHY is Canada dry?
How come this huge, beautiful land of largely decent folk has acquired an unshakable reputation for being boring?
No matter what policies are pursued in Ottawa, no matter what our good northern neighbors may do, here in the United States, here in the bellybutton of universal consciousness, here, where media mavens determine what matters and what does not, Canadian news generally gets less than long shrift.


Correction
A picture credit last Sunday with a caption about the soprano Montserrat Caballe misidentified the photographer.
He is Steve J. Sherman, not D. Sillitoe.


INSIDE
Between Main and Wall /Page 6  Two Florida retirees want to play it safe with their money and end up in limited partnerships.
Who should pay?
By Susan Antilla.
Mutual Funds /Page 9  With four new funds coming to market, the Vanguard Group is looking more like the rivals it belittled for so long.
By Reed Abelson.
From the Desk Of /Page 12  In denial that she might owe the taxman money for 1994, Danelle Morton tries procrastination as a tonic for a tough tax return.
Earning It /Page 15  A Wall Street analyst moves to Milwaukee so she can hit the ice and snag a gold in the 1998 Winter Olympics.
By Edmund L. Andrews.


The East Side Cab Express: Cheap but Is It Legal?


Take This Job; Up From Welfare: It's Harder and Harder
THIS is America, so these things can still happen: A woman has a child in high school and spends the next decade on welfare.
Then she gets training for a job as a cement mason and finds work molding the gutters and curbs of new highways.
Today she earns $50,000 and buzzes off to work in a black 1993 Saab turbo 9000.
The woman is Gail McDougle, 37, whose son is now 19.
From the public housing projects on the Chicago's South Side, Ms.
McDougle has moved up to an apartment in Hyde Park and is saving to buy a house with a couple of apartments so she can make more money.
"You just have to want to go somewhere," Ms.
McDougle explained.
In the projects, she said, "I would look around and a whole day would pass. 'Oh Man! I haven't been anywhere.' Just sit around, wait for that check. Check comes, get on the State Street bus. Go downtown. Buy some shoes. Come back, enjoy your shoes. The routine never changes. I was tired of not going somewhere."


PLAYING IN THE NEIGHBORHOOD
JAMAICA 'Beauty and Dignity': Artist's View of Black Life


Corrections
A listing on March 12 of European music festivals misstated the dates of the Oratorio-Cantata Festival in Wroclaw, Poland.
A letter from the festival office received April 3 pointed out that the dates will be Sept. 3 to 16, not Sept. 4 to 17.


Katherine the Great
KATHARINE HEPBURN By Barbara Leaming.
Illustrated. 549 pp.
New York: Crown Publishers. $27.50.


Guns Don't Kill, Gun Makers Do?
TWO years ago, Gian Luigi Ferri, a distraught businessman, walked into a San Francisco law firm and unleashed a hail of bullets from a rapid-fire pistol, killing seven people and wounding six others before committing suicide.
Now, in a decision with potentially far-reaching consequences for gun producers, a California judge has decided to let victims of Mr.
Ferri's shooting spree turn the weapon of legal liability on the manufacturer of the assault-style gun he used.
In his decision last week, Superior Court Judge James L. Warren ruled that those wounded in the assault and survivors of those killed could proceed with their claims against Navegar Inc., the Miami-based producer of a semi-automatic pistol known as the TEC-DC9.


Renewable Energy Can Be Competitive
To the Editor:
Your April 11 article on renewable energy ("70's Dreams, 90's Realities," Business Day) underscores two trends in the energy industry: utilities overcharging their customers and deflecting the blame on others, and the failure of the United States to develop a coherent energy policy.


STRANGE PASSIONS
Next month North America's first shoe museum will open its doors in Toronto, with the 10,000 shoes and "shoe related" artifacts, dating back to ancient Greece, that make up the Bata Shoe Museum's collection.
The drawings by Blair Drawson offer a preview.
The heels on these shoes are: sandals, 3 inches; chestnut crushers, 4 inches; kabkabs, 10 inches; platforms, 6 inches and boots, 4 inches.
The shoes will be housed and displayed in a five-story building designed by Raymond Moriyama and reminiscent of a shoe box.
The force behind the museum is Sonja Bata, who sits on the board of a family-owned company that operates shoe stores in 60 countries (including Pic 'n' Pay in the U.S.).
She has been collecting shoes since the 40's.
A footnote: The gift shop will not sell shoes.


Corrections
A review on page 21 of The Times Book Review today, about "Departures," by Jennifer C. Cornell, misidentifies the city of the author's upbringing because of erroneous information supplied by the publisher.
Ms.
Cornell was raised in Boston, Mass., not Belfast, Northern Ireland.


First Amendment Rights vs. Zoning Laws for Topless Bars
IT has been two years since Goldie Solomon began her nightly vigil outside a topless bar here, and the 68-year-old retired nurse still carries a homemade sign with a message for the young women dancing inside and the male patrons who come to see them.
"No porno here," Ms. Solomon's placard reads. "Sex and liquor don't mix. Go home."


A Passion for Movies
MILLION DOLLAR MOVIE By Michael Powell.
Introduction by Martin Scorsese.
Illustrated. 626 pp.
New York: Random House. $30.


Holly Ann Swartz and Steven R. Abo
Dr.
Holly Ann Swartz, an attending psychiatrist and research fellow at New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center, was married last Sunday to Dr.
Steven Robert Abo, a fellow in gastroenterology at Columbia Presbyterian Medical Center in New York.
Rabbi Robert Schumeister performed the ceremony at the 200 Fifth Club in New York.
Dr.
Swartz is keeping her name.
She graduated from Harvard University, and she and the bridegroom received their medical degrees from Albert Einstein College of Medicine.
She is a daughter of Nellie Slagle and Myron Swartz, both of Pittsburgh.
Her father is a certified public accountant in Pittsburgh.
Her mother is the vice president of the J.A.
Williams Company, an appliance distributor there.
The bride's stepfather, Dr.
Edward Slagle, is a psychiatrist in Pittsburgh.
Her stepmother, Laurel Swartz, is a travel agent at Mon Valley Travel there.


Correction
A picture caption on March 26, with a review of "Thomas Mann," by Ronald Hayman, misstated the date of the picture and omitted the name of the photographer.
He is Yousuf Karsh, and the picture was made in 1946.


Bhutto Came, She Saw, She Conquered
The Prime Minister of Pakistan, Mrs.
Benazir Bhutto, came to the United States with one major goal -- to convince Washington to reward her Government with a multibillion-dollar aid package even though Pakistan possesses nuclear explosives.
She was successful.
President Clinton announced that he would seek Congressional approval of aid.
That would be a huge mistake.
It would be a willful violation of Federal law.
Beyond that, it would seriously undermine his own own nuclear nonproliferation goals.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-11  COOL RESPONSE TO JAPANESE  Treasury Secretary Robert E. Rubin dismissed Japan's emergency financial package as too vague to reverse the fall of the dollar against the yen.
The Secretary pressed for more action before the currency gyrations threaten the economic stability of the world's biggest trading region.  1  IRAQ DEFIES UNITED NATIONS  Iraq responded to a United Nations resolution allowing limited sales of Iraqi oil by denouncing the proposal and organizing anti-American demonstrations in Baghdad. 1


April 9-15: Poisoned Ivy; Harvard and Yale Make Embarrassing Admissions
Some of the nation's oldest and most prestigious academic institutions found themselves in the uncomfortable position of having to admit that they had been hoodwinked.
Yale University expelled a senior on April 6 after discovering that he had fabricated just about every aspect of his academic record when he transferred two years ago from a California community college, where he earned a grade-point average of C, to Yale, where he managed to get a B average.
The student, Lon Grammer, was ultimately arrested by Yale police on charges that he took educational loans and scholarships under false pretenses.


There's No Rush to Cash In on Kerkorian's Bid
NO mutual fund had more reason to be loading up on shares of the Chrysler Corporation last week than the Merger Fund.
Designed to let individuals play the stock market like big-time arbitragers, the six-year-old fund aims to exploit the difference between a company's stock price at the time a takeover is announced and what is often a higher price at deal's end.
In the case of Chrysler, that gap -- and the fund's potential profit -- is huge.
Kirk Kerkorian said he plans to offer $55 a share, yet Chrysler stock finished last week just shy of $48, more than 12 percent below his price.


Milutinovic Contends That He Was Dismissed
The United States Soccer Federation said he resigned.
He said he was dismissed.
Whatever the circumstances, BORA MILUTINOVIC is out as coach of the national team.
"This is not my decision, they decide," Milutinovic said Friday night from his home in Laguna Niguel, Calif.
It was reported Friday that the federation wanted the coach to expand his duties into developmental areas.
"They have new ideas, new plans. They have the right to decide what they like, but they also gave me their word, and they have to respect that."


Pauline A. Plimpton, 93, Author Of Works on Famed Relatives
Pauline Ames Plimpton, who had a late-blooming career as a writer that startled but not did not surprise her famous literary offspring, George Plimpton, died yesterday at her home in New York City.
She was 93.
Her family said the cause was circulatory illness.


April 9-15: Not the Peace Plan; Arafat Cracks Down on Islamic Radicals After Gaza Suicide Bombing
Once again, suicide bombings have raised questions about whether Israel and the Palestinians will ever be able to make their peace deal work.
The latest attacks, killing seven Israeli soldiers and a visiting American student, occurred last week near two remaining Jewish settlements in the Gaza Strip, which is largely under Yasir Arafat's political control.
This time, even Mr.
Arafat realized that the relentless bombings by his Islamic opponents must be stopped if he is to have any hope of ever ruling more than Gaza and tiny Jericho on the West Bank.


The Crafty Commuter: Traffic Trouble Spots
A look at trouble spots you may encounter in the next week -- or month, or months -- courtesy of Transcom, an interstate transportation agency.
1.
ROUTE 80, Parsippany to Saddle Brook.
Sporadic lane closings to install and maintain traffic sensors.
Monday through Friday, 9 A.M. to 3 P.M.
2.
ROUTE 4, Paramus to Englewood.
Sporadic lane closings for traffic sensor work.
Monday through Friday, 9 A.M. to 3 P.M.
3.
ROUTE 46, South Hackensack to Palisades Park.
Sporadic lane closings for traffic sensor work.
Monday through Friday, 9 A.M. to 3 P.M.
4.
ROUTE 287, Bridgewater.
The ramp from Southbound Route 287 express lanes to Southbound 202/206 will be closed for pavement work.
Wednesday, 9 A.M. to 3:30 P.M.
To exit, cross over to local lanes.
5.
ROUTE 1-9, Elizabeth.
Southbound right lane closed to install utility polls.
Monday through Friday, 9 A.M. to 3 P.M.
6.
ROUTE 1-9, Edison.
Southbound ramp and slow lane closed for drainage work.
Monday and Tueday, 9 A.M. to 3:30 P.M.
7.
ROUTE 1, North Brunswick.
Northbound shoulder closed between Bishop Boulevard and Route 130 for utility-pole work, until April 30.
8.
PLAINSBORO ROAD, Plainsboro.
Plainsboro Road closed near Route 1 to complete a connector road.
Saturday, 6 A.M. to 10 P.M.
9.
ROUTE 1, West Windsor.
Some lanes closed to build a barrier curb, starting Monday morning.


Self-Righteous Busybody Or Angry Animal Lover?
To The Editor:
I assume that Kay Lockridge, who wrote the letter "Walk Dog or Do Errands but Don't Do Both" (April 9), is young and possessed of a good pair of legs, or lives in an elevator building, or both.
I know she is self-righteous.
I am not young and I live in a fifth-floor walk-up.
If I didn't take my dog with me on errands, she wouldn't go out very much.


Stabbing Aftermath: Anatomy of a Response
The first incomplete details of the crime insured an extraordinary response: a Hasidic man was stabbed by a black man on a street in Crown Heights last Sunday night.
The victim's face and chest were injured.
The crime scene, around Albany Avenue and Eastern Parkway, grew crowded with officials: Mayor Giuliani, the Police Department's top commanders, representatives of the Brooklyn District Attorney and leaders of the Lubavitch Hasidim.


D'Amato's Ups and Downs
It's been a busy six months for Alfonse M. D'Amato, the junior Senator from New York who rose out of the Republican machine politics of Nassau County to win three terms in Washington, pick up nicknames like the Fonz and Senator Pothole, shake off accusations of impropriety and win the hand of a glamorous woman-about-town.
Some of the headlines have been good; others not.
Here are notable events, in brief: Nov. 8, 1994 -- Look, Ma!
Top of the World!: D'Amato the kingmaker stands revealed as his hand-picked candidate, George E. Pataki, overcomes Mario M. Cuomo to win election as Governor of New York.
January 1995 -- That's Chairman Al, Fella: As a new Congress convenes, Mr.
D'Amato ascends to the chairmanship of the Senate Banking, Housing and Urban Affairs Committee.
Feb. 21, 1995 -- Love, Your Magic Spell Is Everywhere: One week after Valentine's Day, the smitten Senator convenes a news conference to announce he's in love.
The object of his devotion is Claudia Cohen, 44, quondam gossip columnist, entertainment reporter on morning television, former spouse of the Revlon executive Ronald O. Perelman.
The fact-conscious note that Mr.
D'Amato, 57, is still married, though separated from his wife of 25 years.
March 7, 1995 -- I Got the Horse Right Here: The most powerful Republican in New York throws his heft behind the Presidential candidacy of Robert Dole of Kansas, and less than a week later, delivers the endorsements of New York State's most powerful Republican leaders including Governor Pataki (but not Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani).
April 4, 1995 -- Try This With Your O.J.: In an on-air chat with the morning radio personality Don Imus, the Senator ignites a furor with a mocking Japanese-accented parody of Lance A. Ito, the judge in the O.J.
Simpson murder case.
April 5, 1995 -- On Second Thought: With his gaffe making front-page headlines and attracting denunciations nationwide, the Senator issues apology No. 1: "If I offended anyone, I'm sorry." April 6, 1995 -- If at First You Don't Succeed: Buffeted by continuing attacks on his minimalist apology and his insensitivity, an abashed and contrite Mr.
D'Amato takes to the Senate floor to try again: "What I did was a poor attempt at humor," he says.
"I am deeply sorry for the pain I have caused Judge Ito and others." April 7, 1995 -- Farewell, My Lovely: After 13 years of legal separation, the Senator and his wife, the former Penelope Ann Collenburg, a math teacher at Nassau Coummunity College, are divorced.
April 11, 1995 -- One From the Heart: Suffering chest pains, the Senator is hospitalized.
April 12, 1995 -- So Long for a While: Given a clean bill of health, the Senator walks out of St.
Francis Hospital in Roslyn, L.I., and says he plans to take a few days off.
LAWRENCE VAN GELDER


For the Young, a Holiday Weekend of Rituals and Rattled Nerves
It was three days before Easter Sunday, and 6-year-old Breanna Harris kept sending her grandmother back into the clogged aisles of the J.C.
Penney in Elmhurst, Queens, in a frantic search for the perfect bonnet.
"I definitely don't like that," the girl said, flatly ruling out a pretty one of white lace and pink ribbons that her grandmother urged her to try.


Dallas Leaders Halt an Anti-AIDS Program They Say Subsidizes Immorality
For almost a decade, county health workers have been distributing condoms and needle sterilization kits, along with words of warning, to people with the greatest risk of infection with the virus that causes AIDS.
The workers carried out their job on the streets, in gay bars and at county clinics.
They thought that their efforts, along with those of other public and private AIDS education and prevention programs, were making a difference.
Ranked 9th in the nation a decade ago among large metropolitan areas for its number of AIDS cases, Dallas is now in 20th place.


Terreri Is Doing His Best Work in Relief
Chris Terreri, the diminutive goaltender who has presided as the Devils' premier goaltender in the past, has accepted his role as the backup to Martin Brodeur this season and has thrived on it.
Terreri's best work has come in relief appearances, the latest on Friday night.
Although he had not started for eight games, Terreri looked as if he had not missed a minute of play when Jacques Lemaire threw him into the game against the Islanders after Brodeur allowed three goals on the first five shots he faced.


The Atlanta Ticket Race
TICKETS to see Linda Runyon skate in Japan at the 1998 Winter Olympics -- if she makes it -- will not go on sale for many months.
But in just two weeks, seats for next summer's games in Atlanta will be up for grabs.
On May 1, the Atlanta Committee for the Olympic Games will begin a huge mail-order operation: allocating nearly 11 million tickets for 542 sessions of 26 sports in 31 venues.
Although some tickets will be available next year by phone and in Atlanta, mail order is the main way to get into the action.


The Fulminations of a Frustrated Film Buff
RECENTLY, I was having lunch in a Manhattan restaurant with a man from Hollywood who had on a watch that cost more than my car and a suit with one of those brand names that sound like boutique pecorino cheese.
He insisted movies were actually getting better.
"You saw that little John Sayles picture, 'The Secret of Roan Inish'?"


Corrections
An article last Sunday about Clay Felker, the founder of New York magazine, misstated his age.
He is 66.


Fixing the Falling Greenback
"YET another postwar low." Even casual followers of finance know this phrase refers to the dollar's continuing fall against the yen.
But last Monday's new low was startling even in these days.
For a few hours, the dollar hit 80.15 yen -- it was 99.58 in December -- with the one-day fall at one point exceeding 4 percent.
The dizzy drop led to sniping among the superpowers.
Here are the opinions of Wayne D. Angell, the chief economist at Bear, Stearns and a former Federal Reserve governor.
SYLVIA NASAR


Make Room for Crawdaddy
Cabin fever is not just about the cabin, it is also about the self.
Winter makes the eyes turn inward and, for a few months, anyway, the cold justifies a perpetual posture of self-embrace.
But eventually the self grows weary, and it begins looking for a slender skein of blue in the late February sky.
Suddenly, you're fascinated by reports of the groundhog, while impatient with root vegetables and homey, slow-cooked meals.
You feel oppressed by the cloister that was for months a comfort.
You long for something new.


More Than a One-Bossa-Nova-Hit Wonder
IN A CAREER THAT SPANNED 40 years, Antonio Carlos Jobim wrote hundreds of songs, but in the popular mind, he will forever be remembered as the composer of one, "The Girl From Ipanema." One of the best-known and most often played songs of modern times, it guaranteed Jobim fame and fortune while he was still a young man.
But it also overshadowed his other achievements, before and after, and made it inevitable that when he died last December at the age of 67, he would be cited as the songwriter who propelled the bossa nova movement out of Brazil with that single, unforgettable tune.
Among his fellow musicians, however, Jobim (pronounced zho-BEAM) has always had a much larger reputation.
That is why the pop idol Sting, the jazz pianist Herbie Hancock and more than a dozen other artists, some from Brazil, will be performing "A Tribute to Antonio Carlos Jobim" at Avery Fisher Hall on Tuesday.
Someone is certain to sing "The Girl From Ipanema," of course.
But there are also sure to be versions of "One Note Samba," "Quiet Nights of Quiet Stars," "No More Blues," "Out of Tune," "How Insensitive," "Happiness" and other standards that established Jobim as having one of the most fecund and sophisticated musical imaginations of his time.


Crackdown on Gay Theaters and Clubs
Faced with an apparent resurgence in sexual practices that can lead to AIDS, New York City officials recently closed two gay theaters and a gay club and have increased inspections of other commercial sex outlets.
The Earle Theater, at 73-03 37th Road in Jackson Heights, Queens, was closed Feb. 8 by court order.
The New David Cinema, at 236 West 54th Street in Manhattan, was closed March 29.
The West Side Club, at 27 West 20th Street, also in Manhattan, was closed April 5 but reopened on Monday after a judge vacated the temporary closing order, which was based on a zoning violation.


MARKET TIMING
Monday The United States and Japan will begin the next session of talks on auto trade in Washington.
The Clinton Administration is expected to warn Japan that it will impose punitive tariffs unless Japan moves to open its markets.
This will be a busy week for companies releasing first-quarter earnings.
Among today's announcements, analysts expect Chase Manhattan to come in at $1.11 a share, First Chicago at $1.58, and Time Warner at a loss of 12 cents a share.
Tuesday President Clinton plans to hold his first full-scale news conference in six weeks.
He is likely to focus on his skirmishes with Congressional Republicans and the 1996 presidential race.
The Commerce Department will release March housing starts.
Forecast: up 3.3 percent.
Analysts expect Citicorp to post quarterly earnings of $1.60 a share, Chemical Banking $1.34, Merck 61 cents, and Philip Morris $1.58.
Wednesday The Commerce Department will release the merchandise trade balance for February.
Forecast: a $10.5 billion deficit.
It is expected to put further pressure on the dollar.
The earnings of BankAmerica are expected at $1.44 a share, Digital Equipment, which will report for the fiscal third-quarter, at 27 cents and Ford should be $1.57.
Thursday  Analysts expect Compaq Computer at 80 cents, I.B.M. at $1.30 and SmithKline Beecham at 50 cents.
General Motors, by avoiding price wars and cutting costs, should report at $2.27, up from $1.86 last year.
Friday The Treasury releases its March budget statement.
Forecast: a $39.4 billion deficit.
Northwest Airlines is holding its annual meeting in New York City.
It is the company's first shareholder meeting since 1989.


Rediscoveries; The Angel of Malignity: The Cold Beauty of Katherine Anne Porter
A writer pressing the case of the neglected hero gone before has a difficult role: part night nurse, part hit man.
Tenderly we protect the wounded one, aggressively we search for someone we can blame.
We are, of course, thinking about ourselves.
The neglected writer of the past is our own feared specter, our double, thrust into the darkness of the future, the ghost of what we tell ourselves will never happen but know is to come.
A kind of love grows up between these writers, one living, one dead.
This can be trying if the writer you love is probably not a person you would have liked.
I am in the situation of thinking that Katherine Anne Porter wrote like an angel, but is someone I'm glad I didn't have to know.
She was almost certainly not a nice person.
She was a great beauty, but all her young photographs have a self-conscious, self-dramatizing quality that makes them difficult to approach.
She lied brilliantly on a variety of subjects, from her place of birth to her age.
She was born in west Texas in 1890, but often suggested she was a daughter of the Old South, and a younger one at that.
She lied about rather crucial things to two of her four husbands, neglecting to tell one she had had a hysterectomy and revealing her true age to another only on their wedding day.
She was slippery in business dealings; one of her favorite words -- "shady" -- could not inaptly be applied to her.
She also loved the word "bitter," and both shadows and bitterness contributed to her difficulties in working and to the vexed nature of her relationships.
She was an anti-Semite, although she produced devastating portraits of anti-Semites, and she was a racist who believed that darkies were happy on the old plantation, although she wrote a story full of understanding of the buried longings of former slaves.
She dated Hermann Goring at least once, and was disappointed when he didn't call back, but later said she was the first among her friends to grasp the horrors of Nazism.
She betrayed one of her best friends, Josephine Herbst, to the F.B.I., which suspected Herbst of being a Communist.
It was done casually, alcoholically, on a "date" with an agent set up to get her drunk and make her talk.
Porter forgot having "talked," then resented Herbst for her political recklessness, which she saw as a danger to herself.
But none of this has to do, really, with why Katherine Anne Porter is not more widely read.
Being read has not, thank God, rested on good behavior, loyalty to friends, sobriety or straight dealings with publishers.
Think of the case of Ernest Hemingway, like Porter a beauty, a poseur, a betrayer and a drunk -- but certainly not unread.
The image of Hemingway inevitably comes to my mind when I think of Porter.
They were the reverse sides of each other -- one so traditionally masculine, one so traditionally feminine.
Both were deeply American yet ill at ease in America, both wrote with a passionate eye and a reckless insistence on getting things said.
But it was Porter's bad luck to be a near-contemporary of Hemingway's.
His spare, stripped-down style set a tone for what it was to write as an American.
The problem was that it set the tone, so that others were drowned out or considered deficient, improper, overdone.
Now I must admit here that I enjoy blaming Hemingway for things.
On a bad day, I lay at his feet overpopulation, air pollution and harmful additives in foods.
On a good day, I admire his descriptive powers and the integrity of his plain style.
But let us, however reluctantly, put blame aside and consider that Hemingway was surrounded or enveloped or covered by a historical cultural accident outside his control.
He precisely fit the bill of American fantasy after World War I. Partly it was his war record, partly it was his looks -- what Edmund Wilson is said to have called his Clark Gable smile.
And then there was the athleticism, the sexual adventurism and being in Paris at the right time.
Certainly, he added to American prose a needed and on the whole healthful styptic touch.
There was, beginning in the age of Victoria, a kind of sickly overabundance that affected everything from furniture to the poetic line.
It was also an age of increased female power and feminization of culture.
Perhaps for that reason, the choking fustiness that characterized the taste of the age became associated with the female -- the maternal, unsexual female, that is.
And she was the one who, in the provincial towns of America, ran culture.
How exhilarating Hemingway's sentences must have seemed to a claque of young men who feared death by antimacassar.
The novel -- all prose fiction for that matter -- is the love child of two deeply incompatible parents.
It has journalism for a father, poetry for a mother.
For Hemingway and all his sons, the goal was to make of prose an Athena: sprung full blown from the head of the father, the mother swallowed up and kept from sight.
"Good" prose was to have the sharp, telegraphic punch of newspaper language; "bad" prose was ornamented, gilded as the Gilded Age.
This determination became the boot that flattened the face of American prose.
It had many victims, including, perhaps most notably, F. Scott Fitzgerald, who died virtually unread, most of his books out of print.
Later, other voices, particularly William Faulkner's, swelled the American chorus.
But Porter's combination of cold realism and an unmistakably female point of view made her an uncomfortable passenger on what Flannery O'Connor called Faulkner's "Dixie Express" at the same time that she was marginalized as a "Southern writer."
ADDED to these accidents affecting Porter's status is the formal prejudice that insists that the novel is the real thing and shorter forms only pathetic country cousins.
So for many years, Porter took her place as a writer of perfect short stories, admirable but somehow outside the big picture.
She had no traceable ancestors and spawned no followers.
Her stories resisted easy categorization.
Their finished shape belied their originality.
They combined ferocity and tenderness, opulence and precision, voluptuousness and chastity.
It was easier to treat her as a curiosity, a fragile and perhaps overwrought china doll, than to acknowledge the importance of what she had produced.
And she produced very little -- three collections of stories, "Flowering Judas" (1930), "Pale Horse, Pale Rider" (1939) and "The Leaning Tower" (1944).
Her collected stories, published in 1965, are only 495 pages long: in a career of nearly 50 years, that's 10 pages a year.
Publishers kept asking for the novel, and she put her mind to it, adopting a course that was both personally and formally a torment to her.
She began "Ship of Fools" in 1941, and worked over it, seized by reluctance and boredom and self-hatred, for more than 20 years.
When it finally appeared, in 1962, it brought her a fame and a financial success her stories had never achieved; it became, for younger readers, the way that they knew Katherine Anne Porter.
Which meant they did not know her at her best, as a writer of stories.
And if they knew her only as the author of the book a much-hyped movie was based on, they would wonder what any shouting had ever been about.
"SHIP OF FOOLS" has a kind of greatness, but it is not the kind associated with the traditional greatness of the novel.
We expect that in a novel characters will move and grow, and the characters of "Ship of Fools" appear in a series of static snapshots.
There is an overlay of melodrama: a drug-addicted "Condesa," a saintly doctor, an alcoholic aging belle, a dwarf.
But the novel is fearless in its facing of the possibility that the true nature of human beings is malign.
To act with malignity would seem, in Porter's mind, to be as natural to humans as drawing breath.
There is the thick malignity of the Germans, the careless, coarse malignity of the Americans.
But most frightening of all is the troupe of Spanish dancers who are utterly outside the web of moral consideration.
They will do anything for profit, to get their way or to experience the joy of humiliating.
There are two children in the troupe, twins from hell called Ric and Rac after two dogs in a comic strip, who live only to cause harm, and one night they throw the beloved white bulldog of a childless German couple overboard, simply out of boredom.
We see over and over again in "Ship of Fools" a technique of which Porter is a master: the ability to describe gesture and manners, to use them as a nest in which to enclose a statement of general, even metaphysical, significance.
This is evident in her description of a scene in which a drunken husband beats his wife in the same room in which their child is supposedly asleep.
Then in a fit of morose mutual lust, the parents make love in the bunk above their son's head.
In the morning, another passenger sees them bowing and holding the door for each other and remarks:
Lost in the bitterness and cynicism with which Porter wrote "Ship of Fools" is the joy in nature and in simple living that marks her greatest short stories.
This pleasure suffused the breathtaking "Holiday" (1960), which took her more than 30 years to write.
It is the story of a suffering young woman's vacation with a family of German immigrant farmers.
The center of the story is a hideously afflicted young serving girl, whom the narrator only gradually realizes is one of the children of the family.
She sees that the forgetfulness, the brutal using of this girl is not a cruelty but a down-to-earth understanding that a dreadful tragedy has occurred, that something must be done with it and life must go on.
Ottilie, the damaged girl, is portrayed in all her grotesqueness, surrounded by her family's intensely healthful and fecund business.
But around these two aspects, like a shimmering envelope, is the narrator's enchantment with the land and the coming of spring.
She describes one of her first rides across the property:
"There was nothing beautiful in those woods now except the promise of spring, for I detested bleakness, but it gave me pleasure to think that beyond this there might be something else beautiful in its own being, a river shaped and contained by its banks, or a field stripped down to its true meaning, plowed and ready for the seed. . . . The leaves were budding in tiny cones of watery green."
After a disastrous thunderstorm, in which everybody in the family works to the utmost to try to save what is being ruined by the overwhelming waters, the mother (whom Porter has described, with one of her delicious aphorisms, as "a matriarch in men's shoes") simply takes to her bed and dies.
The family goes off in a caravan of wagons for the funeral; only the narrator and Ottilie are left at home.
Ottilie begins to weep, to howl with weeping.
The narrator assumes that she is grieving because she hasn't been included in the funeral procession, and she takes her in a rickety wagon to try to catch up with the others.
She discovers that what Ottilie wants is not to join the others but just to go for a ride.
What she wants is a holiday.
In her realization, the narrator is shocked into a deep understanding:
Porter earns her right to speak about humanity, about life and death, because she has so firmly rooted her perceptions in the soil of the particular.
The mention of Ottillie's stout belt, the touch of the narrator's fingers on her dry flesh, makes us understand that the voice of the narrator is entirely trustworthy; if she says this is the nature of life, we will believe it.
And we believe Porter when she takes us in "Pale Horse, Pale Rider" into the territory not only of death, but of dying.
The strength of our belief is connected to the fact that we are not reading just a story about dying.
We learn, as well, about sexual love, the war at home, pleasure in weather and clothing and animal aliveness, the manners of people who work at a minor newspaper in a minor American town, the precarious position of a woman who must earn her way with no one behind her to break her fall.
THE lovers in the story are named Adam and Miranda: the first man, the untainted daughter of Prospero.
He is a soldier about to leave for World War I. Adam expects not to return, so the few days he has with Miranda have a great preciousness.
But she can't take time off from work on the newspaper to spend the day with him.
So we see her in her rather cheerful office, with the colleagues who sit on her desk and let their feet dangle.
There is a brilliant set piece about a hoofer to whom Miranda has given a bad review.
He insists on confronting her and insists that she tell him why she doesn't think he's any good.
"I've been called the best in the business by the best in the business and I wanta know what you think is wrong with me," he says in an agonizing display of bravado that ends in tears.
In the course of Miranda's daily rounds, we meet types who are caught on the exhilarating hook of Porter's aphoristic wit.
A thuggish Liberty Bond salesman is introduced:: "He might be anything at all . . . advance agent for a road show, promoter of a wildcat oil company, a former saloon keeper announcing the opening of a new cabaret, an automobile salesman -- any follower of any one of the crafty, haphazard callings." Another patriotic fund raiser is said to have a face "in which nothing could be read save the inept sensual record of 50 years."
Miranda's attraction for Adam is recorded in a prose that is oddly arousing in spite of its formal strictness.
His uniform, his shoes, his watch, his hands are all the locus of a tremendous masculine force.
And yet, when Miranda falls sick, he nurses her with the tenderness of the mother she still yearns for.
It is not, after all, the war that cuts into their time together, it is the influenza epidemic, which brings Miranda to the brink of death.
And it is at this moment that Katherine Anne Porter performs one of the riskiest feats in American literature.
She dares to use the language of transcendence and of dream to describe what is supposed to be indescribable: the experience of dying.
She approaches it breakneck, on the back of a horse that is always on the verge of bolting.
But it does not, even for a moment, resist her control.
Then, the heart-stopping fence is taken, with the inevitable arc of perfect flight:
Grammatically, this last sentence is a matchless piece of virtuosity: 12 clauses that rise, fall, meander, rise again, then crash.
The sentence is followed by a much quieter diction: we learn that Miranda will live but that Adam has died -- not of a German bullet but of the influenza he caught from her.
Reluctantly, Miranda understands that she must go on living.
She plans her resurrection in a traditionally feminine way: she makes a shopping list.
"One lipstick, medium, one ounce flask Bois d'Hiver perfume, one pair of gray suede gauntlets without straps, two pairs gray sheer stockings without clocks. . . . A jar of cold cream. . . . No one need pity this corpse if we look properly to the art of the thing."
Katherine Anne Porter was heroic in her commitment to looking properly to the art of the thing.
This commitment allowed her to look in the face of such unimaginables as evil, death, the irreparable blows of fate, and force them to turn themselves beautiful.
It was an exhausting and perilous enterprise, one that made it almost impossible to live.
She reached 90, but for many of the years of her long life she produced no writing.
What she did produce has the clarity and inclusiveness of the art we have proclaimed great.
She once sent a message to the sophomore class of Thomas A. Edison High School in Tulsa, Okla.
It said: "Practice an art for love and the happiness of your life -- you will find it outlasts almost everything but breath."


Dollar Is Weak, but Not Everywhere
Economists can provide all sorts of complicated and sometimes contradictory reasons for why currencies gyrate in value.
Some of those reasons may even be correct.
But for Americans traveling in most of the world, one thing is clear: The dollar is not worth as much as it used to be.
Since the beginning of last year, the dollar has lost more than 20 percent of its value versus the world's two other major currencies, the Japanese yen and the German mark, and is trading at or near all-time lows against them.
And because of the way the world's economies are interconnected these days, the relationships among those three major currencies filter down to affect almost all exchange rates, causing a form of sticker shock for Americans approaching a currency-exchange bureau.


These Boots Apparently Think They're the Energizer Bunny
BEFORE Helen Reddy taught women to roar, before Gloria Gaynor urged them to survive and way before Cyndi Lauper pointed out, quite sensibly, what girls just want to have, there was Nancy Sinatra and her boots.
Yes, those boots.
The ones that, one of these days, are gonna walk all over you.
And now those boots are walking again.
Stomping, even.
On April 6, for the first time in more than 20 years, Nancy Sinatra performed live, at the Playboy mansion here, where nowadays the bunnies are very much clothed and the grotto is filled with bath toys, thanks to Hugh Hefner's young sons, Marston and Cooper.


If You're Thinking of Living In/Hastings-on-Hudson; Close to the City, but in a World of Its Own
EVERY morning when he walks from his home to the train station, Tom Quinn is reminded of why he moved to Hastings-on-Hudson.
"First of all, I walk through the heart of the downtown," Mr.
Quinn said.
"This isn't some nightmare subdivision with no center." Then he stands on the platform and can see the Palisades across the Hudson River and the Manhattan skyline to the south.
"It's comforting to me to know that the city is so close."


'Faust' to 'Ruddigore,' Opera Takes Over
CHORAL concerts proliferated during the Lenten season, but next weekend opera takes charge of the vocal scene.
Off to an early start is Connecticut Opera, with an 8 P.M.
Thursday production of Gounod's "Faust," plus a Saturday encore at 8, both performances at the Bushnell in Hartford.
Barton Green sings the title role, with Ai-Lan Zhu as Marguerite and Alan Held as Mefistofele.
The sets were borrowed from Tri-State Opera but the company's conductor, Robert Ashens, will be on the podium.
For more casting details or reservations, call the Bushnell box office at 246-6807 or Connecticut Opera at 527-0713.
For lively opera buffo next weekend, try Connecticut Grand Opera and Orchestra's new staging of Donizetti's "Don Pasquale." The production is conducted by the group's artistic director, Laurence Gilgore, who made his company debut several years ago in the same work.
The cast includes Stephen Lusmann, Shelley Jameson, Gregory Cross and, in the title role, Steven Condy, winner of the 1992 Luciano Pavarotti International Voice Competition.
On Saturday 8 P.M. is curtain time at Klein Memorial Auditorium in Bridgeport; the April 29 repeat, also at 8 o'clock, is at the Stamford Palace.
For tickets call 359-0009 (Bridgeport) or 325-4466 (Stamford).


WHO PUT THE LID ON GP120?
Jesse Green portrays me and other AIDS activists as obstacles to the testing of an AIDS vaccine that is being hyped by the Genentech spokesperson, Don Francis.
I do not take umbrage at Francis's being represented as fighting the good fight against a recalcitrant Federal bureaucracy -- he is.
I do take umbrage at Green's characterization of the rest of us as being out of touch with what is best for people we represent.


Dispensing Lots of Pain, Lots of Gain
IT IS NOT GENERALLY A GOOD IDEA FOR A MUSIC critic to envy musicians, but envy is what I felt recently, watching William Christie dissect Charpentier's "Descente d'Orphee aux Enfers" during a master class with students of the Mannes Opera Ensemble, sponsored by the Mannes College of Music.
I certainly didn't envy the acerbic comments the students received.
Mr.
Christie described one singer's performance as "asthmatic," tortured by quick, short breaths.
He criticized one of the music directors for demonstratively conducting an impassioned recitative in which Eurydice dies: "People who do that should be shot."


RESULTS PLUS
N.B.A.
Celtics Solidify Position  The Boston Celtics opened a three-game lead over Milwaukee for the Eastern Conference's eighth playoff spot, beating the Detroit Pistons, 129-104, last night in Hartford behind Dominique Wilkins's 26 points.
Dee Brown added 22 points and Derek Strong had 20 for the Celtics.
Detroit was led by Grant Hill with 27.
Boston, which led by as many as 32 points and never trailed in the second half, solidified its playoff position with four games remaining.
Detroit guard Joe Dumars did not travel with the team and missed his second straight game because of tendinitis in his knees. (AP) BULLETS 114, BUCKS 110: The rookie Juwan Howard tied a season high with 31 points as Washington broke a 13-game losing streak by nipping Milwaukee in Landover, Md.
Chris Webber added 29 points and 10 rebounds as the Bullets avoided setting a franchise record with a 14th consecutive loss.
Vin Baker had 30 points and 17 rebounds for the Bucks, who have lost six of seven on the road. (AP) SUPERSONICS 115, WARRIORS 99: Gary Payton, playing with a broken finger, scored 24 points and Kendall Gill, back after treatment for clinical depression, capped a fourth-quarter run that led visiting Seattle over Golden State.
The SuperSonics won for the 11th time in 13 games and stayed in the thick of a four-way race with San Antonio, Phoenix and Utah for the top playoff spot in the Western Conference.
Payton, who broke his left ring finger on Thursday night against Dallas, played in his 287th straight game. (AP)
N.H.L.
Canadiens Lose Ground  Bryan Smolinski set up one power-play goal and scored another as the Boston Bruins beat Montreal, 3-2, last night, sending the Canadiens to their third straight loss.
The Canadiens, 3 points behind Buffalo and 2 points behind the Rangers in the race for the eighth and last Eastern Conference playoff spot, lost at the Forum for only the third time in 18 games this season.
In today's final in Tokyo, Agassi will face No. 4 seeded Jim Courier, a 6-4, 7-5 winner against second-seeded Michael Chang.
In the women's singles, second-seeded Amy Frazier beat Tang Min of Hong Kong, 6-3, 6-3, and advanced to today's final against top-seeded Kimiko Date of Japan. (AP) WOLTERS WINS EASTER BOWL: In an all-California final yesterday, top-seeded Ryan Wolters of San Jose defeated second-seeded Kevin Kim of Fullerton, 6-4, 2-6, 6-2, to win the boys' 18 title in the Easter Bowl junior championships in Palm Springs, Calif.
Wolters, who is headed for Stanford next fall, and Kim are both on the United States National Team and are roommates at the Palmer Tennis Academy in Florida.
Fourth-seeded Amanda Basica, 16, of Lomita, Calif., captured the girls' 18 title with a 6-3, 7-6 (8-6) victory over No. 3-seeded Brie Rippner of Chico, Calif.
In the all-Florida boys' 16 final, top-seeded Rudy Rake of Fort Lauderdale defeated Rafael DeMesa of Key Biscayne, 6-3, 6-1.
ROWING  Princeton Wins Childs  Princeton's varsity heavyweight crew successfully defended the Childs Cup yesterday on the Harlem River, but by the slimmest of margins, defeating Pennsylvania by 1.09 seconds with Columbia third.
The finish was so close both coaches had to ask who had won.
BROWN DOWNS HARVARD: Brown defeated Harvard yesterday for the third year in a row on the windy Charles River in Boston as the Bears continued their dominance of intercollegiate rowing.
The defending national champions, in their first season under their new coach, Scott Roop, trounced the Crimson by 11.7 seconds or three boat lengths in the Stein Cup regatta.
TRACK AND FIELD  Loughlin Sets Record  Bishop Loughlin set a meet record yesterday in winning the boys' two-mile relay at the Midwood Hornet relays at Midwood Field, Brooklyn.
Loughlin, running with Stephen Edwards, Purnell Lancaster, Carlos Isaac and Jovan Thompson, won in 8 minutes 5.06 seconds.
Dwight Joseph of Thomas Edison took home two gold medals.
He won the triple jump at 44 feet 7 inches and ran the third leg on the 400-meter relay, which won in 44.1 seconds.


For Elderly Immigrants, a Retirement Plan in U.S.
It was in the chaotic din of a Chinatown garment factory that 74-year-old Ho Yin-peng discovered a better way to survive than snipping loose threads from clothing at 5 cents a dress.
Her co-workers told her that even though she lived with her son, she could qualify for the Federal welfare program known as Supplemental Security Income if she was over 65 and had been in this country for more than three years.


Giving Birth Is Painful, But at Least It's Covered
ANTICIPATING the birth of a child involves plenty of strain, both mental and physical.
But don't tell adoptive parents their emotional strain doesn't rank a close second.
"I had to face the same fears," said Dianne R. Wentworth, a project manager for Pacific Bell in San Ramon, Calif., who adopted a toddler in November.
"I understand there's disability in birth, but there's just as much adjustment time in adoption."
When it comes to financial strain, though, adoptive parents clearly get the worst of it.
Most prospective parents give little thought to that big hospital bill, as nearly all employers offer maternity benefits.
But adoptive parents typically get little help, scrambling to pay -- out of their own pockets -- costs that average $9,000.
For a foreign-born child, that can soar to $30,000.


Get Serious


Junior and the Old Dog Try Some Quality Time
Tommy Boy  Chris Farley, David Spade Directed by Peter Segal PG-13 96 minutes


Hell Was Other People
EVELYN WAUGH A Biography.
By Selina Hastings.
Illustrated. 724 pp.
Boston:  Houghton Mifflin Company. $40.


All They Need to Know, They Learn in Kindergarten
MONICA MANDEL'S morning kindergarten class was having trouble sitting still.
A special visitor had arrived at their Roaring Brook School classroom here to talk about his job, and everyone was very excited.
For the children, it was a break in the routine.
For the visitor -- Dr.
Robert Ludwig, a diagnostic radiologist at Northern Westchester Hospital in Mount Kisco -- it was a rite of passage that many parents go through: the career talk in the classroom.
Adults in a wide variety of fields visit classrooms -- usually their own offspring's -- in an effort to translate their profession into terms that a small child can understand.
For the parent, the visit is usually fun and often a challenge.
Keeping pace with the attention spans of young children is no easy feat.


Streetscapes/Saks; The Giant Leap From Sixth Avenue to Fifth Avenue
THE elegant Saks Fifth Avenue won't say what kind of space it's looking for in New York for its discount subsidiary, Saks Clearinghouse, but it probably has to be near transportation, masses of shoppers and other stores.
It's too bad there's no space available in Herald Center, at the southwest corner of 34th Street, where Broadway and the Avenue of the Americas converge.
That's the original Saks, built in 1902 but smothered under later coverings.
Horace Saks deserted this site when he originally went upscale and built the Fifth Avenue store, 70 years ago.


Mayor's Motorcade Disrupted at Egg Roll
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani's appearance at the annual Central Park Easter egg roll was briefly disrupted about noon yesterday by a man who tried to obstruct the Mayor's motorcade as he was leaving the festivities with his daughter.
Witnesses said the man, who appeared to be irrational or intoxicated, shouted about conditions at the Port Authority Bus Terminal and approached a Parks Department truck in front of the Mayor's car.


On Sunday; A Union Man Still Fighting For 'His' Paper
PACING about his home at age 63, Harry Leykis, the chairman of the not-quite-defunct Newspaper Guild union at The New York Post, has got back some of the bounce of his Golden Gloves boxing days as a city teen-ager.
Those were the days when New York newspapering first intoxicated him and being tough seemed a matter of fun, not survival.
Bantamweight thin, he's still fighting to get the severance pay for 43 years of work that was denied him in the paper's tragicomic bankruptcy debacle of 18 months ago.
And lately, he's been fighting a recurrence of cancer.


Readying Indian Point for the Long Haul
INDIAN POINT 3, shut for 25 months by management problems, is different these days: it smells of fresh paint, and it is crawling with inspectors from the Nuclear Regulatory Commission, as managers prepare to ask in a few days for permission to reopen the reactor in mid-May.
But the owner, the New York Power Authority, says the bigger challenge is still ahead: making the plant run right for the long haul.
Unless it can run well, the Power Authority's president, S. David Freeman, insists, it will not run at all, and the big challenge will come after the plant reopens.


The Story of Dow
I HAVE BECOME ADDICTED TO THE serialized fiction that serious newspapers tuck away back among the stock tables.
The plot of the daily "Market Story" beats any TV soap.
It's a Freudian drama that tracks the moment-by-moment anxieties of a highly neurotic character named Dow.
His feverish ups and downs are not only recounted with medical precision but also interpreted with obvious poetic license by faceless Traders, Investors and Analysts.
They are more skilled than any Euripidean chorus at finding heavenly explanations for every twist of fortune.
Synopses don't do justice to the excitement of every day's plot turns.
But I think I've caught the essence of the drama by tracking the tale from New Year's Day to the Ides of March.


Earth Day Challenge For Wheels and Feet
RUNNERS, bikers and in-line skaters are invited to the Prospect Park Triple Challenge relay race on Saturday in celebration of Earth Day.
"We thought we'd have this race on a day that was put together to focus on environment and ecology," said Janine St.Germain, a spokeswoman for the park.
"We wanted to incorporate the three different groups that have a real love of the park."


The Fairest Cure We Have
Back to the future is the right approach to the affirmative-action debate.
Strip away 30 years of political baggage, and you will uncover a measured way to undo patterns of discrimination that is still the fairest remedy we have.
In retrospect, the idea that grew into affirmative action seems tame.
In 1966, the Justice Department looked behind the innocent facade of a craft union in New Orleans and discovered a closed-circuit operation that guaranteed that minorities would never work in the trade.
Every member of the local was white, and a vicious circle of rules guaranteed it would stay that way.
To get a job through the union's exclusive hiring hall, one had to be a member, related to a member or referred by a member; to become a member, one had to have experience working in the trade.
This lily-white union could perpetuate itself indefinitely.


'The New Victorians'
To the Editor:
If, as Michelle Green claims in her review (March 19), Rene Denfeld's book, "The New Victorians: A Young Woman's Challenge to the Old Feminist Order," is "a powerful call to arms for women of her generation," you can count this 28-year-old feminist out.


Checkmate Bringing Escape to Teen-Agers
The signal came, and Benjamin Little, B. J. to his teammates, started psyching himself up to play.
"Come on, B. J., you can do it," the 16-year-old told himself, clenching his fists and slapping his thighs as he prepared for battle.


When Politicians Cut Taxes: The Winners and the Losers
To the Editor:
Even some Republicans are urging Governor Whitman to delay the final stage of her 30 percent cut in the state income tax, and rightly so.
In the face of Federal budget cuts, any income tax reduction can only put more pressure on services -- particularly higher education.


Terreri Is Doing His Best Work in Relief
Chris Terreri, the diminutive goaltender who has presided as the Devils' premier goaltender in the past, has accepted his role as the backup to Martin Brodeur this season and has thrived on it.
Terreri's best work has come in relief appearances, the latest on Friday night.
Although he had not started for eight games, Terreri looked as if he had not missed a minute of play when Jacques Lemaire threw him into the game against the Islanders after Brodeur allowed three goals on the first five shots he faced.


Passover in Sarajevo


Public Radio, a Lifeline In Alaska, Facing Cuts
Corey Flintoff's voice reaches the remote corners of the nation's largest and most sparsely populated state every weekday, delivering the world's news from his desk in the nation's capital.
As a newscaster for National Public Radio, Mr.
Flintoff is heard in many out-of-the-way places, but none so isolated as the Yupik Eskimo villages of southwest Alaska.
In these tiny communities, where children still learn their native language before English and families subsist on fish, game and berries gathered near their homes, public radio is a lifeline, not just to the nation's capital but to family and neighbors.


Too Many Foreigners
ALIEN NATION Common Sense About America's Immigration Disaster.
By Peter Brimelow. 327 pp.
New York: Random House. $24.


State Stops Short Of Requiring Electric Cars
The Whitman administration has officially pulled back from a clean-air strategy that would have required auto companies to sell electric cars in the state.
Instead, the state's policy on toughening motor vehicle air pollution standards will rely on the adoption of a single national standard for all states except California.
The state's Environmental Commissioner, Robert Shinn, signed an order last Wednesday that would include New Jersey in the 49-state alternative if it is adopted by the Federal Environmental Protection Agency.
New Jersey and 11 other Northeastern and Middle Atlantic states had once agreed to adopt pollution standards as tough as California's.
But the states balked at requiring the "California cars" because they are more expensive. (AP)


When 2 Partners Own a House
To the Editor:
I write to comment on the response given in your Q.&amp;A. column on March 26 to Amir Jawad's inquiry regarding partition of an investment property he owns with an irresponsible partner.


Disney's Direction
To the Editor:
It doesn't take a rocket scientist or a Harvard M.B.A. to figure out that Michael D. Eisner and friends are so desperate for profits at any cost that they are willing to risk association with a group like Miramax to further their personal goals for wealth ("Clouds Over Disneyland," April 9).
Grasping at straws of "adult" entertainment while loosening the bonds of the audience represented by traditional family values seems pretty risky business.
Will "Priest" outsell "Snow White"?
I doubt it.
What if families with "traditional" values decided Warner Brothers and Universal were more fitting "family" entertainment than Disney? -- Disney films, Disneyworlds, Disney Channel, Disney Merchandise . . .
Disney Doomed.
LUCILLE SANCHEZ-COREA San Francisco, April 11 The writer is vice president of A.R.
Sanchez-Corea &amp; Associates, a building code consulting firm.


UP FRONT: CHATTER - Half Empty? Half Full?; Too Many People
Overpopulation equals scuzziness, crime and urban blight in general.
It's inevitable.
Therefore, I have to answer "worse." Without population limits (which are admittedly unconstitutional, but our forefathers never envisioned the millions we're dealing with), New Jersey is doomed.
ROBERT R. REPPY Tifton, Ga.


76ers Give the Nets Their Ticket for the Lottery
Chris Morris, the unrestricted free agent who has used his high-tops to communicate with his employer many times this season, penned another gem tonight with a black felt-tip pen.
On his right sneaker, he wrote, "It's Time . . . " On the left, he wrote, "To Say Goodbye."


Bouquet Without Thorns From House of Blues Staff
To The Editor:
As admittedly biased longtime employees of the House of Blues, we read with great interest the comments of those who are free to live and do business in New York City but would deny others the same opportunity.
"Hold the Welcome Wagon: Boos for the House of Blues" (March 19) and "Catching Up: Boots, Booze and Blues" (April 9).


Stepping Back From the Canvas
To the Editor:
What does the burden of Herbert Muschamp's willow-song about Ross Bleckner come down to?  [ "Art, Setting and the Architecture of the Heart," March 26 ] .
That they are both homosexual, that Mr.
Bleckner paints pictures on the theme of AIDS and that Mr.
Muschamp's lover died of this disease; that Mr.
Muschamp therefore has "no distance" from the pictures and can't (or won't) judge them as paintings.


Butterflies Are Free but They Do Like Food
ANYONE who has been visited by butterflies knows well their magic.
These lovely creatures visit silently and for only a moment.
The spell is cast.
Then they are gone.
Want to have more of these magic moments?


URBAN ECOLOGY: Greening Washington
Environmentalism is not the darling of the Congress these days, but the university with the greenest campus in the country -- figuratively at least -- is right in the middle of Washington.
Under an agreement with the Environmental Protection Agency announced last December, George Washington University has begun its green university project.
Students, faculty and administrators have created the Institute for the Environment to examine every aspect of university life.
Some suggestions: more E-mail, "paperless" courses and a "green dorm" designed to produce the best indoor air quality.


GADGETS: Meaner Meters
The modern city will soon get a little meaner.
A small Harleysville, Pa., firm, Intelligent Devices, has evolved a new parking meter designed to eliminate the joy of pulling into a slot that has time still left on the parking meter.
The intelligent meter, above, is designed to sense the exit of a vehicle from a slot and reset the timer to zero.
It has already been used in Ardmore, Pa., and will be tested this spring in two other small Pennsylvania communities, as well as Baltimore.
Officials in Philadelphia, Newark and New York have all been given demonstrations.


'Remarkable'
To the Editor:
I want to thank Herbert Muschamp for his remarkable essay and for sharing his thoughts and emotions so honestly -- and generously -- and beautifully.
JANIS EKDAHL  New York


Healing Aid
To the Editor:
Herbert Muschamp's essay was very moving and had a clear sense of a healing going on in his own life.
His ability to let art and architecture become part of the healing process is, I am certain, inspiring to many Times readers.


Katherine the Great
KATHARINE HEPBURN By Barbara Leaming.
Illustrated. 549 pp.
New York: Crown Publishers. $27.50.


Corrections
A picture caption last Sunday with an article about a sculpturing demonstration at the Hudson River Museum misidentified a student shown beside his cast.
He was Stephen Kerner, not Keon Iglehart.


Returning Tutsi Herders Add to Rwanda's Strains
"On this road, wildlife is a priority," reads a huge billboard at the entrance of Akagera National Park.
But not a single zebra or gazelle is to be seen on the paved road that winds for miles along the park border to the rolling savannah -- just two cranes hiding behind a bush.
Instead, the hills and plains are dotted brown with long-horned cattle -- hundreds of thousands inching across the tawny grass, prodded by dogs and young boys with sticks.


TATS Cru Wins Coca-Cola Account
NATURE'S lighting was perfect on a recent afternoon as TATS Cru set out to create a mural for on the wall of a South Bronx discount store.
Under a deep blue sky and a bright sun, the crew's three young men deftly manipulated spray-paint cans as easily as artists use brushes.
A few hours later three red circles with the white trademark Coca-Cola signature inside had replaced the web of graffiti covering the wall.
Piece of cake for three guys used to painting at night or in dark subway tunnels.


How the Budget Bite Might Feel
Sometimes budget battles in Albany can seem no more urgent than the sound of distant thunder: a dull roar of name-calling, worst-case scenarios and best-case projections.
But even Gov.
George E. Pataki's supporters agree that his proposed budget cuts would cause some pain throughout the state, and opponents have organized protests.
The Governor says the cuts are needed to close a budget gap of more than $4 billion and to pay for a $750 million tax cut that he insists is crucial for the state to have a competitive economy and attract businesses and jobs.
Governor Pataki and legislative leaders are now wrangling over the severity of the reductions.
To get a sense of how the city might be affected, the map below takes one borough -- Manhattan -- and details some ripples anticipated either directly from cuts in state aid or from belt-tightening by local agencies responding to reductions.
Some of these scenarios are offered by the agencies themselves or by advocates for programs.
In addition, reductions in state aid will be compounded by other cuts in city and Federal programs.


Lawrence S. Yu and Caroline E. Jee
Caroline Eunyung Jee, a daughter of Dr.
Keum Ho Jee and Kyung Cha Jee of Franklin Lakes, N.J., was married yesterday to Dr.
Lawrence Sikyong Yu, a son of Sung Kwang Yu and Soon Yea Yu of Wallington, N.J.
The Rev.
John W. Minnema performed the ceremony at the Hawthorne Gospel Church in Hawthorne, N.J.
Mrs.
Yu, 23, graduated from the University of Pennsylvania.
She is an associate in the retailing practice at Coopers &amp; Lybrand, the accounting firm, in New York.
Her father is an obstetrician and gynecologist in Wayne, N.J.


For Elderly Immigrants, a Retirement Plan in U.S.
It was in the chaotic din of a Chinatown garment factory that 74-year-old Ho Yin-peng discovered a better way to survive than snipping loose threads from clothing at 5 cents a dress.
Her co-workers told her that even though she lived with her son, she could qualify for the Federal welfare program known as Supplemental Security Income if she was over 65 and had been in this country for more than three years.


Photographer's Journal


A Summation From the Patron Saint of Sociology
IT was a strange project, trying to make a portrait of the man who had coined the notion of "Obliteration by Incorporation," an important concept in the Sociology of Science that Robert Merton had fathered.
In the accumulation of scientific knowledge, where each discovery expands or alters some part of the whole, the sources of those discoveries are often obliterated from the collective memory.
The organizational structure of science itself, the fact that peer recognition of significant originality is the basic reward, made for strange contradictions between the stated communality -- that discoveries become public property -- and the often fierce battles for priority.


The Last of All His Kind
TWILIGHT OF THE HABSBURGS  The Life and Times of Emperor Francis Joseph.
By Alan Palmer.
Illustrated. 388 pp.
New York: Grove Press. $27.50.


Ferry to 34th St. Adds Hours and Drops Fee (to Free)
The NY Waterway ferry between Hunters Point in Long Island City, Queens, and East 34th Street in Manhattan will extend its hours starting tomorrow and will offer free rides to all for the next two weeks.
The ferry, which departs every 15 minutes and has been operating only during morning and evening rush hours, will start running continuously between 6:45 A.M. and midnight on weekdays.


IF IT'S TUESDAY, IT MUST BE DAD'S HOUSE
Amid the pain and confusion surrounding the end of a marriage, parents have two fundamental choices: to put either themselves, or their children first.
In "If It's Tuesday, It Must Be Dad's House" (March 26), David Sheff is to be applauded, not simply for publicly acknowledging that the choice he and his ex-wife made was the wrong one, but for digging deep enough to understand the enormous burden they have placed upon their son.
VERONICA CLINTON Cranford, N.J.


Word for Word/Tax Talk; Render Unto Caesar, Pay the Piper Or Just Get That Check in the Mail
TAXES are as funny as a toothache, as profound as a pothole.
But as long as there have been tax collectors, the subject has proved fodder for humorists, philosophers and jurists.


New Tours Visit Gardens in England
Admirers of British gardens have a range of new tour itineraries to choose from.
The National Trust in conjunction with Page &amp; Moy, based in Leicester, has started several tours to National Trust properties with gardens.
Among the tours available is a four- or five-night package, Gardens and Country Houses of Somerset and Wiltshire, which includes a visit to the Gertrude Jekyll garden at Barrington Court near Ilminster in Somerset.
The garden, which dates from the 1920's, was designed as a series of three contrasting "rooms" or gardens, including a Lily Garden, an Iris Garden and a White Garden.
Departure dates are May 30, June 14 and 26 and Aug. 30.
The cost, based on double occupancy, ranges from about $645 to $870 (calculated at $1.63 to the pound), depending on the length of stay, and includes bus transportation from London, accommodations and some meals.
A four-night package, Houses and Gardens of Derbyshire, includes visits to the 18th-century style garden at Kedleston Hall in Derby.
Departure dates are May 31, June 14, July 12 and Aug. 2.
The cost is $645.
Most tours start from London.
Information: Page &amp; Moy/National Trust Holiday Collection, 136-140 London Road, Leicester LE2 1EN.
Telephone (44 116) 252 4444, fax (44 116) 254 9949.


Disaster-Free Day in Tokyo


Mr. Fix-It
IN the gaudy restaurants and dingy bars where casino executives gather, two questions are asked more than any others these days: When and where will Steve Wynn -- whose Golden Nugget Mirage brought the Las Vegas Strip back from the dead -- build a casino in Atlantic City?
And will he get Dennis Gomes to run it?
In 1991, Mr.
Gomes (the name rhymes with homes) was hired away from Mr.
Wynn to save Donald Trump's Taj Mahal casino complex.
While the rescue is still in progress, Mr.
Gomes's accomplishment has been viewed as miraculous.
In four years he has turned the Taj Mahal from a hopeless money loser to Atlantic City's top-grossing casino -- still losing money, but now with potential for full recovery.


Capital T-Shirt Sellers Get Eviction Notices
A free speech loophole has provided many of the tourists that parade past this city's monuments every day an extra treat: three T-shirts for $10.
But officials of the National Park Service are not amused.
They think the the monumental flea market that has grown up in recent years around the sale of souvenir T-shirts around the city's monuments has created a shopping mall atmosphere, and they are going to put a stop to it.


Widening the Goalposts for Tax Deductions
BURIED in the tax bill now pending in Congress is a provision to allow many more people to claim a deduction for using a home office.
The beneficiaries are people whose jobs take them places: doctors, auditors, salespeople and others who work in a variety of settings but often manage their businesses from home.
The provision would reverse the recent I.R.S. tendency toward ever-stricter standards for these deductions.
Supporters say the change makes sense in light of the growing numbers of people who are taking advantage of technology to work from home or who have, of necessity, joined the legions of downsized executives starting home-based consulting businesses.
The House Committee on Taxation estimates the cost of the measure, which would take effect with the 1996 tax year, at $1 billion over five years.


School Board to Provide Photos of Sex Offenders
In a variation on "Megan's Law," Community School Board 30 will notify parents by mail whenever paroled sex offenders move into the district, without giving specific information.
The parolees' names and photographs, but not addresses, will be available at the school board.


Protector of the Pines
IN A BURNED pine forest, there is no movement, no sound, no color except for the muted gray of spongy ash that blankets the ground.
Blackened skeletons of trees, their limbs upraised and twisted, look frozen in shock at the ferocity of flames that stripped them of life in an instant before moving on in a fireball to claim other victims.


A Little League of Their Own
It was a breezy springtime morning, the sort of day on which Ernie Banks used to saunter out of the dugout, and say, "Let's play two."
On its opening day, the Harlem Little League was doing the Chicago Cubs great one better: it was playing 23 games, all preceded by a whale of a parade.
Eight African drummers led the way up Adam Clayton Powell Jr.
Boulevard, 2,000 balloons hovered overhead, boys and girls wore lovingly pressed uniforms and stiff new gloves, adults led chants, mothers pushed baby carriages.
As the procession filed past the husks of one abandoned building after the next, passers-by stopped to look, then to smile, wave and clap.


A Buddhist New Year in the Bronx


Where Religion Gets a Big Dose of Shopping-Mall Culture
On Easter morning in suburban Phoenix, Community Church of Joy is offering worship services to suit nearly every taste: a sunrise service with country-style music; a traditional service with a 60-voice choir at 9, and at 10:30, an upbeat service with pop-style music -- all in the 6,000-seat sports stadium the church rented because its 800-seat sanctuary is too small.
Across the country in suburban Chicago, Willow Creek Community Church expects 27,000 people to fill its six services, settling themselves in upholstered theater seats, not pews, to hear original music performed with all the pizzazz of a professional show with 16 vocalists, a 10-piece band and three interpretive dancers.


Mets' High Hopes Are Nothing New
The reaction to the Mets' signing of Brett Butler last week was unanimously positive -- from players, news media and fans.
Players and fans were especially vocal about it, showing their excitement with the addition of a professional and productive player of Butler's stature.
"Any time you acquire somebody who is high profile, whether by trade or free agency, it's not surprising that people would react euphorically," Al Harazin said.
"Particularly in the case of a free-agent signing. People don't worry about the dollars and cents of it. People think of it in terms of how the player will help."


Late to Work? Let Us Know!
You say your kid wouldn't let you leave the house until you played "Aladdin," with you as Abu, the kleptomaniacal monkey?
Uh-huh.
The Times seeks readers' tales of excuses for arriving at work late.
Send your story -- no longer than 500 words, please -- to On the Job, Money and Business, The New York Times, 229 West 43d Street, New York, N.Y. 10036.
Or by E-mail to onthejob@nytimes.com.
Names will be withheld upon request.
Please include your phone number.
All submissions become the property of The Times and may be republished in any medium.


Dear Diary


Of Cages and Mazes: 2 Artists Go Exploring
A WARNING to those unfamiliar with the Rabbet Gallery, at 120 Georges Road here: First, the only animal to be seen is the engaging beagle puppy that belongs to the owner, Dot Paolo; second, Georges Road is not to be confused with George Street, which runs through the Rutgers University campus.
The gallery, which takes its name from a joint used in making wood frames, is in a huge brick building, once the headquarters of the National Music String Company.
It stands several blocks away from the university in semi-industrial territory.
Visitors will know they have arrived when they see signs for Bristol-Myers Squibb and Cylinder Head World on opposite sides of the road.


Shaky Finances Cloud Future of Waterloo Music Festival
It started in the 1960's, when the State of New Jersey wanted to obliterate Waterloo Village, then a neglected Colonial village near Stanhope, by putting a reservoir there.
By the 1980's, with the reservoir plan a distant memory, the village had become home to a classical music school and a major summer music festival.
Now, the finances of the Waterloo Foundation for the Arts are under water, its founder has relinquished daily control and there will probably not be a Waterloo Festival this summer.


Traffic Alert
TODAY Fifth Avenue will be closed from 44th Street to 57th Street from 11 A.M. to 2:30 P.M. for the Easter parade.


Teterboro, Where One of Every Four Residents Is a Councilman
By day, Teterboro has a working population of about 15,000; it's home to more than 90 companies, and Teterboro Airport is New Jersey's second largest, after Newark International.
But after business hours, the population drops to the 22 residents of Huyler Street, the only residential block in the square-mile industrial community.
The other day, the Borough Manager, Peter T. Neillands, agreed to talk to us about Teterboro, a place that "everybody has an opinion on and nobody has a solution for."
Q.  Who lives in Teterboro?
A.
There's only 10 or 11 dwelling houses, two of them multiple-family and the rest single-family homes.
Most of the people are tenants; some of the houses are owned by real-estate conglomerates and other ones by industry.
Most of the residents are blue-collar workers, largely retired.
I would say the average tenure of people living here is 25 years or so.


A Cultural Jewel Is 125
The Metropolitan Museum marks an anniversary with a founders' ball, on April 10, and much more.


Suburban Sprawl
FLESH AND BLOOD By Michael Cunningham. 466 pp.
New York: Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux. $22.


Susan Thomas and Steven Hutchinson
Susan Jane Thomas, an independent management consultant in New York, was married on Wednesday to Steven Nicholas Hutchinson, a partner in Weiss, Peck &amp; Greer, an investment management firm in New York.
The Rev.
Galen Guengerich performed the ceremony at the Unitarian Church of All Souls in New York.
Ms.
Thomas, 41, is keeping her name.
She and her husband, 45, graduated from Vassar College and received M.B.A.'s from Harvard University.
The couple's first marriages ended in divorce.


Taking To the Streets To Fight Drugs
MARY LOU RINALDI, having lived in the neighborhood all her life, can attest that many things about the West Side of Stamford have gone unchanged.
"For example, a lot of people still have gardens and vineyards," said Ms.
Rinaldi, who is the president of the Stamford Board of Representatives, the city's governing body.
But Ms.
Rinaldi, who lives in a house her grandfather built in the 1920's, knows well that some things have changed for the worse in a corner of the city, bordered by affluent Greenwich and by the high rises of Stamford's business district.
Drug dealing, for instance, has become commonplace in much of the area, particularly on the two main thoroughfares, Stillwater Avenue and West Main Street.
In addition, many of the neighborhood's older buildings have deteriorated.
And the crime rate has risen considerably, with occasional outbreaks of violence, including several shootings in the last few years.


Exit, Sweet Exit
To the Editor:
Like Matthew Purdy ("In Search of an Exit to Call Home  [ No Joking ] , April 9), I grew up at Exit 135, but I consider my hometown Exit 131. I used to date a 137, a 105 and a 144. I married a 144 and he has added a whole new dimension to my life: east and west.


Returning Tutsi Herders Add to Rwanda's Strains
"On this road, wildlife is a priority," reads a huge billboard at the entrance of Akagera National Park.
But not a single zebra or gazelle is to be seen on the paved road that winds for miles along the park border to the rolling savannah -- just two cranes hiding behind a bush.
Instead, the hills and plains are dotted brown with long-horned cattle -- hundreds of thousands inching across the tawny grass, prodded by dogs and young boys with sticks.


Vital Linkage
To the Editor:
Herbert Muschamp's essay so accurately summarized my feelings about the Guggenheim and various shows there: looking and relooking at various artists over time, looking at and living in New York after growing up in one of the provincial cities (in my case, Chicago), and the link between the personal, the political and esthetics.
ALLEN W. PRUSIS  New York


IRAQIS DENOUNCE U.N. OIL PROPOSAL
The Iraqi Government yesterday denounced a United Nations plan to allow limited sales of Iraqi oil and organized large anti-American demonstrations in Baghdad.
"I think the voices of the masses have expressed the Iraqi stand," the speaker of the Iraqi Parliament, Saadi Mahdi Saleh, told Associated Press Television during one rally.
"What you heard from the people is rejection of this decision."


A QUESTION FOR: Thomas Hampson
Q: If you could sing anywhere in the world, outside of a concert hall, where would it be?
A: For a pure physical singing space, I'd probably choose one of the great pyramids, or a cathedral in Russia.
Some place I've never been.
No, I'd have to say the pyramids, the spiritual center of the world, where there are incredible acoustics, where a single sound turns into a symphonic phenomenon.
No Dodger Stadium for me.
I guess I'd sing different kinds of things, Mahler and Schubert, maybe.
Something soft, something loud.
Then again, it would be a trip to do a country-and-western song.
Or take Paul Horn  [ the jazz flutist ]  and improvise duets.
Whoever was with me would have to want to be there for the same reasons.
I woudn't want to perform there -- I'd just like to sing for the sake of singing.


Corrections
The Television section today includes outdated picture captions on pages 4 and 24, and an outdated listing for Tuesday on page 27, about the new comedy "Buddies." The premiere of the series has been postponed.
In its place, an episode of "Roseanne" will be shown Tuesday at 9:30 P.M. on ABC.


PHOTOGRAPHER'S JOURNAL


Hudson Cozy
ANGLERS AND WRITERS + (212) 675-0810; 420 Hudson Street; $; no credit cards


Carolina Controls Draft Destiny of Carter, the Top Prize
It's cloak-and-dagger time in the National Football League.
Get ready for a week of trade rumors, smoke screens and talk of "the best player available" in advance of the annual draft to be held next Saturday and Sunday at the Paramount in Madison Square Garden.
When the rumors start flying and things get thick this week remember this: Kenneth Leonard (Ki-Jana) Carter is the clear No. 1 pick.
Now, it's just a matter of whether the Penn State running back winds up with Carolina, which has the No. 1 selection, or some other team that trades its way to the top spot.


For Rangers, Victory Is Best Revenge
It's the war of the words and yet, in the end, Brian Leetch agrees with Harry Sinden.
It's Sinden, the Bruins' general manager, who never, ever misses an opportunity to state that Leetch doesn't deserve to be mentioned in the same breath as Bruin legends Bobby Orr and Ray Bourque.
And it's Leetch, a New England native, who says, you know something, Sinden is right.
"I think Harry and I agree that Bobby Orr should not ever be compared to anyone," Leetch said Friday night after he helped propel the Rangers to a 5-3 victory over the Bruins in a must-win game at Madison Square Garden.
"And Ray Bourque's been at the top of his position since he's been in the game.


Guru for Businesses Braving the Internet
FROM Gutenberg to gigabits.
Such technical advances are made every 500 years or so, said Richard Mandelbaum, director for Advanced Technology in Telecommunications at Polytechnic University.
And although most of us may know that Gutenberg invented the printing press, few of us know that gigabits mean a billion bits of information.
Not to worry.
Dr.
Mandelbaum, an expert in high-speed telecommunications was at Polytechnic University's Westchester graduate center in Hawthorne recently, leading a forum about how to do business on the Internet to members of the Westchester business community.


Our Maddening Tax System
The day before Americans must send in their tax checks is an appropriate moment to ask whether Congress can't do better.
The current tax code is maddeningly complex, costly and unfair.
One large firm had to submit a tax return of more than 20,000 pages.
The code penalizes savings, thereby retarding growth -- an alarming problem for a country that has seen its savings rate fall well below the rates in Japan and Western Europe.
The code also breeds cynicism among those who cannot claim any of the subsidies that Congress passes at the behest of big contributors.


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
ART EXHIBITION
John Squier and Peter J. Ketchum, whose art may be seen in the Bushnell's Promenade Gallery, 166 Capitol Avenue, Hartford, through April 30, know how to get a viewer's attention.
Shown widely around the country, their pictures commingle colors, people, situations, commentary and mediums in a manner that is provocative, funny and to the point.
Various attempts to pigeonhole their work as Pop, folk, cartoon, mixed media, collage, anthropomorphic or merely strange tend to fall short of the mark.
One thing is certain, their audiences invariably have a good time.
Anyone wishing to meet the artists may attend a closing day reception on April 30 from 4:30 to 6:30 P.M.


Junior and the Old Dog Try Some Quality Time
A Goofy Movie  Animated, with the voices of Bill Farmer, Jason Marsden, Jim Cummings, Kellie Martin, Rob Paulsen and Wallace Shawn Directed by Kevin Lima G 76 minutes


Too Many Foreigners
ALIEN NATION Common Sense About America's Immigration Disaster.
By Peter Brimelow. 327 pp.
New York: Random House. $24.


Magic, Operetta and More Magic
Bally's Park Place  Boardwalk and Park Place. (800) 225-5977.
For tickets call Ticketmaster, (800) 736-1420.
MAIN BALLROOM Ed Hopson, NABF junior lightweight champion, vs.
Moises Pedroza.
Saturday at 4:30 P.M.
Tickets: $25.
COMING UP The Temptations, May 5-7, and Sheena Easton, July 6-9.
PARK CABARET "Legends in Concert," featuring impersonations of Tom Jones, Whitney Houston, Elvis Presley and others.
Sunday through Thursday at 7:30 and 10 P.M.; Saturday at 8 and 10:30 P.M.
Tickets: $20.
Caesars Atlantic City  2100 Pacific Avenue. (800) 677-7469.
For tickets call Ticketmaster, (800) 736-1420.
CIRCUS MAXIMUS SHOWROOM Daryl Hall and John Oates.
Today at 8 P.M.
Tickets: $30.
Don Rickles.
Thursday at 8 P.M., Friday at 10 P.M., Saturday at 9 P.M. and next Sunday at 8 P.M.
Claridge Hotel  Boardwalk and Park Place. (800) 257-8585.
For tickets call Ticketmaster, (800) 736-1420.
PALACE THEATER Ann Jillian, actress and singer.
Friday at 10 P.M., Saturday at 8 and 11 P.M. and next Sunday at 7 P.M.
Tickets: $25 plus a one-drink minimum.
The Grand  Boston at Pacific Avenue. (609) 340-7200.
For tickets call Ticketmaster, (800) 736-1420.
CAMBRIDGE BALLROOM Bill Cosby.
May 5 at 10 P.M. and May 6 at 8 and 11 P.M.
Tickets: $35 and $50.
COMING UP Frankie Valli and the Four Seasons, May 26-28.
Harrah's Hotel Casino  Harrah's Boulevard and Huron Avenue. (800) 242-7724.
BROADWAY-BY-THE-BAY Diahann Carroll and the Michael Natale Ochestra.
Tuesday and Friday at 7 P.M.; Wednesday, Thursday and Saturday at 7 and 10 P.M. and next Sunday at 7 and 10 P.M.
Tickets: $20.
Merv Griffin's Resorts Casino Hotel  1133 Boardwalk. (609) 340-6830.
For tickets call Ticketmaster, (800) 736-1420.
SUPERSTAR THEATER Vietnamese Magic Show.
Saturday at 8 P.M. and next Sunday at 6:30 P.M.
Tickets: $35, $50 and $75.
COMING UP Italian Show, May 20 and 21; Rosie O'Donnell, May 26-29.
Sands Hotel and Casino  Indiana Avenue and Brighton Park. (800) 257-8580.
For tickets call Ticketmaster, (800) 736-1420.
COPA ROOM "The Escapade," a music revue.
Sunday through Thursday at 3:30 and 7:30 P.M. and Saturday at 7 and 10 P.M.
Through June 10.
Tickets: $15.
Showboat Hotel Casino  Delaware and Pacific. (609) 343-4000.
For tickets call Ticketmaster, (800) 736-1420.
MARDI GRAS SHOWROOM "The Basin Street Follies" featuring "Disorderly Conduct," a husband and wife slapstick team.
Through April 29.
Monday through Saturday at 8 and 10:30 P.M.
Tickets: $10.
Tropworld  Boardwalk and Brighton Avenue. (800) 257-6227.
COMING UP Johnny Mathis,  May 18-21.
Trump's Castle Casino Resort  Huron Avenue and Brigantine Boulevard. (800) 777-8477.
For tickets call Ticketmaster, (800) 736-1420.
CRYSTAL BALLROOM Dick Fox's 40th Anniversary of Rock 'n' Roll.
Friday at 10 P.M., Saturday at 8 and 11 P.M.  and next Sunday at 9 P.M.
Tickets: $20 plus one-drink minimum.
COMING UP The Four Tops, May 26-28.
KING'S COURT SHOWROOM "Unforgettables," a tribute to late and great stars, through June 4.
Monday through Thursday at 3 and 7:30 P.M., Saturday at 7:30 and 10:30 P.M. and Sunday at 8:30 P.M.
Tickets: $12.50, weekdays; $15, Saturdays and holidays.
One-drink mimimum required.
Trump Plaza  Boardwalk at Mississippi Avenue. (800) 759-8786.
For tickets call Ticketmaster, (800) 736-1420.
PLAZA SHOWROOM Engelbert Humperdinck, entertainer.
Friday at 9 P.M., Saturday at 8 and 11:30 P.M. and next Sunday at 8 P.M.
Tickets: $45.
COMING UP Penn and Teller.
April 28-30.
Trump Taj Mahal  1000 Boardwalk at Virginia Avenue. (609) 449-1000.
For tickets call Ticketmaster, (800) 736-1420.
CASBAH Dean Scott, singer.
Through Thursday at 7:30 and 10:30 P.M.
Tickets: $12.50.
"Das Ist Die Liebe," a German operetta with Marika Oszald, Saturday at 8 P.M.
"Concerto Italiano" with Riccardo Cocciante, Antonio and Marchello, Rosita Celentano and Gigi Finizio, Saturday at 8:30 P.M.


What's in a Road Project: Improvement, or a Highway?
A series of 11 projects -- some planned, some already built -- along the Hudson River waterfront in Hudson County have some environmental activists wondering: Is it a string of local road improvements, or an unannounced "stealth highway"?
The activists, including members of the Hoboken Sierra Club, say the road widenings and bypasses add up to a continuous highway from the foot of the Bayonne Bridge to the George Washington Bridge.
They fear that a highway could be built without first going through the usual process of obtaining Federal permits and environmental impact studies.
State transportation department officials say the road improvements are needed to get people to and from developments in Jersey City and elsewhere.
ANDY NEWMAN


Passover in Sarajevo


THE FIRST PRIMARY
Twenty-nine floors above Nashville, a slight man in a dark suit is exploding into the telephone.
"What's goin' owwnnn?!" he shouts, in a voice that has closed a thousand deals.
Ted Welch, mid-south mogul and Republican money man, is searching for $20 million, which he thinks can turn Lamar Alexander, the former Governor of Tennessee, into the President of the United States.
It is 3 P.M., and Welch is on his 19th phone call of the afternoon - this one to a Washington lobbyist he os urging to co-sponsor a $1,000-a-plate dinner.
The lobbyist, as confident and as loud, responds with a name that Welch does not want to hear -- Gov.
William Weld of Massachusetts, another potential candidate.
Welch, a former Bible salesman, answers with pity.
"Bill Weld, bless his heart, he has no idea what it takes to do fund- raising." The conversation moves on to Senator Phil Gramm of Texas, a more obvious rival and no one's idea of a financial naif.
"Here's what I think," Welch says.
"I think north of Kentucky he'll have a hard time."
The men parry for a minute or two and then Welch moves in for the kill, with an expenditure of tense, coiled energy.
"We really want you, Peter," he says, falling forward in his turquoise chair.
His knee meets the ground and his shoulder hits his desk, flagpole at Iwo Jima style.


Q. &amp; A.
Ending A Lease Early Q I have lived for a dozen years in a rent-stabilized apartment building and recently signed another one-year lease.
If I move out before the lease expires (I may have the opportunity in the fall to purchase a condominium), but give my landlord at least two months' notice, will I be entitled to get my security deposit back?
After all, upon my vacancy, the landlord can go ahead and raise the rent on the apartment, so in the long run he will make more money. . . .
M.
Goldstein, Brooklyn.
A Under New York law, a tenant who has signed a lease is liable for the rent for the full term of the lease, said Edward Filemyr, a Manhattan lawyer who specializes in real estate.


Residential Resales
In the following reports, the "listed at" price is the asking price when negotiations began that ended in the sale.
Time on market is from most recent listing to contract.
MANHATTAN
CARNEGIE HILL  $1.15 million
1220 Park Avenue (95th St.)  3-bedroom, 3-bath, 3,000-sq.-ft. prewar co-op; 24-hr. doormen, concierge, 2 maid's rooms, eat-in kitchen, 2 exposures; maintenance $2,507, 30% tax-deductible, listed at $1.295 million, 17 weeks on market (Broker: Corcoran Group)  GREENWICH VILLAGE  $275,000
200 East 61st Street  (Savoy)  1-bedroom, 1-bath, 848-sq.-ft. condo in a 9-year-old building; doormen, concierge, health club; common charge $582, taxes $5,484, listed at $485,000, 13 weeks on market (Brokers: Feathered Nest; MIC)  BRONX
CASTLE HILL  $139,000
444 Theriot Avenue  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 40-year-old semi-attached brick house; eat-in kitchen, finished basement, private driveway; taxes $1,212. listed at $148,000, 21 weeks on market (Broker: Century 21/Metro Star)  BROOKLYN
MIDWOOD  $226,500
1037 East 2d Street  2-family, 93-year-old semi-attached frame house; 4 bedrooms, 2 1/2 baths in primary unit; 2 bedrooms, 1 bath, den in other; taxes $1,605, listed at $275,000, 14 months on market (Brokers: John P. Burke; Krone)  PARK SLOPE  $280,000
329 8th Street  2-family, 3 1/2-story, attached brownstone; 3 bedrooms, eat-in kitchen in primary duplex; 2 bedrooms, dining room in other; 1 bath in each; taxes $1,200, listed at $310,000, 48 weeks on market (Broker: Noonan)  WINDSOR TERRACE  $280,000
55 Sherman Street  4-bedroom, 2-bath, attached, legal 2-family house to be used as a single-family residence; dining room, eat-in kitchen, den, rear porch; taxes $1,618, listed at $289,000, 1 week on market (Broker: Warren Lewis)  QUEENS
JACKSON HEIGHTS  $185,000
30-32 69th Street  2-family, 36-year-old attached brick town house; 2 bedrooms, dining room in primary unit; 1 bedroom in other; eat-in kitchen, 1 bath in each; 1-car garage; taxes $1,800, listed at $199,000, 3 weeks on market (Broker: Century 21/Best)  FOREST HILLS GARDENS  $335,000
342 Burns Street  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 70-year-old Tudor; dining room, eat-in kitchen, fireplace, finished basement; taxes $1,745, listed at $349,000, 26 weeks on market (Broker: Sarah Jones)  STATEN ISLAND
BRIGHTON HEIGHTS  $75,000
150 Arnold Street  2-bedroom, 1-bath, 55-year-old detached colonial; eat-in kitchen, aluminum-sided exterior; taxes $940, listed at $75,000, 60 weeks on market (Broker: Salmon)  SILVER LAKE  $310,000
18 Park Court  4-bedroom, 1 3/4-bath, 60-year-old detached colonial; dining room, eat-in kitchen, fireplace, finished basement, 2-car garage; taxes $1,450, listed at $350,000, 10 weeks on market (Broker: Vitali-Sunshine)  NEW JERSEY
CAPE MAY  $181,000
953 Sewell Avenue  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 41-year-old ranch; front porch, deck, eat-in-kitchen; taxes, $2,569, listed at $193,000, 18 weeks on market (Broker: Coldwell Banker Sol Needles)  PERRINEVILLE  $314,800
45 Cheryl Lane  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, new custom colonial; 2-story foyer, walk-in closets, 2-car garage, bay windows; estimated taxes $6,800, listed at $359,800, 43 weeks on market (Broker: Prudential New Jersey)  RIDGEWOOD  $575,000
363 Crest Road  5-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, 61-year-old Tudor; slate roof, leaded-glass windows, h/w floor, new kitchen; taxes $12,117, listed at $585,000, 1 week on market (Broker: Douglas Elliman-Joan Quigg)  WOODCLIFF LAKE  $385,000
13 Stratford Court  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 24-year-old colonial; fireplace, 2-car garage, full basement, taxes $7,200, listed at $399,900, 3 weeks on market (Broker: Prudential Higgins; Murphy Realty Better Homes and Gardens)  WESTCHESTER
BEDFORD  $1.9 million
8 Kilborn Lane  7-bedroom, 5 1/2-bath, 8-year-old colonial; brick terraces, library, gym, basketball court, pool, dining gazebo, 4 acres; taxes $20,962, listed at $1.75 million, 1 year on market (Broker: Houlihan/Lawrence)  CHAPPAQUA  $660,000
330 Douglas Road  4-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, 78-year-old stone/stucco house; terrace, pool, family room, legal apartment, 3-car garage; 1.9 acres; taxes $14,971, listed at $729,000, 1 year on market (Broker: Houlihan/Lawrence)  EDGEMONT  $567,000
160 Old Army Road  5-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 7-year-old colonial; center hall, office, balcony, skylights, Jacuzzi, 0.33 acre; taxes $16,241, listed at $639,000, 11 months on market (Broker: Julia B. Fee)  MAMARONECK  $190,000
107 Villa Avenue  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 47-year-old Cape Cod; fireplace, dining room, deck, playroom, updated kitchen; taxes $6,930, listed at $220,000, 5 months on market (Brokers: Merritt Associates; Burbank Whittemore)  CONNECTICUT
COS COB  $525,000
35 Mianus View Terrace  6-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 99-year-old colonial; dining room, french doors, front and rear porches, 1-car garage, .33-acre lot; taxes $3,374, listed at $529,000, 2 weeks on market (Brokers: Pruner Associates; Coldwell Banker/Schlott)  GREENWICH  $175,000
40 West Elm Street  (Harborview)  750-sq.-ft. studio-condo in a renovated prewar building; concierge, L.I.
Sound view, 1-car garage; common charge $293; taxes $2,492, listed at $189,000, 8 weeks on market (Brokers: William Pitt; Coldwell Banker/Schlott)  RIVERSIDE  $501,600
21 Hendrie Avenue  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 98-year-old Victorian; dining room, wraparound porch, ; taxes $4,207, listed at $535,000, 14 weeks on market (Broker: Coldwell Banker/Schlott)  STAMFORD  $489,000
94 Barnes Road  (Heatherwood)  3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 2,606-sq.-ft. condo in 9-year-old building; cathedral ceilings, Jacuzzi in master bath, screened porch and deck, paddle tennis courts, pool and clubhouse; common charge $450; taxes $7.095, listed at $489,000, 65 weeks on market (Broker: Coldwell Banker/Schlott)  LONG ISLAND
FARMINGDALE  $157,000
23 Miller Road  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 45-year-old ranch; dining room, eat-in kitchen, basement, porch, 1-car attached garage; taxes $5,000, listed at $169,990, 4 weeks on market (Broker: A-1 Realty, Network of Homes)  JERICHO  $258,500
116 Orleans Avenue 3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 34-year-old colonial; dining room, eat-in kitchen, den, finished basement, gas heat, new roof, 1-car garage; taxes $4,800, listed at $279,000, 12 weeks on market (Broker: ERA Gatewood)  LEVITTOWN  $126,000
44 Club Lane  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 46-year-old Cape Cod; eat-in kitchen, dining area, 1-car garage; taxes $3,800, listed at $129,990, 4 weeks on market (Brokers: Coldwell Banker Sammis; Century 21 Dallow)  SEARINGTOWN  $372,000
33 Barry Park Court  4-bedroom, 3-bath, 30-year-old split level; dining room, eat-in kitchen, den with fireplace, basement, attached 2-car garage; taxes $8,300, listed at $395,000, 12 weeks on market (Brokers: Atanas; Blaich)


A Trickle-Down Theory
To the Editor:
Kudos to Neil Simon for his courage and convictions in defying the business-as-usual mentality of Broadway producers  [ "If Neil Simon Likes the Nabe, It Must Be Off Broadway," March 26 ] .
As a former avid theatergoer, I look forward again to seeing plays performed in small, intimate theaters like the Union Square, with its relatively limited seating capacity.


Dear Family


Where Religion Gets a Big Dose of Shopping-Mall Culture
On Easter morning in suburban Phoenix, Community Church of Joy is offering worship services to suit nearly every taste: a sunrise service with country-style music; a traditional service with a 60-voice choir at 9, and at 10:30, an upbeat service with pop-style music -- all in the 6,000-seat sports stadium the church rented because its 800-seat sanctuary is too small.
Across the country in suburban Chicago, Willow Creek Community Church expects 27,000 people to fill its six services, settling themselves in upholstered theater seats, not pews, to hear original music performed with all the pizzazz of a professional show with 16 vocalists, a 10-piece band and three interpretive dancers.


Blue Dog Demo
THE BLUE DOGS are poised to bite Newt Gingrich," Jackie Calmes wrote in The Wall Street Journal. "To date, the Republican House speaker has had the votes of these self-described 'Blue Dog Conservative Democrats.' "
Twenty-three Democrats in the House of Representatives who are eager to reduce the Federal deficit now sport lapel pins that depict a blue hound.
Lest observers miss the point, the symbol is surrounded by the words "Blue Dog Conservative Democrat."


McNamara's Retreat
IN RETROSPECT The Tragedy and Lessons of Vietnam.
By Robert S. McNamara with Brian VanDeMark.
Illustrated. 414 pp.
New York: Times Books/Random House. $27.50.


Once-Upon-a-Time Tale Of the Big, Bad City
New York City is known for traumatizing the talented people who come here thinking they can break into show business without first getting beaten to a pulp.
But once upon a recent time, our little town opened itself up to someone in the extravagant manner of a fairy tale or musical comedy.
That someone was Deborah Lippmann, a sweet-natured manicurist to the stars by day and an aspiring star herself by night.


From Smart Money, Clones, Phones, Loans
IF you're sending a chunk of change to the Internal Revenue Service today, the next thing you will want to think about is saving.
You might look first to the May issue of Smart Money, whose feature "Keeping Track" will give you some good, practical ideas.
"Send in the Clones" suggests that Apple computer clones and their promise of low prices might be just as good as the original.
Apple is cooperating with Power Computing, which is making the first clones of the 11-year-old Apple Macintosh family, "so that the Mac standard can finally whittle away at I.B.M. compatibles' dominance of the personal computer market," the article says.


Britain Is Streamlining Its Bureaucracy, Partly by Privatizing Some Work
At a time when voters nearly everywhere are demanding more efficiency from government, Britain has undertaken one of the world's most comprehensive efforts to slash costs and improve services.
The Conservative Government transformed the nation's economy in the 1980's under Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher by throwing slow-moving, inefficient state-owned industries into the free-market fray.
Now her successor, John Major, is applying the same market-oriented ideology to the Government bureaucracy by making it compete with the private sector and meet explicit performance goals.


Is the Tough Love Too Tough?
For eight years, the Anderson Program based at Public School 9 has functioned almost as a private school within the public school system, setting itself off from the rest of the school as a free-wheeling program that allows students to accelerate at their own pace, and enjoying an unusual level of parent involvement.
But moves by a principal trying to impose order and enforce discipline in what was once an unruly school have enraged some Anderson parents.
When the principal, Joan Gutkin, was granted tenure last month, the parents -- who had been exploring ways of expanding the K-5 program since last fall -- redoubled their efforts to hunt for an entirely new home for the program.


McNamara's Retreat
IN RETROSPECT The Tragedy and Lessons of Vietnam.
By Robert S. McNamara with Brian VanDeMark.
Illustrated. 414 pp.
New York: Times Books/Random House. $27.50.


TALES OF MANHATTAN: The Bronze Handbag
Everyone knows you shouldn't leave a handbag unattended in New York City.
Except for the bronze one above, which is bolted to a marble ledge at 57 East 57th Street.
It's a replica of an MCM Princess Kyoto handbag and rests outside the MCM boutique as an elegant come hither, an upscale version of a giant shoe (see the shoe museum piece at right) outside a cobbler's shop.


UP FRONT: CHATTER - Half Empty? Half Full?; Polluted and Bankrupt
Because of the relaxing of environmental laws, New Jersey will pollute the Delaware and Hudson Rivers.
Couple this with the billions of dollars being taken from various trust funds, which will require repayment, and you will find New Jersey a polluted, bankrupt state by the year 2005.
MAX NIEDERLE Martinsville


Crunch Time
SOUTH RIVER is a workaday middle-class suburb in Middlesex County, but its schools have the feel of urban relics.
Learning muddles along in buildings that have stood for many decades and rarely been repaired.
It is hard to rouse young minds when rainwater seeps into the classrooms, when textbooks fall apart, when the surroundings gnaw at the spirit.
Every year, local educators plead for more money, and almost every year, residents fuming over rising property taxes reject the district's school budget.
Cuts are made; decay marches on.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
LOST IN HOLLYWOOD  The Fast Times and Short Life  of River Phoenix.
By John Glatt.
Primus/Donald I. Fine, cloth, $23.95; paper, $12.95.


Crasswords
I HAD A GOOD PASSWORD ONCE.
I LOST it to modern vandals who cracked an Internet node with a password-sniffing program that sat quietly in the shadows and recorded everyone's connections to other sites across the planet.
In the aftermath, there was my password, S!itnol (the first letters of the first words of a Supremes song -- and you're welcome to it), shockingly exposed near the end of a long security-agency printout.
It was like walking into a gallery and seeing your own nude posture photo.
And what a loss!
A good password is hard to find.
A bad password is what you are probably using right now, or soon will -- for at this peculiar moment in human history we find ourselves obliged to punch in special sequences of characters before we can go on line, or get cash from a machine, or check voice mail, or turn off a house alarm, or telephone with a credit card, or reactivate a car radio, or secure a spreadsheet or word-processor document.
Lizzie and 123184 are screamingly bad passwords, especially if they happen to be the name and birth date of your firstborn.
Gandalf is a bad password; so is any obscenity in any earthly language; so is any name ever used in an episode of "Star Trek." So are eizziL and 481321 -- password crackers do use computers, you know, and the on-line message groups are always hopping with queries like this one from a gentleman in Kuwait: "hi there. I want a program which can get others PassWord. E-mail me Please. Nassib."


Cynthia Sheridan And Scott Siegler
Cynthia Ann Sheridan, the daughter of Doris Sheridan of Nyack, N.Y., and the late Charles Sheridan, was married last Sunday to Scott Michael Siegler, the son of Holly and Lawrence Siegler of New City, N.Y.
The Rev.
Herbert Freeland, a Methodist minister, officiated, and Rabbi H. Philip Berkowitz took part in the ceremony at the Pearl River (N.Y.) Hilton.
Ms.
Sheridan, who is keeping her name, is the chairman of the English department at Felix Festa Junior High School in West Nyack, N.Y.
She graduated from Smith College and received a master's degree in English education from Manhattanville College.
She is also a candidate for a doctoral degree in education at Fordham University.
Her previous marriage ended in divorce.


Marlboro Country Was Once No Man's Land
PERHAPS THE MOST successful package redesign of all time was that done for Marlboro cigarettes in 1955 by the designer Frank Gianninoto.
The Marlboro cigarette had existed previously in a white pack covered with weak graphic elements and a lot of copy.
It was associated with women, at a time when buyers of filter cigarettes were most likely to be women.
But filters were beginning to catch on with men too, and the redesign was prompted by the desire of Philip Morris, the tobacco company, to have a filter cigarette that would appeal to all.
Gianninoto's simplification was, in fact, very like the Campbell's soup can -- red on top, white on the bottom, with a coat of arms that like Campbell's gold medal, tends to disappear.
The white meets the red as an arrow pointing upward, a very simple graphic device visible on even the snowiest television set.
Perhaps the most radical part of Gianninoto's design was the new physical form it gave the package.
Rather than the familiar cigarette pack made of paper, with a foil liner and cellophane wrapper, Marlboro sported a cardboard box with a top that flipped open.
The early advertising jingle promised "filter, flavor, flip-top box," an indication that the company thought the box would be perceived as something special.
There was a certain implication that people living a rugged life in Marlboro Country needed a tougher cigarette pack in their pockets, but the advantages of this novel pack -- beyond its novelty -- were never fully explained.
The English design critic Reyner Banham theorized in 1962 that the real purpose of the box was to prevent people from removing their cigarettes easily from the package.


Steak and Seafood a la New Orleans
JACKSON SQUARE accurately calls itself a steak and seafood company.
The menu and decor make that apparent.
The restaurant, in Rockville Centre, has that masculine look associated with classic steakhouses that is now equally at home in 1990's fish houses.
At Jackson Square it is executed with dark wainscoting, ceiling fans, beveled glass, brass railings and floors of bare wood or tiny white tiles.
A New Orleans overlay pops up in murals of jazz musicians and Mardi Gras masks.
Unfortunately, the noise level is on a par with Bourbon Street on Fat Tuesday at parade time.
Most of the noise was generated by a three-piece band and mobs of people who were waiting in the bar.
The no-reservations policy was the culprit for the wait.


The Lure of Bargains Way Downtown
ANDREA ULDRYCH, a traveler from Germany, was trying on a double-breasted blazer at Century 21, the way-downtown department store at 22 Cortlandt Street, near Church Street.
Her leather jacket and purse lay in a heap on the floor.
It wasn't easy.


The Road To Derby Takes Dizzy Detour
While the power horses of East and West stalked and chased, and while a medical miracle named Randy Romero hunched down in the saddle, a 30-1 long shot named Wild Syn led every step of the way today to win the Blue Grass Stakes by 2 1/2 lengths over Suave Prospect.
And, while doing so, he royally scrambled the traffic on the road to the Kentucky Derby.
No horse in the race was given less chance to win, yet no horse in the race ever got in front of him.
He simply set a tantalizing pace that no jockey challenged, and at the end of a mile and one-eighth he still had the lead over some of the ranking candidates for the Derby: Suave Prospect, who held off the late run by Tejano Run by the length of his head, and then Thunder Gulch two lengths farther back.


Junior and the Old Dog Try Some Quality Time
The Pebble and the Penguin  Animated, with the voices of Martin Short, James Belushi, Tim Curry and Annie Golden G 75 minutes


A Declaration of the 60's, Before the Doubts
BERGMAN MOVIES.
FINNISH textiles.
Franny and Zooey.
Bertoia chairs.
Kind of takes you back, doesn't it? -- to the last liberal moment, before the 1960's became The Sixties, with all the cultural helter-skelter that decade now stands for.
The Ford Foundation Building takes you back there, too.
Designed by Kevin Roche John Dinkeloo &amp; Associates, this 1967 landmark will receive the 25-Year Award from the American Institute of Architects at the organization's convention next month.
The 12-story building is well worth a retrospective look, not only as one of the last first-rate office buildings to go up in New York but also as the expression of a time when people were more confident that they knew what first-rate was.


A Passion for Movies
MILLION DOLLAR MOVIE By Michael Powell.
Introduction by Martin Scorsese.
Illustrated. 626 pp.
New York: Random House. $30.


It's Still Not Too Late to Start Publishing Comic Strips
To the Editor:
I was pleased your April 9 editorial ("A Century of 'the Funnies' ") noted the centennial of newspaper syndicated comics, an American export published worldwide in a multitude of languages.


Is TV Ready for 'New York 10023'?; There's a Boom in Series Filming, and the City Is a Star
To Jackie Opshinsky, a professional party planner who lives on Central Park West, the Upper West Side is a place where neighbors plant community gardens and join Crimewatchers.
"The neighborhood is all about middle-class parents getting involved in their community to make things better," she said.
To Molly Cliff, a lawyer, Central Park West is boring.
"You know, they have their families," she said.
"There's not a whole lot of razzmatazz."


Corrections
An article and a picture caption last Sunday about vacation homes misstated the rent for a house in Dorset, Vt.
It is $3,500 a month.


The Decline of Discourse


Word Games


Founders, Keepers
Dinners for Clay Felker and Richard Parsons in the first category and for Joyce Meskis in the second.


Corrections
A picture with an article about Public School 3 in the Neighborhood Report last Sunday carried an incorrect caption.
The woman pictured was Lucy Rubin, a teacher at the school, not Hope Alswang, a mother of two P.S. 3 students.


IF IT'S TUESDAY, IT MUST BE DAD'S HOUSE
Joint custody is not really the issue here; it is the spirit with which parents approach their responsibilities.
My ex-husband and I share the privilege of "co-parenting" our 5-year-old son.
We purchased homes five minutes away from one another so that he can easily spend time at either house.
Neither of us would dream of relocating so that airline travel stood between our visits.
DONNA WEIGERS DEPASQUALE Northport, L.I.


Sports of The Times; Joe Cool's Body Clock Runs Out
HE wasn't really Joe Montana yet.
He was merely the 49ers' third-year quarterback out of Notre Dame, a skinny starter who was still studying and searching.
And when Ed (Too Tall) Jones was asked to appraise him before a game at Candlestick Park early in that 1981 season, the Cowboys' defensive end shrugged.
"He can't throw deep," Too Tall said.
During the 49ers' 41-14 victory, with Too Tall's arms flailing in his face, the third-year quarterback whipped a long pass to Dwight Clark.
As his wide receiver hurried into the end zone for a 78-yard touchdown, the third-year quarterback turned to Too Tall.


Help for Adoptive Parents of Special-Needs Children
Adoption costs have been nil for Valerie L. Sundsboe, who is adopting her fourth disabled child.
Mrs.
Sundsboe, 32, of Omaha discovered her talent for working with physically impaired children as a high school volunteer.
She and her husband, Ron, decided to adopt because "we thought it was better to give a home to a child who already needed one. I don't think people realize how many special-needs kids are waiting for homes." Drew, who was suffering from cerebral palsy, joined the family in March 1989.


April 9-15; Bad Blood All Around
The focus of the O.J.
Simpson trial this week was not O.J.
Simpson, but the jury sitting in judgment of him.
As powerful as any testimony in Judge Lance A. Ito's courtroom was his interview with Jeanette Harris, the juror he kicked off the case a few days earlier for dissembling on her juror questionnaire.
What she told Judge Ito during their 35-minute talk Wednesday revealed that long-feared racial divisions in the group were worse than anyone anticipated.
In the interview -- a transcript was released Thursday -- the 38-year-old black woman described how a kind of apartheid had developed in the sequestered jurors' lives.
She said that black and white jurors (a Hispanic woman sided with the whites) fought over what movies to watch, who could use which exercise machines, and whether to open windows on the van taking them to court.


Political Memo; In Welfare, The Fights Are Political, Not Fiscal
Welfare has moved to the center of the state budget battle, and for all the attention being paid to it, one would think it was the chief cause of the state's fiscal problems.
It is not, nor is it even close: education, health care and transportation programs all dwarf welfare spending in the state budget.
But in the realm of political theater, welfare makes for compelling drama, particularly when the plot involves the Republicans pummeling Democrats with the issue.


Israel's Likud Will Back Any Peace That's Real
To the Editor:
Amos Oz is perhaps Israel's most accomplished writer of fiction, as is once again confirmed by "The Hamas-Likud Connection" (Op-Ed, April 11), in which he tars the democratic Israeli opposition as "the best collaborator that Hamas could hope for" and the "Israeli counterparts" of Islamic terrorism, veritable demons really, who are "against any kind of peace."


MCA's Not So Excellent Adventure
No doubt Hollywood breathes easier now that MCA Inc. has come home after its star-crossed Japanese idyll.
The Matsushita Electric Industrial Company, which bought the entertainment conglomerate in 1990 and has sold it to Seagram, is also pleased.
It is rid of a sinkhole that confounded its dreams of transforming the movie and music business.
Happiest of all is Edgar Bronfman Jr., the Seagram president, who has a new $5.7 billion toy.
But it is worth noting that the saga of MCA's dealings with Matsushita was an exercise in hubris and self-delusion.
Each side viewed the other as ripe for partnership without being clear about the details.
Maybe it was racist for some Americans to be upset about the Japanese takeover of such cultural jewels as Columbia Pictures and MCA.
The Seagram deal has not, after all, inspired articles about Canada's "invasion" of Hollywood.
But there were clearly outmoded cultural stereotypes in the way the two sides dealt with each other.


From the Brick Oven, Serious Pizza (but No Slices)
Yes, I know: everyone has a favorite pizza place.
And clearly, there will never be any way to determine who makes the state's best pizza.
All I know is that in 18 years of passionate experimentation with the New Jersey product, Brooklyn's in Hackensack is the closest I've come to the real deal.
Brooklyn's Coal Burning Brick Oven Pizzeria, to be exact, and as you can gather from the six-word name, it takes its mission seriously.
The coal (40 pounds a day of Pennsylvania anthracite) makes the oven burn extra hot, and the crust comes off the superheated bricks in about four minutes, thin, crisp and blistered.
The mozzarella is made in the house.
The pies are seasoned from a great fragrant bowl of chopped fresh basil.


A Word to the Wise for Co-op Owners: Participate!
SWEET are the uses of adversity, and also of ignorance, in building a successful co-op.
Both must be overcome.
In the process of overcoming, co-op owners acquire the cohesion and wisdom that makes for good housing.
Charles Rappaport, who is 72 years old, found these principles to be true in his own building and others built as co-ops in the 50's and 60's because they led to shareholder participation in building governance.
And participation is the theme he has hammered at for 30 years as president of an organization known now as the Federation of New York Housing Cooperatives.


Commercial Property/Salaries; As Growth and Hiring Resume, the Pay's the Thing
NEWMARK &amp; COMPANY, like most real estate firms, used to delegate research to clerks who were good with computers.
This month, Newmark hired a research director with a bachelor's in economics and a master's in statistics.
"Of course we're paying him a lot," said Barry Gosin, Newmark's chief executive.
"We need someone to forecast conditions, not regurgitate what's happened."


One-Act Play Getting A Life of Its Own
THEATER audiences at the Rich Forum in Stamford have grown accustomed to previewing plays headed for Off Broadway.
Now they are getting a jump on a bookshop near Lincoln Center.
At no charge.
"The Stamford Theater has a pleasant obligation to offer free programming," said Glenn Young, the publisher of Applause Books at 211 West 71st Street in Manhattan.
The shop is where readings of one-act plays selected from "The Best American Short Plays 1993 to 94" (edited by Howard Stein and Mr. Young) are being held over three Wednesday evenings, one in April, two in May. (Donation: $7.50, capacity: 100; 212-765-7905).


With Affluent Chinese Moving In, A Press War Begins to Heat Up
It has been a very, very good year for Li Yung and his New Jersey China Times.
On Jan. 1, the Chinese-language weekly published its first issue, with a press run of 5,000 copies.
On April 1, that figure hit 20,000, distributed free at 56 restaurants, banks and supermarkets throughout New Jersey.


Valerie Gordon and Marvin James
MARVIN JAMES, 36, has cooked at Time Cafe and the Gotham Bar and Grill in Manhattan and is now the chef at a bistro in the theater district, Chez Josephine.
He has the tranquil demeanor of someone who has spent the day in a yoga class doing the cat pose rather than in a busy restaurant cooking.
His dishes are a health-conscious blend of classical French cooking and soul food, with whimsical dashes of his own.
Once, early in his career, when he was trying to figure out what to make as a dessert special, he picked a bunch of scented geraniums and made geranium sorbet.


A City of 8 Million Art Critics
If reactions to the new installation in the traffic island at Fifth Avenue and 23d Street, at the foot of the Flatiron Building, prove anything, it's that public art does indeed involve the public.
In one 45-minute period recently, the following responses to the 19-foot-tall bluish-gray tower and base were noted.
"It's a clothes peg," said Liz Kingston, heading to the gym from her 25th Street apartment.
"Or maybe it's a big arrow telling you it's downtown." Born in Ireland, she recalled that her brother, Niall, a sculptor, had made a huge metal dinosaur that was placed along the coast of County Clare.
"A bit jarring to some of the villagers."


L. B. Turkevich, First Woman To Teach at Princeton, Dies at 85
Ludmilla B. Turkevich, an expert in Russian language and literature who was the first woman to teach at Princeton and then spent 18 years as chairwoman of the Russian department at Douglass College of Rutgers University, died on Friday at the Princeton Medical Center.
She was 85 and lived at the Monroe retirement village in Jamesburg, N.J.
Her family said the cause of death was respiratory failure.


Betty-Ann Soiefer, Alan Izenman
Betty-Ann Soiefer, a lawyer, was married last Sunday to Dr.
Alan J. Izenman, a statistician.
Rabbi Emmanuel Gettinger, who is a cousin of the bride, officiated at the Lincoln Square Synagogue in New York.
The bride is the project director for the Task Force on Equal Treatment in the Courts for the United States Court of Appeals for the Third Circuit, in Philadelphia.
She graduated from the University of Pennsylvania and received her law degree from American University.
From 1990 to 1994, she was a counsel to the Senate Committee on Governmental Affairs.
She is the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Jack Soiefer of Jamaica Estates, Queens.
The bride's father retired as a general practitioner in Brooklyn.


INSIDE
IN PERSON  In the fire's wake, a walk through the ashes with Walt Earlin, son of the Pine Barrens. 4 RESTAURANTS  Splendor in the Meadowlands: Il Villaggio, where pasta is a course, not a life style. 11 SOAPBOX  The tombstone murals of Camden: Memorials or messages of death?
Plus letters. 13


For a Touch of Spring, Add Herbs, Garlic, Cream and Cheese
FEATHERY herbs, a whiff of garlic and perhaps a judicious splash of cream or a touch of cheese are all it takes for that light, quick springtime touch.
Pasta, potatoes and rice all benefit from such treatment.


Foreign Affairs; Where Do Cars Come From?
The other day I was playing the computer game "Where in the U.S.A. Is Carmen Sandiego?" with my 9-year-old daughter, Orly.
It's a wonderful geography-teaching tool.
You have to follow clues to different cities to track down vile criminals.
The clues we were given for one trip were all clearly pointing to Detroit.
But instead of giving my daughter the answer, I wanted to see if she could figure it out herself, so I asked her: "Where are cars made?" And without missing a beat she answered: "Japan."
From the mouths of babes.


Real Names and Faces Enter a Debate on Policy
A hundred years ago, the Georgian-style brick campus here was newly built and newly named: the Village for Epileptics.
It was the latest thing in institutional care -- rural, airy and hidden from view.
Today the old dormitories are moldering from age and neglect and from the particular drabness that characterizes many government buildings.
The blunt name it once had has been so softened by the modern instinct for indirection that a stranger could hardly guess who lives at the North Princeton Developmental Center.
In fact, it is home to 528 moderately to severely retarded adults and the 1,003 state employees who care for them.


Corrections
The Television section today includes outdated picture captions on pages 4 and 24, and an outdated listing for Tuesday on page 27, about the new comedy "Buddies." The premiere of the series has been postponed.
In its place, an episode of "Roseanne" will be shown Tuesday at 9:30 P.M. on ABC.


INSIDE
Days Filled With Knights
One of the best chess teams in Illinois is from one of the worst public schools in Chicago.
How did that happen?
Through conspiracy -- of care and love administered by families and a math teacher.
Page 12.
Academe and Admissions
College administrators acknowledge that a determined applicant who fabricates a lustrous past can sometimes slip past the student admissions process.
Page 19.
Ready for Prime Time
"Central Park West," from the producers of "Beverly Hills 90210," is one of a dozen new shows or pilots being filmed in New York.
Page 21.
Goal of Welfare Fight: Votes
Republican strategists in Albany believe the budget battle over welfare will be the wedge that pushes voters into their camp in 1996.
Page 21.
Basques Study Belfast
Basque nationalists, seeking to end 26 years of violence, are looking to Northern Ireland for a lesson in how to start peace talks.
Page 6.


WHO PUT THE LID ON GP120?
The somewhat astounding and poisonously personal resistance among some AIDS activists to trials of the vaccine makes one wonder about their own hidden agendas ("Who Put the Lid on gp120?" by Jesse Green, March 26).
Are they so reluctant to permit its testing partly out of conscious or subconscious fear of its diminishing their own importance if it is a success?
JOHN STROTHER Princeton, N.J.


A New Newark, Too
To the Editor:
Your comments about Newark ("New Jersey, Dateline America," April 2) reflect the same old negative perceptions of the city too often seen in the media.
Sometimes it seems The Times has a kind of standardized "urban decay" profile that is trotted out every time Newark is written about.
Why not talk to people in the arts community or the restaurant community?
Or, for that matter, the ordinary, middle-class, taxpaying citizens in the neighborhoods?
Plenty of folks like this in Newark are awfully tired of the city's being described as a huge abandoned reservation for the poor.


Equity Offerings for This Week
The following equity and convertible debt offering is expected this week:
Atlantec Corp., San Jose, Calif., 2.1 million shares. Hambrecht &amp; Quist.


Editorial Notebook; A Hip-Hop New Yorker
Casey McDonald wants Tina Brown to repent.
The chances of that are extremely slim, of course.


Workers to Give Up City Cars
City employees accustomed to driving home in city vehicles will have to switch to new sets of wheels: their own.
Mayor Bret Schundler has decided that no more nonuniformed city workers will drive city vehicles except those who need to transport equipment.
He has ordered the reassignment or auction of 50 vehicles.
Mr. Schundler expects to save $37,500 a year on fuel, maintenance and insurance.


City Is Urged To Reduce Health Plans
New York City gives its employees better health benefits than most other cities and states, and could save $600 million by, among other things, making workers and retirees pay a portion of their insurance premiums, a private group that monitors the city's budget concluded in a report to be released today.
In its report, the Citizens Budget Commission said the cost of health insurance for the city's 1.1 million employees, retirees and dependents has become one of the fastest-growing parts of the budget.
The city now pays $1.5 billion a year, or nearly 5 percent of this year's $31.8 billion budget, in this area; a decade ago, it paid $474 million, only 2.5 percent of the budget.


Faster Relief for Newark's Schools
New Jersey's effort to take over the Newark public schools has suddenly been accelerated.
Bypassing the standard hearing process, a state administrative law judge has ordered New Jersey to assume control of its largest school district.
The decision is welcome, provided it means real improvement in the prospects for students.
At least since 1984, the State Education Department has intensively monitored and investigated Newark schools, which have consistently failed to meet certification standards.
A 1988 law allowed the state to take over failing districts, which it has done in Jersey City and Paterson, the state's second- and third-largest districts.


CHRONICLE
James Henry Roosevelt, an uncle of President Theodore Roosevelt, will be buried next month -- for the fourth time.
Mr.
Roosevelt, who dedicated his life to the development of a hospital for the poor, died in 1863 before he could see the final fruits of his labor, Roosevelt Hospital, which was built in 1869.


Digital Commerce
DESPITE the best efforts of some of the media industry's most innovative print publishers, turning a profit from "going on line" remains an elusive proposition.
But the exploding popularity of the Internet, and especially the incredible ferment of creative activity on its easy-to-navigate World Wide Web, offer the first glimmers of hope that artists and publishers of all stripes -- media conglomerate or teen-aged poet -- may actually be able to start reaping the fruit of their own Net labors.


Corrections
Because of an incorrect calculation by tournament officials, the Bridge column on April 10, about the final match of the Vanderbilt Knockout Team Championship, misstated the winning margin.
It was 72 imps, not 28.
Another column about that match appears today on page C16.


Are Giants Looking For Running Room?
One would think that with the tough and talented Rodney Hampton in the Giants' backfield, as well as with the versatile Herschel Walker as a third-down back and kick returner, the Giants might not be looking at running backs with their first-round pick in Saturday's draft.
That isn't necessarily the case.
Word has circulated throughout the league that if somehow Michigan's Tyrone Wheatley or Colorado's Rashaan Salaam slip to the Giants' pick at No. 17 -- it is unlikely Wheatley would slip that far but Salaam might -- the Giants might take one of them.
Then, according to other reports, they would look to trade Hampton.


Michael Jordan Signs With Rayovac
Michael Jordan has agreed to his first endorsement deal since returning to basketball, signing a long-term contract with the Rayovac Corporation in Madison, Wis., to be a spokesman for Rayovac Renewal re-usable alkaline batteries and Power Station chargers.
Though the terms were not disclosed, USA Today estimated the deal could be valued at $10 million over 10 years; Mr.
Jordan already makes an estimated $30 million annually working for marketers like Nike, Quaker Oats and Sara Lee.


Pope's Message Denounces 'Selfishness and Desire for Power'
Pope John Paul II, in a passionate but somber Easter message today assailing human callousness, declared that "selfishness and the desire for power contradict the truth of man."
In his address to a crowd of 200,000 people in St.
Peter's Square, John Paul denounced war and armed political struggle.
He said groups struggling for political rights -- he specifically mentioned Kurds, Palestinians and the indigenous populations of Latin America -- should relinquish the use of force.
Instead, he proposed "dialogue as the only way to promote equitable solutions for a society, marked by respect and reciprocal acceptance."


25th Earth Day to Have a Political Accent
The environmental movement's most concerted campaign in a generation is about to get under way as environmental groups around the country work to use the 25th anniversary of Earth Day to rally opposition to a reversal of environmental legislation.
Trying to influence lawmakers of both parties as they meet with constituents during the Congressional recess, the groups are reviving all the usual organizing tools of a movement that came of age in 1970.
They are also using new lobbying tactics that evolved after the first Earth Day, when millions of people took to the streets and helped persuade Congress to pass dozens of environmental laws in the ensuing decades.


Hong Kong Journal; Swept Away in 1911, Manchus Still Haunt Women
Away from the mirrored canyons of Hong Kong's financial district, across the Tai Lam hills that spill toward the Chinese border, women in broad-brimmed rattan hats tend fields of watercress rippling in the early spring breezes.
New houses in pastels of pink and peach edge the fields, circling and intruding along the paths that lace together Ma Tin village.
Older brick houses with tiled, upswept roofs are giving way rapidly to the two- and three-story blocky, air-conditioned, antennaed homes that bespeak affluence and modernity.


CHRONICLE
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani may be the opera fan in his family, but it is DONNA HANOVER GIULIANI who will appear on stage Wednesday at the New York City Opera production of "La Traviata."
No, she will not sing, but she will waltz at a ball in the first act of the Verdi opera at the New York State Theater.


Abroad at Home; Too Late the Phalarope
On March 9, 1969, James Reston wrote in his New York Times column:
"The art of resigning on principle from positions close to the top of the American Government has almost disappeared. Nobody quits now, as Anthony Eden and Duff Cooper left Neville Chamberlain's Cabinet, with a clear and detailed explanation of why they couldn't be identified with the policy any longer. . . . Most, at the critical period of escalation  [ in Vietnam ] , gave to the President the loyalty they owed to the country."


Pauline A. Plimpton, 93, Author Of Works on Famed Relatives
Pauline Ames Plimpton, who had a late-blooming career as a writer that startled but not did not surprise her famous literary offspring, George Plimpton, died on Saturday at her home in New York City.
She was 93.
Her family said the cause was circulatory illness.


Sports of The Times; This Dude Was Not Afraid
THEY were a couple of strangers looking for work during the baseball strike.
Terry Blocker soon noticed that Dave Shotkoski was "just like me, a family man, showing pictures of his family." One afternoon after practice, Blocker mentioned his Christian faith to the man in the nearby locker.
"He was listening, but he didn't have a lot of time," Blocker recalled the other day.
"We had just gotten paid, and he was going to wire money to pay the mortgage and to his wife. I could relate to that, because I was going to do the same thing."


Spencer Truman Olin, Executive For Olin Corporation, Dies at 96
Spencer Truman Olin, a former executive of the Olin Corporation who devoted much of his life to supporting the Republican Party and giving away his share of the huge munitions fortune his father started building more than a century ago, died on Friday at his home on Jupiter Island, Hobe Sound, Fla.
He was 96.
Mr.
Olin was overshadowed somewhat by his older brother, John M. Olin, who was president of Olin Industries at the time of its merger with the Mathieson Chemical Corporation in 1954 and chairman of the Olin-Mathieson Chemical Corporation, now the Olin Corporation, until 1967.
The older brother died in 1982.
The company was founded in 1892 by their father, Franklin W. Olin, to make blasting powder.
It has grown to become a diversified $2.7 billion corporation.


Architect of Austere Works Receives the Pritzker Prize
Tadeo Ando, a Japanese architect whose spare, contemplative buildings adapt modernist forms and materials to Eastern concepts of space, is the recipient of the 1995 Pritzker Architecture Prize, it was announced yesterday by Jay A. Pritzker, president of the Hyatt Foundation, which sponsors the award.
Mr.
Ando, who is 53 and lives in Osaka, is the third Japanese architect to receive the Pritzker Prize since 1979, when it was first awarded.
He is also one of the youngest architects to receive what is widely considered architecture's most prestigious honor.
Mr.
Ando was born in Osaka in 1941 and first achieved recognition in 1975 with the Azuma House, a small row house in Osaka that introduced the characteristic elements of his later work: smooth concrete walls; large expanses of glass; spare, uncluttered interiors.
His use of concrete draws on pioneering work by Le Corbusier and Louis Kahn, but in many of Mr.
Ando's buildings light and space appear to have nearly as much substance as solid walls.


Failing to Learn Combination, Two Gunmen Carry Off a Safe
A liquor store owner and his wife were bound with wire, beaten and threatened at gunpoint but refused to tell two armed robbers the combination to a home safe, leaving the men to carry it off Saturday night, the police said.
The safe contained about $40,000 in cash and jewelry, said Sgt.
Sean Crowley, a police spokesman.


Asians Agree On Disclosure To Halt Crises
Asia's finance ministers gingerly approached the question today of how to keep a Mexican-style crisis from happening in their own hemisphere, agreeing to disclose far more information to investors and cautioning against growing addicted to the kind of monetary policy that sent Mexico to the brink of insolvency.
American officials had expected to spend much of the day discussing the dollar's sharp decline against the Japanese yen and its effect on Asia.
But at their meeting here, finance ministers from 18 Pacific Rim countries steered clear of a detailed discussion of the problem, leaving it to the United States and Japanese to sort out between themselves.


STRENGTH IS SEEN IN A U.S. EXPORT: LAW ENFORCEMENT
American law enforcement agencies are rapidly expanding overseas, deploying agents to dozens of countries in scores of joint investigations.
Next week, the Clinton Administration is planning to open an F.B.I. international police training academy in Budapest, one of the most ambitious projects in this effort.
American law enforcement is being exported in response to the surge of international terrorism, narcotics trafficking, links between terrorists and drug dealers, illegal immigrant smuggling, financial fraud, corruption, arms smuggling, money laundering and the potential theft and sale of nuclear material and chemically or biologically hazardous substances.


A Soloist Brings in Theater, Poetry and Even Poe
"Monumentally odd" was how one young member of the audience described Beverly Blossom and the solos she presented at the Currican Theater on Friday night in "Blossoms (Two)," a shared program with Roberts Blossom.
It was an apt appraisal, for Ms.
Blossom's small dance and theater pieces are very odd yet never less than monumental in their distillation of such themes as love and death.
The evening's premiere, ". . . Nevermore," performed to music by Loreena McKennitt, was a pair of solos that explored the properties of the two wonderfully outlandish hats and the layers of flowing black clothing worn by Ms.
Blossom.
But the spirit of Edgar Allan Poe hovered over the enterprise.


Marvis Martin in Recital
The recital next Monday by Michael Schade and Susan Graham at the Walter Reade Theater (165 West 65th Street, Manhattan) has been canceled because of a scheduling conflict.
The soprano Marvis Martin is to sing instead.
With Warren Jones as accompanist, Ms.
Martin will offer works by Mendelssohn, Schubert, Bachelet and Cantaloube and several spirituals, in a recital starting at 7:30 P.M.
Original tickets may be used; others, at $20, are available at the Alice Tully Hall box office, or through Center Charge, (212) 721-6500.


BUSINESS DIGEST
U.S. Wealth Inequality Seen As Widest in Rich Nations
New studies about the concentration of American wealth and income are showing that the United States is the most economically stratified of industrial nations.
Federal Reserve figures show that the wealthiest 1 percent of American households -- with a net worth of at least $2.3 million each -- owned nearly 40 percent of the nation's wealth in 1989 and that the top 20 percent of Americans -- households worth $180,000 or more -- owned more than 80 percent of the country's wealth.
A1.


Making Points With Quips In a Stylistic Hodgepodge
Oscar Wilde knew that quips can sometimes be more brilliant than sermons.
Doug Elkins, one of the young wits of modern dance, knows that too.
He played a word game with the title of Wilde's most famous comedy, calling his Friday night program at the Bessie Schonberg Theater "The Impotence of Being Earnest."
His Doug Elkins Dance Company affirmed the importance of having fun in stylistic hodgepodges choreographed to taped collages that included Handel, Mozart, rock, rap and folk music, snippets from lectures on bird calls, monologues by Lenny Bruce and excerpts from the musical repertory of the Royal Tahitian Dance Company.


Easter Sunday: Near Perfection
On the Avenue, they strolled in and out in the Florentine-gold sunlight like people in a song, sweeping picture brims and straw boaters, chapeaux ribboned and plumed, toques, berets, top hats and Panamas -- a passing parade of creamy parfait color for spring: lemon-lime, strawberry-orange, cranberry-rose.
It was a nearly perfect Easter, a day without brass bands or beery pomp, a day to step into the rotogravure and notice a woman's windblown hair or the geography of an old man's face.
The sky was cloudless, as blue as an amateur's painting, and a chilly wind seemed to justify the new spring coat, the white gloves, the face uplifted to a warming sun streaming between the skyscrapers.


Out to Learn Their Artifacts
Some students from Rutgers University and Stockton State College are choosing to go to summer school at recently identified archeological sites in the county.
From July 10 to Aug. 16 the students will be taking a six-credit course called "Field Study: Prehistoric Native American Coastal Archeology" as they sift through bones and artifacts 10,000 years old.


Final Night For a Chef Of Renown
Andre Soltner said Saturday night would be just like any other at Lutece.
But of course it would not be.
For Saturday was Mr.
Soltner's last night at the world-renowned restaurant he and his wife, Simone, have guided for 34 years.
Since the early 1960's, when truffles and foie gras were as rare as ponytails on men, Lutece has represented a level of gastronomy that stood up to anything found in Paris.
Habitues took great pride in that.
More importantly, Mr.
Soltner, a beguiling, almost folksy presence in the dining room, stripped all pretension from fine dining.


Discord Is Rising Over Pact On Spread of Nuclear Arms
For a quarter of a century, a relatively simple treaty of fewer than 50 paragraphs has served as the touchstone of all international efforts to limit the spread of nuclear weapons and to prevent peaceful nuclear projects from being used in destructive ways.
Now the 1968 accord, the Treaty on the Nonproliferation of Nuclear Weapons, is up for renewal, 25 years after it took effect, in 1970.


INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY: Where the Chips May Fall Next; As U.S. Manufacturers Enjoy The PC Boom, Asia Plans For the Next Big Market
American chip makers have never been cockier -- and that could make a downfall all the harder.
Since reclaiming the lead in the global semiconductor market two years ago from Japan, the United States chip industry has been on a roll, led by the Intel Corporation, whose stock has surged lately on expectations of an exceptionally strong earnings report this week.


Devils Edge Whalers on Quirky Late Goal
The Devils peppered Sean Burke of the Hartford Whalers with 21 shots in the last period, but they needed a lucky break with 63 seconds left to get the winning goal tonight.
Scott Stevens, the captain of the Devils, scored the winner when his shot from the high slot bounced off the skate of Chris Pronger of the Whalers and caught Burke by surprise.


Memorial for Schwartz
A musical memorial service for Norman Schwartz, the concert manager and record producer who died on March 21, will be held on Tuesday at 12:30 P.M. at the Fifth Avenue Presbyterian Church, at 55th Street.
After the actor Terrence Currier delivers the introduction and a reading from Dylan Thomas, the 15 scheduled performances will include a song by Mr.
Schwartz's daughter, Elizabeth Morrison Hannum, and a dance piece choreographed by another daughter, Nell Schwartz.


Key Hurls 5 Shutout Innings
Jimmy Key thrilled the Yankees today by pegging five shutout innings against Atlanta in West Palm Beach, allowing one hit, striking out two and walking none in his first spring training start.
Key is recuperating from arthroscopic shoulder surgery and is the probable opening day starter, so the Yankees are watching every pitch closely.
"Impressive," said pitching coach Billy Connors, after Key hit 88 miles an hour on the radar gun.
"He's ready."


Bridge
The final of the Vanderbilt Knockout Team Championship in Phoenix, Ariz., on April 8 was unusual in four respects.
Both teams involved had just four players, making it a stamina test -- most teams have six players, permitting some rest for all.
Neither team had a playing sponsor, as nearly all the top-ranked teams do nowadays.
The standard of play was very high: The losing team was held to just 67 imps in 64 deals, when two per deal would be normal for the losers.
And one of the winning pairs had not played a deal together before the start.
The impromptu partnership consisted of Michael Polowan of Manhattan and Marc Jacobus of Las Vegas, Nev., who won their first major team title together with Bill Root of Boca Raton, Fla., and Richard Pavlicek of Fort Lauderdale, Fla.
Their final margin of victory, understated by officials and by this column when play ended amid some confusion, was 72 imps.
They had survived some nail-biting matches in earlier rounds: In one of them the result was a tie and a committee ruling gave them victory.


RESULTS PLUS
HOCKEY  Perfect Day for Hull Hat Trick  Brett Hull scored four goals for the first time in his career yesterday as St.
Louis ended Detroit's six-game winning streak and club-record seven-game road winning streak, 6-5.
Hull's hat trick coincidentally came on hat giveaway day at St.
Louis' Kiel Center and, after goal No. 3, personnel filled a net with some of the giveaway hats which rained down on the ice, delaying the game for five minutes. (AP)


A Simpson Lawyer Makes New York Style Play in Judge Ito's Courtroom
Until last week, Barry Scheck's part in People v.
O.
J.
Simpson was largely offstage.
His role officially centered on DNA, the sole element in the case that makes minds numb.
On the "Dream Team" T-shirts and buttons hawked outside the courthouse, Mr.
Scheck's face was not to be seen.
But last week, all of that changed.
Mr.
Scheck's ferocious cross-examination of Dennis Fung, the chief police evidence collector in the case, brought him instant, worldwide notoriety and applause.
While blunting the testimony of a key prosecution witness, Mr.
Scheck also proved that an aggressive New York lawyer could play in California, although it took a few nips and tucks in his personality.


A U.N. Peacekeeper Dies; Bosnia's Pain Does Not
The eyes of Cpl.
Eric Hardoin are a piercing blue.
Imploringly they gaze upward.
Then slowly they die, vacant and unquestioning.
This filmed image of the last moments of the life of Corporal Hardoin, a French United Nations soldier in Sarajevo, has been shown repeatedly on Bosnian television this weekend.
In the minutes before his death, he had been building an anti-sniping barrier of empty cargo containers outside the central Holiday Inn, a place where killing is utterly commonplace.


Jets Hope They'll See A Sacker In Draft
Prodded by an 80-year-old owner who dramatically came out of the background to insist on winning now, the Jets are looking to choose a quarterback-chasing defensive lineman with their first pick of the draft next Saturday.
Rarely has there been such a sense of urgency surrounding the draft for this long-troubled team.
But when Leon Hess, without consulting anyone, fired Coach Pete Carroll, and then, again unilaterally, hired Rich Kotite, it was the clearest message any Jet owner has sent since the days of Sonny Werblin and the drafting of Joe Namath.


Accounts
*
Thrifty Rent-a-Car, Tulsa, Okla., a unit of the Chrysler Corporation, has placed in review the creative portion of its account, previously handled by Compton Partners, Saatchi &amp; Saatchi Advertising, New York, a unit of Cordiant P.L.C.
The billings were estimated at $3 million to $4 million.
The media services portion is handled in house.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-9  LONG ARM OF THE LAW
American law enforcement agencies are rapidly expanding overseas, in response to international terrorism, narcotics trafficking and arms smuggling.
A1  NUCLEAR TREATY ON THE AGENDA
As representatives from 174 nations gather to begin a four-week conference to review and renew the Treaty on the Nonproliferation of Nuclear Weapons, there are sharp differences about its future.
A1  MEKONG'S SOURCE FOUND
High on the Central Asian plateau, a group of explorers said they discovered the source of the Mekong River, which has eluded similar expeditions for a century.
A1  SAFEGUARDING FISH STOCKS
The agreement reached by Canada and the European Union over a disputed fishing ground in the North Atlantic could serve as a model for preserving endangered fish stocks throughout the world.
A2  WAR-WEARY SARAJEVO
News analysis: Three years after the Bosnian war began and Serbian forces encircled Sarajevo, despair has set in over whether the bloodshed will ever end.
A3  POPE SPEAKS ON PEACE
Pope John Paul, in a passionate Easter message, denounced war and armed political struggle, and urged the Kurds and Palestinians to relinquish force.
A7  SINN FEIN CRITIQUE
Gerry Adams, the political leader of the Irish Republican Army, criticized both the Irish and British Governments as many of his supporters celebrated the anniversary of the 1916 Easter Rising.
A7  Three Hamas members killed in an Israeli ambush.
A3  Indonesia is purging the news media of critical journalists.
A9  Ma Tin Journal: Hong Kong community's ways under assault.
A4  National A12-15, B7-8  WELFARE AND TEEN MOTHERHOOD
The experts and the politicians cannot agree on whether cutting off welfare payments to teen-age mothers will change the girls' thinking and behavior.
A1  BIG GAP IN U.S.
WEALTH
New studies about the concentration of American wealth and income are showing that the United States is the most economically stratified of industrial nations.
A1  RELIGIOUS RIGHT SNUBBING G.O.P.
Leaders of religious conservative groups are not lining up behind any of the Republican candidates for President in the early stages of the 1996 campaign.
A1  CANDIDATES NUDGE EACH OTHER
The fight for conservative voters heated up between two Republican candidates for President, Bob Dole and Phil Gramm.
A13  A REBELLION AGAINST A REVOLUTION
Environmentalists are talking about a rebellion against the efforts to roll back environmental regulation by Republicans in Congress who often describe themselves as revolutionaries.
A12  LOUISIANA BRAWLS OVER RODENTS
Louisiana officials are trying to find a way to control a growing population of large rat-like animals called nutria that are tearing up canals and roads, but they are fighting with animal-rights groups.
A12  A CRY OF PAIN ON TELEVISION
A Los Angeles woman who lost two sons in episodes of urban violence has built a large audience for a weekly talk show on community-access television.
A12  NEW YORKER AIDS SIMPSON
The lawyer on O. J. Simpson's defense team who was hired to handle the highly technical DNA evidence won rave reviews for his cross-examination of the police department's evidence collector.
A14  A STUDY OF WASTE IN GOVERNMENT
The Mayor of Los Angeles who ran on a promise to make the city more efficient has produced a voluminous report on the subject that should give him some ammunition in political fights to come.
A15  Metro Digest B1  COURT PILES UP BACKLOG
The United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit, which includes New York, Connecticut and Vermont, has the worst backlog of long-pending civil cases among the nation's 11 circuit courts.
A1  Business Digest D1  Arts/Entertainment C9-16  What public television can mean away from the big cities.
C9  Mannes school says thank you.
C9  Tadeo Ando wins Pritzker.
C13  Music: Domingo as Parsifal.
C9  Cop Shoot Cop at Tramps.
C14  Dance: "Igor and Vera." C12  Beverly Blossom.
C12  Doug Elkins company.
C12  Books: "Men in Black." C13  Sports C1-8  Baseball: O'Neill, Key ready.
C2  Basketball: Bulls best Knicks.
C1  Column: Araton on Knicks.
C5  Football: Giants looking for runner?
C7  Hockey: Rangers edge Isles.
C1  Devils beat Whalers.
C4  Racing: Larry the Legend out of the Derby.
C7  Obituaries B9  Spencer Truman Olin, former executive of the Olin Corporation.
Editorials/Op-Ed A16-17  Editorials  A good nuclear example.
Faster relief for Newark schools.
Tax facts and fictions.
Maureen Dowd: The buzz.
Letters  William Safire: "But not so fast."  Anthony Lewis: Too late the phalarope.
Francisco Goldman: In a terrorized country.
Jon McMillan: The all-American fire trap.
Bridge C16  Chronicle B8  Crossword C13


Metairie Journal; They'll Shoot Nutria, Won't They?
Even for a rodent, it is unlovely.
It is, more or less, a snub-nosed, 10-pound, aquatic rat.
It looks like a beaver from the front, with drooping whiskers and protruding orange teeth.
But from the rear it more resembles an overfed wharf rat, with long claws, a serpentine tail and a nasty habit of devouring strategic parts of southern Louisiana.


Corrections
A report about college rowing in the Results Plus column in some copies of SportsSunday yesterday misstated the outcome of the race between Harvard and Brown.
The Harvard varsity won by 12.05 seconds to win the Stein Cup.
A corrected article appears today on page C3.


In Performance; DANCE
Waiting for Something That Never Shows Up  Polly Motley The Kitchen
"You Can Sing Anytime . . . " was not really a dance but a mirage.
The hourlong work, which Polly Motley presented on Thursday night at the Kitchen, was lovely to look at and totally insubstantial.


A Tip for School Elections
Elections will be held tomorrow in several hundred school districts, and the State Education Commissioner, Leo F. Klagholz, urged voters over the weekend to review their districts' spending plans carefully.


Special Education's Bus Routes: A Curve for Giuliani
Every day since the beginning of the school year, Patricia Joyce has piloted school bus No.
Q011 through the clogged streets of Queens's Ridgewood and Glendale neighborhoods.
Beginning at 6:30 A.M. one day last week, she made 29 stops to pick up sleepy children, all bound for special education classes.
Carmela Forster, the matron assigned to escort the children, walked up and down the aisle, making sure their seat belts were snapped into place.
A route like theirs, in a full-size yellow school bus, costs the city an average of $493 a day, making it among the most expensive routes in the country.
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani, taking a hard line against union bus drivers, says that cutting salaries is the key to reducing costs.
He puts the potential savings at $100 million to $150 million out of the $316 million that the city spends.


Messier's Closed-Door Talk Keeps Playoff Door Open
When Rangers Coach Colin Campbell went inside to address his team between the second and third periods at Nassau Coliseum this afternoon, he found that the locker-room door had already been shut.
The man who had closed the door was Mark Messier.
The captain was in the process of holding an impromptu team meeting to perhaps prevent the door from being shut tight on the Rangers' season.


David Schwimmer, An Internist, 81; Studied War Diets
Dr.
David Schwimmer, a longtime Manhattan internist who was active in research in the 1940's and 50's about survival rations for military personnel, died yesterday at his home in Teaneck, N.J.
He was 81.
The cause was heart failure, said his daughter Georgia.


Tax Facts and Fictions
Tax refunds will be a little late this year, in a good cause.
The Internal Revenue Service has laid a new trap for taxpayers who claim undeserved refunds, but the trap sometimes catches honest taxpayers, too.
The I.R.S. must take care to accommodate the innocent as quickly as possible, while not relenting on the tax evaders.
It is estimated that cheaters have been claiming more than $1 billion -- maybe $5 billion -- in fraudulent refunds each year.
Those are dollars collected from taxpayers who comply with the law, and paid out to people who do not.


Germany Can't Mark War's End Without Pain
To the Editor:
A.
M.
Rosenthal, in "Stay Home, Pole" (column, April 7), discusses why President Lech Walesa of Poland has not been invited to take part May 8 in German observances of the end of World War II.
Mr.
Rosenthal concludes this is the grossest example of moral and political callousness Germany could have committed.


Awaiting Judgment: A special report.; New York's Clogged U.S. Courts Delaying Civil Verdicts for Years
In 1990, Federal prosecutors in Brooklyn filed a civil rights lawsuit against the village of Island Park, L.I.
The prosecutors charged that the virtually all-white village rigged a federally subsidized housing program to exclude blacks and instead awarded houses to politically connected villagers.
Prosecutors believed they had a strong case and filed a motion for summary judgment in 1993, seeking an immediate decision from Federal Judge I. Leo Glasser on whether he would decide the case without a trial.
Such summary motions -- successful or not -- are usually decided within a few months.


U.S. Can Help Britain Break Nuclear Habit
To the Editor:
Your coverage of the Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty conference has highlighted issues that will arise next week, the main one being lack of progress on disarmament.
We urge supporters of nonproliferation in the United States to remember that they have the power to halt one type of nuclear proliferation.


But Did C.I.A. Misjudge Soviet Economy?
To the Editor:
Re "Bashing the Spooks" (column, April 6) by William Safire: Mr.
Safire attacks past Central Intelligence Agency analyses of the Soviet economy and claims its current director has not done his "homework." Before attacking the estimates, one might at least read them first.
Many important estimates on the Soviet Union during the 1980's have been declassified.


Indonesia Cleansing Its Press Of Writers Who 'Insult' Rulers
The Indonesian Government is purging the nation's newspapers and magazines of reporters who write critically about the Government, destroying the careers of some of the nation's best-known journalists and drawing protests from the United States and other foreign Governments.
Last month, the Government arrested several members of the Alliance of Independent Journalists, a group formed last August to challenge the censorship policies of President Suharto.
At least two of the reporters are still in detention on charges of "insulting the Government," a crime that can carry a prison sentence of up to seven years.


A Solution to a Silt Complaint
In two weeks, the inlet between Manasquan and Point Pleasant should be deep enough for trawlers and other commercial fishing vessels to use again, environmental officials said last week.
The first dredging in five years began in early March but was halted temporarily after complaints about the sand and silt deposited on Manasquan Beach.
Bernard Moore of the State Department of Environmental Protection said a disposal area on Gull Island was now receiving the sand and silt.


Pictures Of a Dark New York
"One of these days I'm gonna learn to play and write myself a song," Tod Ashley of Cop Shoot Cop sang with a sneer on Saturday night at Tramps.
He was, of course, being sarcastic.
While other bands that combine the jackhammer rhythms of industrial rock and the aggressive riffs of heavy metal tend to let their clatter overwhelm or simply replace songwriting, New York's Cop Shoot Cop takes the time to write contagious pop melodies (which it breaks into shards in its songs) and lyrics that don't sound fatuous when separated from the music.
On Saturday, Mr.
Ashley and Jack Nantz, the other singer in the band, came off like soldiers who had just returned from a war in the East Village, bringing back tales of misery and suffering that they may have witnessed or just compiled from newspaper headlines and police blotters.
There was the story about the prostitute on her first day out of the brothel ("The Divorce"), the one about what happens when a man with a $10 bill in his pocket meets a poorer man with a big black gun ("$10 Bill") and the one about the man who sees his fellow subway riders in a sickly new light after being slipped a hit of L.S.D. ("Down Come the Mickey").


Easter Skies Were Robin's Egg Blue


In Performance; CLASSICAL MUSIC
A Tricky Determination As to Old Hat or New Hat  Hilliard Ensemble Alice Tully Hall
In view of the current rage for austere, mystical and quasi-religious music, it seemed noteworthy on Thursday evening that Alice Tully Hall, though well filled for a performance of Arvo Part's "Passio," was not packed, and that the audience reaction, though warm, was not clamorous.


Gap in Wealth In U.S. Called Widest in West
New studies on the growing concentration of American wealth and income challenge a cherished part of the country's self-image: They show that rather than being an egalitarian society, the United States has become the most economically stratified of industrial nations.
Even traditional class societies like Britain, which have inherited large differences in income and wealth over centuries, going back to feudal times, now have greater economic equality than the United States, according to the latest economic and statistical research, much of which is to be published soon.


'Parsifal' as Vernal Metaphor
This has been the weekend when Christians and Jews think more about the God they hold in common than they ordinarily might.
Yet Easter and Passover are also sublimations of the seasons.
They are about climate and weather and human survival: the transition from cold to warmth, from lost to found, from barrenness to green things that grow.
Wagner's "Parsifal," in all its warped grandeur, is another traveler along this passage.
The triumph of the Grail is also the triumph of the sun.
And just before midnight on Friday, when Placido Domingo lifted his cup before the patrons of the Metropolitan Opera, no Wagner lover could help but feel the redemptive glow of those A-flat major harmonies.
Amfortas's wound had been healed, holy relics rescued and restored, and outside on city streets flowering pear trees were in full blossom.


Of Life and Limbs
The call for help came at 2:46 A.M.
A homeless man in a wheelchair, perhaps a double amputee, had been shoved into the Harlem River just under the Triborough Bridge and left to drown.
Firefighter Robert Marcoux plunged into the frigid water and, battling the swift current and the water-soaked weight of his gear, snapped a life belt onto the apparently helpless man and hoisted him to safety.


Dividend Meetings


Economic Calendar
Listed below are the scheduled release dates for major economic indicators this week.
Monday  None  Tuesday  Housing Starts . . .
March  Wednesday  Balance of Trade . . .
Feb.
Thursday  Weekly Jobless Claims  Friday  None


In Performance; CLASSICAL MUSIC
Orchestral Sounds From Two Pianos  Double Edge Merkin Concert Hall
Kevin Volans's "Cicada," as played by the piano duo Double Edge on Wednesday night, is more about time than it is about sound.
Its several chords, at times reduced to single notes, are like markers, road signs that allow us to measure series of small shifts in temporal space.
In a curious way, what is directly heard is not the music at all but a backdrop for the music.
Mr.
Volans, who is from South Africa, rejects growth and development.
"Cicada" operates within a fixed space; inside it we experience leisurely shifts of position.
These seemingly systematic patterns of change are distantly reminiscent of the old English art of bell ringing.


A Good Nuclear Example
With the United Nations starting review today of the Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty, Washington is busy rounding up a large majority of other countries to extend the agreement indefinitely.
That is an invaluable enterprise because the treaty binds some 169 nations not to acquire nuclear arms.
But if the Administration wants to keep others from trying to become nuclear powers, it has to do more than lobby for votes.
It needs to set an example by doing more disarming itself.
The Administration could take two steps that would not only attract votes for treaty extension but also foster nuclear abstinence by others: shrink the size of its nuclear arsenal and reduce the role these arms play in American strategy.


Pacers Rout Wolves and Gain Ground
Pacers 114, Timberwolves 75
The Indiana Pacers moved closer to their first National Basketball Association division championship yesterday with a 114-75 trouncing of the Minnesota Timberwolves.
The victory gave Indiana 50 victories in an N.B.A. season for the first time since joining the league and put the Pacers, who were playing at home, one and a half games games ahead of Charlotte in the Central Division with three games to go.


Fugitive Child Molester Held
A convicted child molester on the run since January from the authorities in Connecticut has been arrested here.
Philip S. Cardany, 45, formerly of Bristol, Conn., had been convicted of raping a child in 1992 but fled after his appeal was denied.


Dover Would Lower Sales Tax
Some municipalities want to raise taxes.
Not Dover.
It wants to cut its 6 percent sales tax in half.
"We have asked the state to declare us an urban enterprise zone and let our retailers charge only 3 percent tax," said Mayor Stephen Shukailo.
"We would attract more customers. And instead of sending the sales tax we collect to the state, we would spend it to upgrade the exteriors of our businesses."
Mr.
Shukailo said Dover suffers from an image problem.
The town's per capita income is the lowest in Morris County, and its unemployment rate is 10.4 percent.
DAVID STOUT


Jordan Stays Out of 55 Zone, but the Knicks Still Can't Keep Up
The Knicks had won five consecutive games.
They had momentum.
They appeared to be peaking for the playoffs.
None of that mattered to the Chicago Bulls.


No Headline
"This is my 21st year, and this is by far the most stressful tax season I've ever had. Family life? What's that? My son grew a mustache and a ponytail and I didn't even know it." -- STEVE KATZ, an accountant in Monticello, N.Y.  [ B1:3. ]


Mannes School Says Thank You
"This is working out about right," said Charles Kaufman, leaning back in his chair and staring at the ceiling of his office at the Mannes College of Music.
"If I stayed here any longer, I'd have to start putting pictures on the ceiling."
Mr.
Kaufman, who plans to step down as dean and return to full-time teaching at the end of the year, has been credited with revitalizing an institution that was on the verge of collapse when he took it over 16 years ago.
He will be honored tonight during a concert at Alice Tully Hall.
The singers Frederica von Stade and Olga Makarina, both Mannes graduates, and Sun Mei-Ting, a pianist in the preparatory division, will be the featured artists.
The proceeds will be used to establish a scholarship fund in Mr.
Kaufman's name.


Republican Is Warned: No Cheering
Just before the end of their first 100 days in Congress, freshmen Republicans like Michael P. Forbes of Long Island gathered for a miniseminar on how to be re-elected.
"I want to help you implement the Beverly Hills model of incumbency," Glen Bolger, a poll taker, told the freshmen at a class meeting earlier this month.
"Which is, 'Y'all come back now, ya hear?' "


U.S. Investors Stampede Into Brazil
As clear as the telephone lights flashing furiously at the United States trade center switchboard here, American investors and exporters are stampeding into Brazil.
"Calls, faxes, visitors, requests -- it's doubled in six months," said Richard R. Ades, the harried director.
"We had a brief drop with the Mexico crisis. Then it went right back up. In some areas, it's tripled."


A Change of Sopranos
The soprano Brigitte Fassbaender has canceled her Sunday recital at Alice Tully Hall, having decided to retire and devote herself to directing.
Angelika Kirchschlager, an Austrian soprano making her American debut, is to sing in her place.
With the pianist Jean-Yves Thibaudet as accompanist, Miss Kirchschlager will sing works by Brahms, Schumann, Schubert, Korngold and Hugo Wolf.
Original tickets may be used; others, at $25, are available at the box office or through Center Charge, (212) 721-6500.


CorrectionsA Correction: Harvard Wins
Harvard's varsity crew took back the Stein Cup from Brown on Saturday with an easy three-length victory on the windy and rough Charles River at Boston.
Brown had won the last two Stein Cup regattas.
A report in the Results Plus column yesterday misstated the outcome of Saturday's race.


First of Mac Clones To Be Offered Today
The Power Computing Corporation, a tiny start-up company led by one of the original copiers of the I.B.M. personal computer, is expected to introduce the first clones of the Apple Macintosh today.
The arrival of copy-cat computers that run the Macintosh operating system are the core of Apple Computer Inc.'s new strategy to increase its stalled market share and slow sales of Intel-based PC's that use the Windows software of the Microsoft Corporation, which now outsell the Macintosh computers by an estimated 10 to 1.


1 Killed and 1 Is Injured by Hit-Run Driver
A hit-and-run driver killed a New Jersey man and injured another early yesterday outside a Chelsea nightclub, the police said.
Daniel Kiehn, 20, of Rockaway, N.J., was pronounced dead at 3:50 A.M. at St.
Vincent's Hospital, about an hour after the incident, said Doran Tamari, a police spokesman.


At Ballet Theater, Promotions for 1995
American Ballet Theater has announced promotions and appointments for its 1995 season at the Metropolitan Opera House, which begins next Monday.
Paloma Herrera has been made a principal dancer, and Maxim Beletserkovsky, Martha Butler and Yan Chen have been promoted to soloists.
New company members are Jose Manuel Carreno of the English National Ballet and Royal Ballet and Vladimir Malkhov of the Moscow Classical Ballet, both principals, and Angel Correno, who danced with Victor Ullate and joins Ballet Theater as a soloist.
Wes Chapman and John Gardner have returned to the company as principals.


Everett Has Regained Good Graces of Green
Carl Everett lost his shot at the starting spot in center field the moment the Mets signed Brett Butler last Tuesday.
And he was in trouble with Dallas Green, his new manager, before then.
So for Everett, this spring could have been considered a waste, a few weeks of work before the inevitable trip to Norfolk, Va., to play for the Mets' Class AAA team.
Everett has not approached his situation in that way.


Market Place; For CCH, a business law and tax publisher, times could be better, even in April.
AS Americans hustle to beat today's income-tax filing deadline, this should be the best of times for CCH Inc., the venerable business law and tax publishing corporation.
But the company, known until Jan. 1 as Commerce Clearing House, is still engaged in an expensive restructuring program and absorbing heavy costs from the development of new products.
Securities analysts who follow CCH, of Riverwoods, Ill., generally rate the stock as a hold.
They are likely to maintain that neutral rating, moreover, for some time.


PRO BASKETBALL: Sorting Through the Wreckage; Once Thought to Be Playoff-Worthy, the Nets Are Lottery-Bound
Kenny Anderson sat in his director's chair in the Nets' locker room for maybe 20 minutes Saturday night, until nearly everyone had either left for the showers or gone home.
He managed a rueful laugh.
"When things went wrong this season," he began, "we just didn't have a backbone. Too much chaos, I guess."


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Turning an old sight gag into a tribute to milk, and in the process, to magazines.
SOME of the most prominent figures in the magazine industry have agreed to look somewhat silly in print to demonstrate their fervent belief in the human kindness of milk.
These senior executives are elated that the National Fluid Milk Processor Promotion Board and its agency, Bozell Worldwide in New York, are spending the board's entire advertising budget of $35 million to buy 757 ad pages in 54 magazines.
Beginning today, 30 executives will appear in a series of thank-you print ads by Emmerling Post in New York for the Magazine Publishers of America, the industry trade association.


O'Neill Is Ready To Start The Race
Paul O'Neill dressed about 10 feet from Bernie Williams and Wade Boggs this morning, he spoke with Don Mattingly and Luis Polonia and he talked about Jimmy Key and Danny Tartabull.
There was continuity to his routine because there is continuity in the Yankee clubhouse.
All around, O'Neill spies familiar faces and reasons for hope.
Sure, the Yankees have added musculature to their powerful torso by injecting Jack McDowell, John Wetteland, Tony Fernandez, Dion James and Scott Bankhead into the team picture, but O'Neill raves about the togetherness and constancy of the best club in the American League from last season.
It helps him crawl out of bed each morning and helps him dream of waking up in a World Series this year.


Global Business Activities Rose 40% in First Quarter
International mergers and acquisitions, joint ventures and minority investments rose nearly 40 percent in the first quarter, but there are signs that the recent increase in such activity may be peaking.
The weaker dollar and continued industry consolidation in the United States have particularly driven this trend, according to a survey of international transaction activity to be released today by the accounting firm KPMG Peat Marwick.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article in Business Day on Saturday about the convictions of a New Hampshire couple on tax evasion charges misattributed a statement that 46 of 49 felony defendants in tax-protest cases were acquitted or that the juries were unable to reach a verdict.
The statement was made by William Cohan, a criminal defense lawyer, not Carl Stern, a Justice Department spokesman.


For G.O.P., Religious Right Plays Waiting Game in Iowa
Leaders of religious conservatives have splintered over which Presidential candidate to support in next year's Republican primaries, and some are deliberately staying neutral in a strategy to maximize their influence.
Several prominent conservative Christians say that while most Republican contenders hold acceptable positions on the issues they most care about, including abortion and school prayer, there is no obvious standard bearer for them to rally behind.
They are not as enthusiastic about the contenders as they were over two of their favorites who chose not to run: former Education Secretary William J. Bennett and former Vice President Dan Quayle.


Radio
New York City recently agreed to sell its radio licenses for WNYC-FM and WNYC-AM for $20 million.
The New York metro area is the most listened to radio market in the United States, even though the number of radio stations in both New York City and its surrounding areas has grown hardly at all in the last 20 years.
In the rest of the country, the number of new radio stations has grown by more than 10 percent over the last five years.
Adult contemporary music is the most popular format for New York radio stations, while on a national level, its popularity continues to wane and country music continues to grow.


INSIDE
Dole May Block Nomination
Senator Bob Dole said he may keep the nomination of Henry W. Foster as Surgeon General from coming to the floor for a vote.
Page A13. 'If I've Offended . . .'
In politics, the slur-cum-apology marks a growing crassness by people in the public eye.
Are they really sorry?
Metro Matters, page B6.
More Important Than Games
Terry Blocker relied on his faith as he searched for the killer of a fellow replacement baseball player.
Sports of The Times, page C3.


Where Public Television Means More Than a Political Football
When people argue about public television in Washington, Boston, New York or Los Angeles, they talk about "Sesame Street," "Nova" and "Frontline"; about whether the political programming is too partisan, about whether opera and ballet are too elitist, and about slashing station budgets of $100 million a year or more.
Here, too, in Cookeville, in the Upper Cumberland region of Tennessee, public television means "Sesame Street," "Nova" and "Frontline." But political programming means covering monthly meetings of the Putnam County Commission.
Cultural programming means the Smithville Fiddlers Jamboree and the Tennessee Tech Faculty Brass Quintet.
The budget runs a little over $1 million.
And the station consists of three rooms and a truck.


Mother of 2 Murder Victims Provides Solace for Others on Her Talk Show
People don't understand, Lorna Hawkins said as she drove slowly through her neighborhood and pointed to a towering palm tree in front of a wooden bungalow.
Her 21-year-old son, Joe, was slain there in a drive-by shooting seven years ago, she said, right around the corner from her own tree-lined street.
Years before, she and her husband had bought and remodeled a stucco house on that street, where her son had learned to ride bicycles, play ball and dance.
"They think it only happens to people who deserve it," Mrs.
Hawkins said as the car made its way across this small, working-class city hemmed in by Watts on the west, Compton on the south, a freeway on the north and the Los Angeles River on the east.
She drove down a rutted road into Watts, turned left at a liquor store decorated with graffiti and pointed to a burned-out metal frame that was once a phone booth.


House &amp; Garden to Rejoin a Rich Club
The recent announcement that Conde Nast Publications plans to resurrect the venerable House &amp; Garden in September 1996 has aroused a great deal of curiosity but remarkably little concern among competitors in the already well-served area of home-decorating and design magazines.
"Everybody in the field has been speculating about what the return of House &amp; Garden will be," said Louis Oliver Gropp, editor in chief of House Beautiful, who is a former editor in chief of House &amp; Garden and the founding editor of Elle Decor.
"But if you are one of the good magazines in the field and there is something that happens in your field, it only helps you."


In Performance; THEATER
Gleaning One-Liners From the Bible  'The Ten Commandments' La Mama E.T.C.
If the world has been waiting for a sendup of Cecil B. DeMille's 1956 remake of his 1923 epic "The Ten Commandments," then the world can part the East Village and make a beeline for 74A East Fourth Street.


In a Terrorized Country
Nine years ago this month, Guatemala was propelled from its usual obscurity onto the world's front pages by two horrific murders.
Hector Gomez Calixto, a baker and leader of a human rights group, was abducted a few days before Easter and found on a roadside with his tongue cut out.
On Holy Saturday of Easter Week, Rosario Godoy Alfaro de Cuevas, a member of the same human rights group (whose labor unionist husband had recently been "disappeared") was found dead in her car at the bottom of a ravine with her 18-year-old brother and three-year-old son.
Accident victims, the military said.
But others saw the human bite marks on Rosario Godoy's breasts, and at the funeral mourners noticed that the infant's fingernails had been torn out.
From all over the world, revulsion and condemnation -- along with hundreds of journalists -- descended on Guatemala.


Germany Can't Mark War's End Without Pain; Slovakia's Side
To the Editor:
Re "Stay Home, Pole" (column, April 7):


Patents; Tokyo Court Ruling Could Set Off New Trade Rift with the United States Over Protection of Patents
UNITED STATES patent experts are lamenting a little-publicized ruling made last month by an appeals court in Tokyo, warning that it may spark a new trade tiff between the United States and Japan.
If approved by Japan's highest court, the decision could have detrimental consequences for industries like pharmaceuticals, where patent protection makes a big difference in how much a company can charge for its products.
The Tokyo High Court, in its Jap-Auto Products Inc. v.
BBS Inc. decision on March 23 departed drastically from long-standing patent customs in most countries, including the United States and Japan.
Patent protection traditionally is limited by something known as a "first-sale doctrine." In simplified terms, the inventor of a widget has the right to a royalty the first time the widget is sold.
But the patent-holder relinquishes rights to a given widget once the object has been sold to another party.
If the new widget owner decides to re-sell the widget to yet a third party, for example, the inventor is not entitled to a second royalty.


By Thinking Small, Kodak Sets Sights on a Big Market
When it comes to images, more data means higher quality.
Indeed, the reason that conventional photo graphy is expected to survive the coming era of digital imaging is that the grains of silver halide in a negative can capture orders of magnitude more information than even the most advanced computer chip.
More information means that chemical-based images can be enlarged and still appear crisp and color-saturated, while those captured electronically quickly grow fuzzy and indistinct if blown up much larger than a computer screen.


The Talk Of Detroit; Detroit's Anxiety Over Chrysler Appears on the Rise
The company's rules were very clear when Chrysler's chairman and Detroit's mayor met with reporters last week to discuss plans for a new engine factory here: not a peep about the stunning bid by Kirk Kerkorian and Lee A. Iacocca to buy the auto maker.
But the mayor, Dennis W. Archer, would have none of it.


Say Ah! A Dental Tool With a Widening Future
New systems are emerging that use computer technology to provide large, sharp images of a patient's mouth while exposing the patient to as little as 10 percent of the radiation received during film X-rays.
The systems use a sensor that is placed in the mouth, where it reacts to the X-ray emission much the way a video camera records light and forms an image.
The collections of electrons that the sensor registered are then transferred to the computer, where a circuit board translates them to digital data and displays the image on a monitor.


Tway's Long and Difficult Day Ends in a Remarkable Victory
There was a time when this would have been routine for Bob Tway.
Shoot a final-round 67, dust a couple of guys in a playoff and take home all the cash, trophies and tournament blazers he could carry.
No problem.
But now, five years since his last victory, nine years since he was the Player of the Year on the PGA Tour and one of the world's top five players, winning the MCI Classic was anything but routine.
When Tway backhanded a tap-in for par on the second playoff hole today to clinch his improbable playoff victory over Nolan Henke and David Frost, his normally implacable features melted.
He was on the verge of tears.


Treasury to Auction Only Bills
The Treasury's schedule of financings this week is confined to today's regular weekly auction of three- and six-month bills.
By the close of the New York cash market on Thursday, traders said, the rate on the outstanding three-month bill was 5.57 percent and the rate on a six-month bill was 5.70 percent.


Floyd Claims Seniors Championship
Raymond Floyd has a hard time figuring it out, but at 52 he said he is playing the best golf of his life.
"That's an incredible thing to say at my age," he observed today, "especially since I've been playing golf on the Tour since I was 20."


Solving Crimes, Sculptor Re-creates Faces of Tragedy
It was early on the cold morning of Jan. 5, before any shoppers had arrived, when a maintenance worker made a grisly discovery in a dumpster behind the Caldor store in Willingboro, N.J.
Among the debris was a body burned beyond any chance of recognition.
The police arrived and began the routine.
They talked with people in the area and checked missing persons files, but nothing turned up.


METRO DIGEST
WAITING (AND WAITING) FOR A RULING
In 1990, Federal prosecutors in Brooklyn filed a civil rights lawsuit against the village of Island Park, L.I., charging that the virtually all-white village rigged a federally subsidized housing program to exclude blacks.
Prosecutors believed they had a strong case and filed a motion for summary judgment in 1993, seeking an immediate decision from Federal Judge I. Leo Glasser on whether he would decide the case without a trial.
But two years and four months later, the Federal prosecutors and the village are still waiting for Judge Glasser's ruling.
So are dozens of others with civil cases.
Some people have been waiting as long as 11 years for the judge to reach his verdict in their nonjury trials.
A1.
NEW YORK CITY  CITY'S RISING COSTS FOR HEALTH BENEFITS
New York City gives its employees better health benefits than most other cities and states, and could save $600 million by, among other things, making workers and retirees pay part of their insurance fees, a private group concluded in a report.
The Citizens Budget Commission said the cost of health insurance for the city's 1.1 million employees, retirees and dependents has become one of the fastest-growing parts of the budget.
The city pays $1.5 billion a year, or nearly 5 percent of this year's $31.8 billion budget, in this area; a decade ago, it paid $474 million, only 2.5 percent of the budget.
B3.
COUPLE ROBBED AND BEATEN IN QUEENS
A liquor store owner and his wife were bound with wire, beaten and threatened at gunpoint but refused to tell two armed robbers the combination to a safe they kept in their modest home in Fresh Meadows, Queens, leaving the men to carry it off Saturday night, the police said.
The safe had about $40,000 in cash and jewelry, a police spokesman said.
B3.
A CALL FOR HELP: REAL OR A HOAX?
The call for help came at 2:46 A.M.
A homeless man in a wheelchair, perhaps a double amputee, had been shoved into the Harlem River just under the Triborough Bridge and left to drown.
A firefighter plunged into the frigid water and, battling the swift current and the water-soaked weight of his gear, snapped a life belt onto the apparently helpless man and hoisted him to safety.
But was everything about this case really as it seemed?
The Police Department does not think so.
B3.
ON THE AVENUE FOR A CLOUDLESS EASTER
On the Avenue, they strolled in and out in the Florentine-gold sunlight like people in a song, sweeping picture brims and straw boaters, chapeaux ribboned and feather-plumed, toques, berets, top hats and Panamas -- a passing parade of creamy-parfait color for spring: lemon-lime, strawberry-orange, cranberry-rose.
It was a nearly perfect Easter, a day without brass bands or beery pomp, a day to step into the rotogravure and notice a woman's windblown hair or the geography of an old man's face.
The sky was cloudless, as blue as an amateur's painting, and a chilly wind seemed to justify the new spring coat, the white gloves, the face uplifted to a warming sun streaming between the skyscrapers.
B3.
REGION  FIRST 100 DAYS FOR A FRESHMAN
Just before the end of their first 100 days in Congress, freshmen Republicans like Michael P. Forbes of Long Island gathered for a mini-seminar on how to be re-elected.
The presentation was a good reminder, Mr.
Forbes said, that even as freshmen Republicans look back, cheering, on their first dizzying months in Congress, they cannot lose sight of the future.
B6.
RE-CREATING THE FACES OF TRAGEDY
Frank Bender is among a handful of artists who lend the skills of their hands and eyes to the police in the United States and Europe.
For two decades, he has helped to identify the victims of accidents and foul play, and he is particularly skilled in showing the effects of age and time on a person's face.
The "faces of tragedy," as Mr.
Bender calls them, line his studio walls.
"Sometimes I'm the last one to get to know these people," Mr.
Bender said.
"For everybody, there is somebody out there who cares what happened to them," he added.
"No one deserves to be buried without a name, without dignity." B6.
Metro Matters by Joyce Purnick B6  Chronicle B8


Author Finds Out Art Consumes, Schlock Feeds
MEN IN BLACK  By Scott Spencer  321 pages. Alfred A. Knopf. $23.
Sam Holland, the protagonist of Scott Spencer's charmingly funny-sad new novel, "Men in Black," is troubled by a sense of being fraudulent.
And with good reason.
He is unable to earn a living from his novels, which are favorably reviewed but don't sell.
"You know the old saying," says his publisher, speaking of bookstore returns, "Gone today, here tomorrow." So Sam has moved his family out of New York City to a small town upstate and has taken up writing nonfiction under a pseudonym.


I.R.A. Leader Faults Dublin And London
Gerry Adams, the political leader of the Irish Republican Army, criticized both the Irish and British Governments today as many of his supporters celebrated the anniversary of the 1916 Easter Rising, which started the events that led to Ireland's independence.
Mr.
Adams, interviewed on national radio in Dublin, deplored the fact that Ireland has no official celebration of the Rising, which eventually led to the revolution that forced Britain to give southern Ireland independence in 1922.


Remembering John Curry
A tribute to the figure-skating champion John Curry, who died in April 1994, is to take place on Thursday at 7:30 P.M. at the Kaye Playhouse, 68th Street between Lexington and Park Avenues.
Mr.
Curry was an Olympic and world figure skating champion in 1978.
Dick Button will be the host of the program, which will include video and film clips.
JoJo Starbuck, Judy Blumberg, Eliot Feld and members of Mr.
Curry's skating company are to speak.
The program is free and open to the public.
A limited number of tickets will be distributed at the box office after 6:30 P.M. on Thursday.
Information: (212) 437-5283.


Los Angeles Mayor Acquires New Power Over City Officials
In the last few days, Mayor Richard J. Riordan, who won office two years ago by campaigning against municipal inefficiency, has gained wider latitude to enforce his vision of city government.
Voters passed a charter amendment that would make it easier for Mr.
Riordan to dismiss heads of city departments, then one day later he produced a voluminous study showing just how inefficient some of their departments were.


Having It Their Way With Stravinsky
Something happened to "Igor and Vera: A Stravinsky Celebration" on the way from the planning board to the theater.
The program of eight dances by six fledgling choreographers, presented on Thursday night at the Kaye Playhouse, was long on sets, costumes, lighting and music, but short on dance.
The Stravinsky scores often sounded as if they were beyond the capabilities of the New York City Gay Men's Chorus Chamber Choir and most of the solo instrumentalists.
Stravinsky's music does not lend itself to the brave authenticity in new choreographers, and the dances said little about the composer.


For Tax Preparers, Hard Journey to the Bottom Line; New I.R.S. Rules and Holiday-Packed Calendar Are Weighing Heavily on Accountants
There once was a client who had the perfect remedy for the tax-season blues at the Norwalk, Conn., accounting firm of Schwartz &amp; Hofflich: he would sing Broadway tunes while doing push-ups with a German shepherd on his back.
"It was his way of helping us out, to break the stress," sighed an accountant, Ann Jevne, noting that the man died recently.
"We absolutely could have used him this year, more than ever."


Final Night For a Chef Of Renown
Andre Soltner said Saturday night would be just like any other at Lutece.
But of course it would not be.
For Saturday was Mr.
Soltner's last night at the world-renowned restaurant he and his wife, Simone, have guided for 34 years.
Since the early 1960's, when truffles and foie gras were as rare as ponytails on men, Lutece has represented a level of gastronomy that stood up to anything found in Paris.
Habitues took great pride in that.
More importantly, Mr.
Soltner, a beguiling, almost folksy presence in the dining room, stripped all pretension from fine dining.


To Get Perot on Ballot
To the Editor:
Your April 9 front-page article on Ross Perot quotes the head of Calfornia's United We Stand America as saying it takes a million signatures to get a new party on the California ballot.


Rains Halt Harvest of Cars
The week's rains may have been good news for farmers, but they put a temporary halt to Jersey City's spring harvest of abandoned cars from a 15-acre tract of marshland along the Kearny border.


Sports of The Times;
THE zip codes may have to be changed, and the area codes, too.
Maybe the public school designations, all to the number no one here can get enough of.
That is number 45.
The holiest number of them all, now that 23 has been left retired, now that the Bulls have reestablished themselves as contenders and resumed tormenting the hated Knicks, whom they drubbed 111-90 yesterday at the United Center.
Number 45's are everywhere in this Michael Jordan-crazed city, on jerseys, T-shirts, caps, placards, walls.
Number 45 displays dominate downtown storefront windows.
"And at guard, from North Carolina, number 45 . . ." And the fans erupt as if they've been promised a free Lexus for retaining their stub.


Essay; 'But Not So Fast'
You cannot be a participant or even an active observer of the 1996 campaigns without taking a stand on a central issue: what liberals euphemize as "affirmative action" to achieve equal opportunity and what conservatives dysphemize as "reverse discrimination" that undermines it.
That's because the use of government purchasing power to bring about that "fair chance" -- an egalitarian end both socially just and democratically satisfying -- illustrates the great pendulum swing taking place.


California Viewers Getting the Chance to Direct Their Sportscasts
In a glimpse into television's interactive future, about 1,000 cable subscribers in Southern California will be the first in the country to customize their own sports-television viewing.
One remote-control button will enable a viewer to call up an instant replay, another button will summon an isolated view of a star player and another will retrieve up-to-the-minute statistics and graphics.
The technology is not just for sports programming.
A Canadian channel uses a similar system to allow viewers of news programs to call up expanded reports and text on selected subjects.
During educational programs, children can respond to math and geography questions presented on their screens.
Viewers of music shows can watch a Peter Gabriel rock concert, for example, and call up information about the country in which he is performing.


Why the Social Work Services in Hospitals Remain Essential
To the Editor:
It is unfortunate that Gov.
George E. Pataki continues to issue pronouncements designed to make political points rather than addressing the real issues of reform in New York's health and welfare systems.
Governor Pataki has taken out his ax again, and this time is using the blunt instrument of budget cutting to get rid of essential social work services in hospitals.


A So-Sorry Situation: Politicians' Apologies
A GUIDE to politics in the 90's:
1. Say something ugly, slanderous or prejudiced.


INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY: The Executive Computer; It took a while, but an industrial-strength visual development tool for the Macintosh is in the works.
FEW businesses need a new word processor with more features than Microsoft Word or a spreadsheet with prettier pie charts than Lotus 1-2-3.
But businesses do need software development tools that let them create custom applications quickly.
To provide companies with that ability, an array of visual programming tools has emerged, like the Microsoft Corporation's Visual Basic, or Powerbuilder by Powersoft, which allow software developers to create applications by point-and-click and drag-and-drop, rather than by laboriously writing thousands of lines of computer code.
Now the Oracle Corporation, which owns more than half the market for corporate data-base management software, is set to enter the fray, with a tool called Power Objects.


But Did C.I.A. Misjudge Soviet Economy?; What We're Paying For
To the Editor:
Re "Bashing the Spooks" (column, April 6): Nice rhetorical stab, William Safire.
You say payments to foreign military officers gain "moral coloration" when they've been in the name of anti-Communism.
I'm a taxpayer interested in cost-effectiveness, and I disagree.


In Performance; CLASSICAL MUSIC
A Familiar Symbiosis Between Diva and Her Fans  Montserrat Caballe, soprano
Carnegie Hall
It met all the qualifications for a diva evening: nostalgic repertory, thunderous if uncritical affection and frequent changes of clothing.
Montserrat Caballe sang for her fans on Thursday evening.
The New Jersey Symphony was onstage with her.
Jose Collado conducted.


Street-Cleaning Freeze
To the Editor:
Joyce Purnick (Metro Matters, April 10) is correct in calling New York City dirty, but wrong in dumping blame on the sanitation work force.
In the 1970's there were more than 10,000 sanitation workers.
Today, as she notes, there are 6,300.


Dole Vows to Oppose Nominee Of Clinton for Surgeon General
Senator Bob Dole of Kansas today vowed to oppose the nomination of Henry W. Foster Jr. to be Surgeon General, as the rivalry for conservative voters in the Republican Presidential contest escalated between Mr.
Dole and Senator Phil Gramm of Texas.
The comments by Mr.
Dole, the Senate majority leader, raised new questions about whether Dr.
Foster, an obstetrician in Nashville, could be confirmed after the Senate holds hearings next month on the nomination.
The choice of Mr.
Foster has been opposed by many Republicans and anti-abortion groups, and they have attacked him, saying that he understated the number of abortions he performed.


Rethinking Welfare: Teen-Age Mothers -- A special report; The Threat of No Benefits: Will It Deter Pregnancies?
Euranda Burns attends the 11th grade, goes roller skating and dancing on weekends and wears blue nail polish.
At 16 years old, she also has a 22-month-old daughter and gets a welfare check.
The $181 welfare payment she receives each month from Aid to Families with Dependent Children, she said, covers her rent and utilities in the house she shares with a roommate in this rural town, which is just south of the Georgia border and one of Florida's poorest.
Her mother, other relatives and the child's father help with the rest of her living costs.


For One Half, Pippen Steps Out of Character
The difference is detectable in Scottie Pippen's step, in the look on his face.
The pressure is off.
His job has been simplified.
Michael Jordan is back in the spotlight.
All Pippen has to do now for the Chicago Bulls is shine.
"It's obviously a lot easier for him," said B. J. Armstrong after the Bulls drubbed the Knicks, 111-90, today at the United Center.


Starbucks Ends Link With Evans Group
The Starbucks Coffee Company and the Evans Group in Seattle have agreed to end their relationship after five years as Starbucks seeks a larger agency as it grows nationally and internationally.
As a result, Starbucks will begin a review on its account, with billings estimated at $7 million.


North Atlantic Fishing Pact Could Become World Model
In resolving their long-simmering confrontation over fishing rights in the North Atlantic this weekend, Canada and the European Union have reached an agreement that could serve as a model for preserving endangered fish stocks throughout the world.
The key to the accord, announced Saturday night in Ottawa and endorsed today in Brussels by European Union ambassadors, is enforcement.
Independent monitors will be on every vessel fishing in disputed waters off Newfoundland to insure that conservation rules are followed.


In the Derby Confusion, 2 Sure Things: Larry the Legend Is Out and Lukas Is Hedging
On the day after a 30-1 shot won the Blue Grass Stakes, the trainers of the rest of the horses said to forget it, that the race was a fluke resulting from a slow pace and would have no bearing on the Kentucky Derby.
Nevertheless, it was clear that Wild Syn's trip to the winner's circle at Keeneland on Saturday had prompted radical changes in the Derby, for it now seems much more likely to attract a full complement of 20 horses to its starting gates at Churchill Downs on May 6.
And it seems likely that one of the favorites might well be the Canadian champion, Talkin Man, who won the Wood Memorial in New York by nearly eight lengths Saturday, three weeks after he won the Gotham by seven.


2 Bitter Foes Agree To Truce and Talks
Publicis S.A. and True North Communications have announced a cease-fire in their bitter dispute over control of a joint venture, Publicis FCB Europe.
In a statement Friday from Publicis in Paris and True North in Chicago, the two agency companies said they had agreed to begin "negotiations to resolve their differences" and to suspend a series of escalating steps each had taken, aimed at dissolving or terminating their alliance agreements.


Corrections
Because of a transcription error, an article yesterday about a Passover ceremony in Bosnia misstated the value of the Sarajevo Haggadah, a richly illustrated 14th-century manuscript.
It is $7 million, not $700 million.


Asia Trek Yields Mekong River's Source
They were 7 men and 14 horses, clambering along riverbeds and across bleak plains as they headed for their place of magic.
They believed that somewhere on the high plateau, not far from China's border with Tibet, they would discover the source of the Mekong River, long sought by explorers.
In a century, more than a dozen expeditions had failed to find it.


Ndeti Is Disappointed But Determined to Win
The boy and the race are inseparable.
He carries it with him, always.
He was born two days before his father won the 1993 Boston Marathon.
In victory, Cosmas Ndeti of Kenya gave his son the name Gideon Boston.
On Monday, Gideon Boston Ndeti will celebrate his second birthday as his father attempts to win Boston for the third straight time.
But father and son will be separated, by miles and miles of ocean and red tape.
The airline tickets did not arrive in Kenya until last Monday, and father and son were due to leave for Boston on Tuesday.
The boy needed a visa to travel.
Senator Edward M. Kennedy's office was contacted in Washington.
Phone calls were made to the United States Embassy in Nairobi, faxes were sent, pleas were made.
But the family ran out of time.
So the father came to Boston while the son remained home with his mother and his baby sister.


3 Winners and 1 Big Loser in TV Season
At the end of a television season, almost any network can come out a winner, provided one looks at the numbers the right way.
Any network, that is, except CBS.


Chase Manhattan Corp.(CMB,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Messier Serves as Inspiration For Rangers' Winning Streak
The day after Mark Messier inspired his teammates with an emotional tongue-lashing, the Rangers flew to Pittsburgh yesterday hoping to keep their longest winning streak of the season alive.
Not to mention their playoff hopes.
After a lackluster 40 minutes against the Islanders on Sunday, Messier delivered a closed-door locker room speech during the second intermission.
The Rangers responded with a come-from-behind 3-2 victory at Nassau Coliseum.
It was only the second time in 40 games this season that the defending Stanley Cup champions have won a game when trailing after two periods.


Williams Faces Charges
ERIK WILLIAMS of the Dallas Cowboys will face charges of sexual assault for allegedly raping a 17-year-old nightclub dancer in his home.
Sgt.
JIM CHANDLER of Dallas's police department said the paperwork was to be mailed to the district attorney late yesterday or early today.
"We have, in effect, filed charges," he said. "They just haven't received them."


Life in the Metropolis Found Lacking
People living in the New York, New Jersey and Connecticut metropolitan region are less satisfied with the quality of life in their communities than are residents of four other parts of the country, according to polls released yesterday by a regional planning group.
The polls, by the Regional Plan Association, found that only 35 percent of people living in the New York area said they were very satisfied with their quality of life, compared with 43 percent in Los Angeles and 52 percent in Seattle, for example.


Walsh and Bears Agree
STEVE WALSH, who guided the Chicago Bears to the playoffs after replacing ERIK KRAMER at quarterback, agreed yesterday to a one-year contract for $1.5 million.


Lamson &amp; Sessions (LMS,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 1


ATI Technologies reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


Synopsys Inc.(SNPS,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


David Polish, 85, Rabbi and Leader Of Reform Judaism
Rabbi David Polish, long a prominent figure in American Reform Judaism and author of nine books, died on Sunday at his home in Evanston, Ill.
He was 85.
The cause was complications from infection and vasculitis, his family said.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
9.00
9.00
6.25
DISCOUNT RATE
5.25
5.25
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
6.13
6.09
3.70
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.56
5.57
3.76
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.69
5.70
4.21
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.02
7.02
7.14
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.37
7.33
7.41
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.25
8.20
8.20
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.22
6.25
6.44
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills 8


Archer-Daniels-Midland Co.  (ADM,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Bank of New York (BK,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Abitibi-Price (ABY,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Draft Could Turn Carter Into a Top Rookie
The busted brown La-Z-Boy in the living room and the pile of empty pizza boxes and beverage bottles leaning against the kitchen wall of Ki-Jana Carter's apartment complement his contemporary American college decor.
Huge CBS and NBC Sports banners serve as wall art.
A 13-inch color television sits atop a VCR that constantly blinks "12:00." There is no remote control.
To change the channel, Carter does it the old-fashioned way.
He walks across the room.


Sherwin-Williams Co.(SHW,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Guardsman Products Inc.(GPI,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


First of America Bank Corp.(FOA,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Kansas City Power &amp; Light (KLT,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Pentair Inc.(PNTA,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Ears Looking at You Kids


Fish That Dates Back To Age of Dinosaurs Is Verging on Extinction
UNLESS decisive steps are swiftly taken to curb human predation, the coelacanth, a very rare fish once thought to have accompanied the dinosaurs into extinction, will truly die out, a team of German zoologists reports.
This gloomy assessment by Dr.
Hans Fricke and his colleagues at the Max Planck Institute for Behavioral Physiology in Seewiesen follows their latest annual census of coelacanths living off the coast of Grande Comore, the largest of the islands making up the Federal Islamic Republic of Comoros.
Along a five-mile stretch of coast where the fish concentrate -- about one-tenth of the island's coastline -- the coelacanth population remained steady from 1989 to 1991, Dr.
Fricke reported recently in the journal Nature.
But from 1991 through 1994, the average number of coelacanths living in their deep Indian Ocean lava caves fell from 20.5 fish per cave to 6.5.


Whitney Holding Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Santa Fe Pacific Pipeline Partners L.P. L.P.(SFL,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Golden West Financial Corp.(GDW,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Zilog Inc.(ZLOG,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 2


Hunt (J.B.) Transport Services Inc.(JBHT,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Status Isn't Everything, at Least for Monkeys
WHAT corporate executive or member of the English aristocracy would not delight in subordinates like these?
Pliant, respectful, uncomplaining, with nary a thought of stealing your job or toppling your privilege!
Hard working, with solid family values, and just begging for the opportunity to attend to your personal grooming.
It is so difficult to find good help these days, and harder still to find an employee who will happily fetch your coffee and dry cleaning.
Would that it were possible to hire a coterie of low-ranking rhesus macaques.
They would have the fleas plucked from your fur as fast as you could say, "top banana."


Wachovia Corp.(WB,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Nellcor Inc.(NELL,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 2


Officer, Disputing Witness, Calls His Fatal Shot an Accident
A housing police officer charged with manslaughter in the shooting death of a man in a parked car in lower Manhattan three years ago testified in his own defense yesterday, saying the car suddenly jerked backward and his service revolver accidentally discharged, sending a bullet into the victim's head.
The officer, Jonas Bright, said he thought the man in the car might be a burglary suspect whom he and his partner were seeking.
He said the man, Douglas Orfaly, 29, of Bay Ridge, Brooklyn, was leaning forward and reaching toward his right as the officer approached him on the morning of March 3, 1992.


Islanders Unveil Goalie of Future
With their season all but over, the Islanders took the opportunity to introduce themselves to their future today.
Eric Fichaud, the 19-year-old goaltender obtained from Toronto for Benoit Hogue, arrived on Long Island a day after he was recalled from his junior team, Chicoutimi of the Quebec Major Junior Hockey League.


Scowling and Batting 8th, Polonia
Buck Showalter is searching for a batting order that feels right.
So today he used Wade Boggs as the leadoff man and demoted Luis Polonia to the eighth slot.
Polonia thinks the manager should keep searching because he wants to bat first against right-handed pitchers.
Polonia said batting eighth would make him feel uncomfortable and would not be a way to use his speed, as Showalter has claimed.
And he questioned why he is always the Yankee who must make sacrifices.


Quebec Separatists Split on Timing and Terms of Referendum
A widening rift between the two top leaders of the Quebec independence movement is undermining it at a time when most Quebecers appear unwilling to take the risks of separation from the rest of Canada.
The split is over the timing and strategy of a referendum.
Premier Jacques Parizeau of Quebec, the head of the Parti Quebecois, wants an early vote and a clear choice in the question between outright separation and the status quo.


Marie Antoinette as a House Guest
The cast of "A Royal Affair," by Luis Santeiro, gets so caught up in the inspired silliness of the play that one hardly notices when the story simply disintegrates in the second act.
The story is not crucial in a farce like this, and Max Ferra, the director, has evidently decided to play every gesture and line for laughs.
The production, at the Intar Theater (420 West 42d Street, Clinton), gets plenty of them.
A retired teacher in Miami hires as a maid a Central American illegal immigrant whose fantasy life teems with crowned Eurotrash and who dreams up intense personal conversations with Queen Elizabeth II.
Through a gardener who has fallen in love with her, the maid meets a medium who conjures up Marie Antoinette and Count Fersen, her Swedish lover, and this amorous pair takes over the teacher's house and the lives of all the other characters.


Regions Financial Corp.(RGBK,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Parametric Technology Corp.(PMTC,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 1


Wolohan Lumber Co.(WLHN,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Bradley Urges Weapons Ban
In the community where he makes his home and where four people were shot to death last month in a post office, Senator Bill Bradley pressed the case yesterday for maintaining the ban on assault weapons.
"You can't come to Montclair in the wake of these murders and not feel the pain of this tragedy," the Senator, a Democrat, said as he met with residents and merchants.


Judge Dismisses Suit Over Soda Sweetener
A New York State judge has dismissed a class-action lawsuit against the nation's diet-soda manufacturers over their nonsugar sweetener, aspartame.
The class action, filed last April, contended that the manufacturers had failed to notify consumers that aspartame can deteriorate in diet soda as quickly as 90 days after its manufacture.
Such degradation could make the soda tasteless or, in some cases, leave it with a bad taste, the suit said, but it did not contend that a change in taste makes the beverages unsafe.


Simpson Prosecutors Get Back to the Bedrock Evidence
It was a day of undoings at the O. J. Simpson trial.
Prosecutors continued their effort to undo five day's worth of damage to one of their crucial witnesses, a police evidence collector named Dennis Fung.
And a defense lawyer tried to undo what some Asian-Americans perceived to be an offensive comment prompted by Mr.
Fung's testimony.
The courtroom appeared to have a holiday hangover this morning and the sense of lethargy was only accentuated as the lowest-key prosecutor at either counsel table, Hank Goldberg, led the soft-spoken and unexcitable Mr.
Fung to explain why many of the defense charges against him fizzle into insignificance once they are closely scrutinized.


Dark Matter Search Hints At New Shape For Galaxy
THE trouble with living inside the Milky Way is that the nearby stellar trees obscure the galactic forest, and much of what astronomers think they know about this galaxy's appearance and structure is inferred rather than seen.
Unfortunately, inferences drawn from sketchy data sometimes turn out to be wrong, and new measurements reported last week are forcing theorists to reconsider their ideas about the Milky Way -- and perhaps all galaxies.


Clinton Signs Washington Financial Rescue Bill


Man Who Killed Parents Flees
A man who killed his parents 15 years ago was on the loose yesterday after walking off the grounds of the Marlboro Psychiatric Hospital.
Manalapan police officials said William Jennings, 39, was last seen on Saturday.
A spokeswoman for the State Department of Human Services said that Mr.
Jennings had grounds privileges that permitted him to walk unattended on hospital property.
The police said he used a deer rifle on Easter Sunday in 1980 to kill his parents, then called to his sister: "I've just shot and killed Mom and Dad. Call the relatives and tell them I've done it." He was found not guilty by reason of insanity.


Life USA Holding Inc.(LUSA,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


King World Productions Inc.(KWP,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


Fish Dealers May Abandon Fulton Market
Faced with a plan by the Giuliani administration to raise their rents and subject them to tight regulations, seafood dealers at the Fulton Fish Market threatened yesterday to move out of Manhattan.
In an intensification of a war of nerves with Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani, a lawyer for the dealers said yesterday that the leaders of the market's three major trade associations would meet on Friday with Terence M. Zaleski, the Mayor of Yonkers, to discuss possible sites there.


In a Video Rush, Phone Groups Aren't Waiting For Fiber Optics
The Pacific Telesis Group is leaping into the nascent business of wireless cable television.
The company is expected to announce today that it will acquire Cross Country Wireless Inc. in a deal worth $175 million.
Cross Country Wireless holds licenses to beam cable programming to viewers throughout Southern California using microwave signals.
Owning the company will enable Pacific Telesis to offer video services to 5 million customers by the end of 1996 -- five years earlier than if it had to wait for the completion of its fiber optic telephone network.


COMPANY BRIEFS
GEN/RX INC., Fort Collins, Colo., a veterinary drug company, acquired Apotex Inc.'s human injectable pharmaceutical division for 15.4 million Gen/Rx common shares, worth about $32.7 million.
MEDALLIANCE INC., Brentwood, Tenn., a medical diagnostic service company, completed the sale of 15 outpatient diagnostic imaging centers to Health Images Inc., Atlanta, for about $73 million.


Leader Financial Corp.(LFCT,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


DPL Inc.(DPL,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Doug Allan, 49, An Opera Executive
Doug Allan, the director of marketing and public relations for the San Francisco Opera and a former marketing executive for the Brooklyn Academy of Music, died on Saturday in a boating accident on Lake Baptiste, near Bancroft, Ontario.
He was 49 and lived in San Francisco.
Mr.
Allan joined the San Francisco Opera in 1992 when the marketing and public relations departments were combined.
Colleagues said that his programs had helped produce record ticket sales for the company this season.


Exabyte Corp.(EXBT,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 1


The Designers' Starting Point
Fashion designers are like jugglers, balancing seasons the way jugglers keep china plates spinning in the air.
While working on one collection, they've got to think about next year's collections and order fabric for them.
Every collection starts and ends with the fabric, and mills take months to fill orders.
A designer can change a hemline at will, but not the colors and textures of fabrics chosen so far in advance.
And the softness or stiffness of fabric is basically what determines the shape of clothes.


300 Are Rescued From Listing Ferry in the English Channel
More than 300 passengers were rescued from a ferry in the English Channel today after the vessel began taking on water and listing in a choppy sea.
The incident was the latest in a long string of safety problems that have afflicted European passenger ferries.


Metro-Richelieu reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 11


Rockland Official Denies Misuse of County Funds
Kenneth Gribetz, the longtime Rockland County District Attorney, denied a local woman's allegations, published today, that he spent county money taking her to hotels and restaurants during a three-year love affair.
Through his lawyers, Mr.
Gribetz called the woman "a very disturbed person" and said she had been harassing him.


Columbia Gas Moves to Break Its Bankruptcy Deadlock
The Columbia Gas System Inc. and its pipeline subsidiary, which is one of the major transporters of gas to the East Coast, filed bankruptcy reorganization plans yesterday in an effort to break a long deadlock with major creditors.
Key to the two reorganization plans are proposed agreements with a major creditor group.


Patterns
'Todd Oldham Forever'
One road to expanding a fledgling fashion business is developing an unmistakable style that is adaptable to a range of goods and projects.
The leading new example is Todd Oldham and his freewheeling, kitschy approach to design.


Baldor Electric Co. (BEZ,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 1


Luxottica to Acquire U.S. Shoe for $1.4 Billion
Moving closer to its goal of a larger United States presence, Luxottica S.p.A., the Italian eyeglass maker, announced today that it had reached agreement to acquire the United States Shoe Corporation, which controls the Lenscrafters optical chain, in a deal valued at $1.4 billion.
The deal, which ends a drawn-out feud for control of U.S.
Shoe, came after Luxottica agreed late Sunday to raise its offer to $28 a share, $4 more a share than its original bid on March 1.
Luxottica also said it intended to go through with U.S.
Shoe's agreement to sell its footwear business to Nine West Group Inc. for $600 million.


Stocks Retreat From Early Gains, With Dow Falling 12.80
The stock market seemed to defy gravity for part of the day yesterday, but it came down to earth in the last hour of trading, pulled down by a variety of factors, including a surge in oil prices following Iraq's refusal of a United Nations plan for the sale of Iraqi oil.
The surge for most of the day in stocks had come despite a surprising rise in the price of gold and silver, usually a sign of declining market confidence; a sharp drop in the bond market; and the fall to record lows for the dollar in New York trading.


The Critics All Agree, Tyson Won't Like It
Mike Tyson will not like "Tyson."
Don King will not like "Tyson."
It's probably best that Showtime, and not HBO, has retained Tyson's post-prison pugilistic services.
The HBO docudrama, which will make its debut on April 29, portrays the fighter and promoter unpleasantly, unless you count the celluloid versions of some of Tyson's vulnerable moments and his pigeon-breeding hobby.


Celanese Canada reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Nationsbank Corp.(NB,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Precarious Painting


Southwest Gas Corp.(SWX,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


China Industrial Group Inc. reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


When to Lift the Iraq Embargo
The United States and Iraq are engaged in a cynical tug-of-war over a United Nations Security Council plan to let Baghdad sell $2 billion worth of oil over the next six months to pay for food, medicine and other necessities.
Washington calls the plan humanitarian help for the Iraqi people.
Baghdad says it is a violation of Iraq's sovereignty.
In truth, the plan is a political maneuver manipulated by both sides in the larger struggle over economic sanctions imposed on Iraq by the Security Council at the end of the Persian Gulf war.
The sanctions include an embargo on oil sales until Baghdad eliminates all efforts to make weapons of mass destruction.
The United States wants to maintain the oil embargo even if Iraq meets that condition.
To deflect mounting international criticism that it is being inflexible, Washington proposed sweetening an exception for oil sales for humanitarian purposes.
Iraq is resisting the partial easing of the embargo because President Saddam Hussein hopes the Iraqi people will blame the United States, not him, for their hardships.


Fifth Third Bancorp (FITB,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


In Vietnam War's Costs, the Poor Bore More Than Their Share; McNamara's Candor
To the Editor:
May I invite on a flight of fancy those, like The Times and James Fallows of National Public Radio, who condemn Robert S. McNamara for his reflections on Vietnam?


Kysor Industrial Corp.(KZ,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Observer; Hooked On Jail
Whatever the problem, the solution is now obvious: jail.
You have heard the following statistic: The United States now has more people locked up than the country that used to hold the world record but whose name eludes me, probably the late Soviet Union or the South Africa of apartheid days.


CLINTON REVAMPS POLICY ON SECRECY OF U.S. DOCUMENTS
President Clinton today signed an executive order overhauling Government secrecy rules and requiring, with certain exceptions, that even the most highly classified documents be made public after 25 years.
The directive, issued after two years of debate within the Administration, establishes the least secretive policy on Government records since the beginning of the cold war.
It would allow the head of an agency, like the Director of Central Intelligence, to exempt some documents, but only with the approval of an appeals panel.


A Writer Becomes His Hero In 1876
What kind of a weekly series gig could Richard Dean Anderson possibly find after ABC's "MacGyver" (1985-1992), in which his Special Forces hero got out of one scrape after another with such unlikely scientific tools as a paper clip or a candy bar?
Try the United Paramount Network's "Legend," which, although set in 1876, teams up Mr.
Anderson with an odd, ahead-of-his time scientist whose inventions are just dandy for last-minute rescues.
Two of the executive producers for this new show, having its premiere tonight on Channel 9, are Mr.
Anderson and Michael Greenburg, formerly the producer of "MacGyver."
There's one major change.
Mr.
Anderson, perhaps with an eye toward some of James Garner's wry westerns, goes for a comedy spin this time.
He plays Ernest Pratt, a hard-drinking, gambling, womanizing writer of dime novels about a heroic character named Nicodemus Legend.
Legend is a kind of Paladin of the prairie.
The problem is that, encouraged by his publisher back East, the decidedly unheroic Pratt is marketed as if he were really Legend, making personal appearances to autograph books and sell locks of his hair to admirers.
Fiction begins to overtake reality.


People
*
George J. Simko, who retired Jan. 1 as president of the European and Mideast operations of D'Arcy Masius Benton &amp; Bowles, New York, was named to the new position of chairman of the executive committee of the board. *
Howard Meditz, senior vice president and director for client services at Marquardt &amp; Roche, Stamford, Conn., was promoted to president, succeeding Jim Marquardt, who was named co-chairman along with Ed Roche, who was previously executive vice president and creative director.
Also, Tom Hackett, senior vice president and creative director, was promoted to the new position of executive vice president and chief creative officer.


Quietly and Without Crowds, China Buries Elder Statesman
In a ceremony bereft of public participation, Communist Party leaders attended the cremation and burial today of Chen Yun, the powerful conservative patriarch who died a week ago.
President Jiang Zemin, Prime Minister Li Peng and other top party officials gathered this morning at Beijing Hospital and bowed three times to Mr.
Chen's body, which was draped in the Chinese national flag.
The funeral bier was surrounded by evergreens.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  A CASE OF TEMPTATION AT TIFFANY'S?
Scott Jackson, 32, a high school dropout who had pulled himself up from nothing, was considered a success -- until the police arrested him in a daring $1.9 million jewelry theft at Tiffany's, the largest robbery in the store's 157-year history.
B3.
MAYOR'S APPROVAL RATING BELOW 50%
A second poll in five weeks has put Mayor Giuliani's popularity below 50 percent as the glow from his endorsement of former Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo begins to fade next to the dour impact of his austerity program.
B3.
RATIONALE FOR HOSPITAL SALE DRAWS FIRE
Five members of the board of directors of New York City's Health and Hospitals Corporation have harshly criticized a report that Mayor Giuliani has used as a rationale for trying to sell three of the city's public hospitals.
B3.
OFFICER SAYS KILLING WAS ACCIDENTAL
A housing police officer charged with manslaughter in the shooting death of a man in a parked car in lower Manhattan three years ago testified in his own defense, saying the car suddenly jerked backward and his service revolver accidentally discharged. sending a bullet into the victim's head.
B3.
COMPTROLLER BACKS BONDS FOR ULSTER
City Comptroller Alan G. Hevesi said that he supported the idea of purchasing bonds with city pension funds to help economic development in Northern Ireland.
B2.
A gay movie theater that was closed after inspectors said they saw numerous sex acts occur, was allowed to reopen under conditions meant to guarantee that the sex will stop.
B3.
REGION  U.S.
ASSAILS INSTITUTION
The Federal Government charged that many residents of the Southbury Training School, Connecticut's only large institution for the retarded, are living in life-threatening conditions and should be moved out.
B5.
TOURING THE GLORIES OF NEWARK
Whenever Emma Fantone gives one of her Newark tours -- be it the walking ones or the formal kind on a chartered bus -- people always say the same things: "Oh, this is beautiful," "Ooh, how nice," "Oh, I didn't know." Our Towns by Evelyn Nieves, B5.
PATAKI FINDS MODEL FAMILY FOR TAX PLAN
John and Alyce Muller, who have two cute children, a house in the suburbs and a dog named Snuggles, found the Governor of New York standing on their front lawn, proclaiming them average New Yorkers who would benefit greatly from his plan to cut state income taxes.
B4.
LOSSES ON REAL ESTATE CUT PATAKI'S TAXES
Governor Pataki earned $121,000 from his law practice and legislative salary last year, according to tax returns.
But a variety of losses on real-estate holdings and his family farm and deductions for legislative expenses kept his Federal taxes to $10,398.
B4.
ROCKLAND PROSECUTOR DENIES CHARGES
Kenneth Gribetz, the Rockland County District Attorney, denied a woman's allegations that he spent county money taking her to hotels and restaurants during a three-year affair.
B4.
A company that wants to build a casino in Bridgeport said it would replace any money that Connecticut would lose if the Pequot tribe is stripped of its casino monopoly.
B5  Chronicle B2


Fulton Financial Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Trustmark Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


MGIC Investment (MTG,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Salomon Tries To Stem Tide Of Defections
Stung by a growing wave of high-level departures, Salomon Brothers yesterday announced an easing of a pay plan that cut the compensation of its managing directors.
But even as Salomon announced the new pay plan and the reorganization of its top management, three more managing directors -- Gerard L. Smith, Robert A. Nau and Joseph C. Bencivenga -- quit the firm.
That brought the total of managing director departures since the restrictive pay plan was announced late last year to more than 20 out of about 200.
And it may well be some time before senior departures abate, people at the firm said.
The departures have particularly hit Salomon's investment banking department.


Stevens Playing Like $17 Million
Last month, when the Devils were struggling to earn a spot in the playoffs, Scott Stevens, their captain, was as guilty as anyone for New Jersey's ineffective performance.
He made mistakes on defense and was almost invisible on offense.
In a season of high expectations, Stevens, the $17 Million Man, felt responsible for the team's misfortunes.


Research Dispels Myth That Brain In Adults Is Unable to Renew Itself
IT was a scam to make birds sing.
Knowing that only male canaries can sing, some pet store owners injected a male sex hormone into the relatively worthless females.
The masculinized female birds and the pet store cash registers sang.
But only for a few weeks, until the hormonal effect wore off.
The scam occurred in the 1930's.
Now, 60 years later, it has led to the discovery that the adult human brain has the capacity to grow new brain cells at any point throughout life.
Overturning long-held scientific dogma that the brain's cellular composition is fixed and nonplastic and that new neurons cannot be generated in the adult nervous system, the find opens new avenues into research to repair damaged human brains.


Washington Federal Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


High Court Hears Arguments In Major Environmental Case
The Clinton Administration came before the Supreme Court today sorely in need of friends in the most closely watched environmental case in years, and it just may have found them.
In a spirited argument, a majority of the Justices appeared sympathetic to the Administration's view that Congress implicitly authorized, or at least did not mean to prohibit, vigorous Federal efforts to protect the habitat of endangered species against the desires of private property owners to develop their land.


Goodfellow reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


Where Brancusi's Independent Road Led
It was a measure of Constantin Brancusi's ambition that he walked most of the way from Romania to Paris in 1904 to complete his art studies here.
Three years later, at the age of 30, the sculptor's career seemed to look up when he joined the studio of the French master Auguste Rodin.
But after just one month, he walked out.
Years later his explanation became famous: "Nothing grows beneath great trees." Yet Brancusi was clearly escaping more than Rodin's immense shadow.
Rodin lived until 1917, but he was a quintessentially 19th-century sculptor.
And Brancusi had no interest in copying Rodin.
He was in search of new forms, and he concluded, "I had to find my own path." The wisdom of this break was soon apparent.
Within a year his stone sculpture "The Kiss," two cubic heads kissing, marked a change of direction.
In 1909, with his first "Sleeping Muse," a marble ovoid head with delicate stylized features lying peacefully on its side, Brancusi began to earn his place as a central figure of modern sculpture.


Grainger (W.W.) (GWW,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Earth Day at 25: How Has Nature Fared?
A QUARTER of a century after the first Earth Day, on April 22, 1970, an emerging public perception holds that the peak of human insult to the environment has passed in the United States and that an increasingly green and healthy future lies ahead.
Proponents of this sunny conviction argue that the modern age of environmental protection has drastically reduced the threat from most forms of pollution, that nature is resurgent and that environmentalists have refused to recognize their own success.
Their position is reflected, for instance, in the title of a new book by the environmental writer Gregg Easterbrook, "A Moment on the Earth: The Coming Age of Environmental Optimism" (Viking).
In a related article in the April 10 New Yorker, Mr.
Easterbrook argued that the environmental laws of the last 25 years have been a "stunning success" and that environmental trends in the United States and Europe "are, for the most part, positive."


A Daughter Of Brando Kills Herself in Tahiti
Marlon Brando's daughter Cheyenne, who had been depressed since her lover was killed by her half-brother five years ago, committed suicide on Sunday, relatives said yesterday.
The body of Ms.
Brando, 25, was found hanging in a bedroom at her mother's home in Tahiti, the relatives said.
Her doctors have said she tried to take her own life at least twice before.


Werner Enterprises Inc.(WERN,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Russell Corp.(RML,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 2


Player Cited in Fatal Crash
A player for the Mets' Class A affiliate here was involved in an automobile accident early Sunday morning that resulted in the death of a 16-year-old girl, the Port St.
Lucie police reported.
Ross Ferrier, an outfielder for the St.
Lucie Mets of the Florida State League, failed to stop at a blinking red light at a local intersection and his auto struck a car in which Teena Curtz, 16, was a passenger, the police said.
Curtz died of head injuries at Martin Memorial Medical Center at approximately 3:30 P.M.
Sunday.


Alaska Air Group Inc.(ALK,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  *
Coastal Bancorp, Portland, Me., filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission to sell $60 million of senior notes.
*
Commercial Credit Co., Baltimore, a unit of Travelers Inc., is selling $200 million of notes due in 2005 through Salomon Brothers.
The notes are priced at 99.545 to yield 7.44 percent.
The noncallable issue is rated A1 by Moody's Investors Service and A+ by the Standard &amp; Poor's Corp. and Duff &amp; Phelps.
*
Federal National Mortgage Association, known as Fannie Mae, is selling $100 million of medium-term notes due in 2005 through Merrill Lynch.
Callable in three years, the issue is priced at par to yield 7.91 percent.
*
First Bank System Inc., Minneapolis, is selling $150 million of subordinated notes due in 2005 through Donaldson, Lufkin &amp; Jenrette.
The notes are priced at 99.893 to yield 7.64 percent.
The noncallable issue is rated A3 by Moody's, A- by S.&amp; P. and A by Duff &amp; Phelps.
*
Geico Corp., Washington, is selling $100 million of notes due in 2005 through Salomon Brothers.
The notes are priced at 99.768 to yield 7.534 percent.
The noncallable issue is rated Aa3 by Moody's and AA by S.&amp; P.
Common  *
Winston Hotels Inc., Raleigh, N.C., filed to sell 2.3 million shares.
Morgan Keegan will be the lead underwriter.


U.S. Bonds Close Mixed; Traders Cite Weak Dollar
Prices of Treasury securities were mixed yesterday, with the 30-year bond falling under pressure from rising commodity prices and a weaker dollar.
The prices of shorter maturities advanced, bolstered by Government reports on Friday that showed weak industrial production and capacity utilization.
Yesterday was the first opportunity for traders to react to the data because the market was closed for Good Friday.


Scripps (E.W.) Co.(SSP,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


There's a Better Way to Crack a Coconut
To the Editor:
Your article about the many ways to eat coconut (April 12) mentions how to open one: "Hold it in the palm of the hand, then smack it with a hammer all around its equator until the shell cracks and the halves separate." Try this and you get an irregular opening.


Applied Extrusion Technologies reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


The Browns Sign Goad
The Cleveland Browns signed the former New England Patriots nose tackle TIM GOAD and the former Washington Redskins special-team member JOHNNY THOMAS, the team said yesterday.


Turkish Leader Says Troop Pullout Is Under Way in Iraq
Turkey has started withdrawing some of the 35,000 troops it sent into northern Iraq four weeks ago to attack Kurdish separatists who set up bases there, Prime Minister Tansu Ciller said yesterday.
"Now that we have achieved our primary objectives, we have begun to bring our troops home," Mrs.
Ciller said in a speech in New York City.
"We will continue this carefully staged withdrawal in the coming weeks as we bring maximum stability and security to this difficult territory."


Argonaut Group Inc.(AGII,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Asia First: A Foreign Policy
The United States is approaching the year 2000 with a grand strategy designed for 1950.
Although America spends almost as much as the rest of the world on defense, neither party is seriously questioning the continuing need for alliances designed for the cold war.
With the illusion of the "last superpower" long shattered, we have to think about American interests in terms of four other great powers: Japan, China, Russia and Germany.
And for the next century, we must concentrate on Asia.
It contains most of the world's population and much of its industry, and Japan and China are the only powers with the potential to be formidable rivals.


Ndeti and Pippig Transform the Big Run Into a Rerun
They stood side by side -- Cosmas Ndeti of Kenya holding three fingers aloft, Uta Pippig of Germany holding two -- signifying their consecutive victories in the Boston Marathon, one having silenced a legion of doubters, the other having charmingly satisfied all expectations, both having combined to establish a first in the event.
It happens year after the year.
The experts predict that Ndeti will fail in Boston because he runs infrequently and unimpressively elsewhere.
Yet, today, in the 99th running, he became only the third man to win Boston three times in succession, joining Clarence DeMar (1922-24) and Bill Rodgers (1978-80) in this racing hat trick.


A Deal for Six Flags, but Not Its Chairman
Call it Geffen's Disease.
Boston Ventures wanted Robert W. Pittman to stay on as chairman of the Six Flags theme parks after its acquisition of 51 percent of the chain from Time Warner Inc.
But Boston Ventures balked when Mr.
Pittman demanded an unusually lucrative deal for himself, according to several investment bankers familiar with the talks.


Northern Trust Corp.(NTRS,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Walbro Corp.(WALB,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Stryker Corp.(STRY,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


The Times Announces 2 Senior Appointments
Two senior editing appointments at The New York Times were announced yesterday by Joseph Lelyveld, its executive editor.
Bill Keller, the Johannesburg bureau chief, was named foreign editor, succeeding Bernard Gwertzman.
Mr.
Gwertzman was named to a new position as senior editor concerned with the news that is presented in the newspaper's offerings in electronic publishing.


Falling Nets Lose To Rising Celtics
Just over five weeks ago, on this same parquet court, you wouldn't have known these teams.
The Boston Celtics were run off their own floor, the Nets were talking about an April date with Orlando, and the bottom feeders of the Eastern Conference could do nothing about it.
Remember?


No Audience For a President?
What if the President gave a prime-time news conference and no one came?
President Clinton does not quite face that prospect.
But tonight, the three major television networks all said they were reserving judgment until Tuesday on whether to cover Mr.
Clinton's question-and-answer session with reporters in the East Room at 9 P.M. on Tuesday.
CNN said it would carry the conference live.


Knicks Look Like Pretenders Instead of Contenders
The Knicks had plenty of excuses available if things didn't go as well as expected against the Milwaukee Bucks last night at Madison Square Garden.
There was the emotional challenge of trying to rebound from a disappointing defeat at Chicago on Sunday afternoon, and there also was the fatigue factor of playing their fourth game in five days.
The remote possibility of catching the Orlando Magic for the Atlantic Division title offered little incentive, and neither did the Bucks, who are clinging to playoff hopes by a splitting thread.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-10  U.N.
NUCLEAR CONFERENCE OPENS  As a U.N. conference opened, the United States failed to persuade China to end its nuclear cooperation with Iran or to improve its human rights performance.
A1


COMPANY NEWS: Need a Loan? Ask the Computer; 'Credit Scoring' Changes Small-Business Lending
The nation's banks have discovered a revolutionary new way to approve small-business loans: Play down human judgment and let computers make most of the decisions.
The new automated approach promises to cut the number of bad loans sharply.
More important to banks, it will save time and make small-business lending a profit maker instead of a profit drain.
Banks will be able to forgo interviews and paperwork for a quick computer check of past credit problems, just as they do when consumers seek approval for credit cards or money to buy a new Buick.


CPC International Inc.(CPC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Raising the Roof, an Old Summer Tradition


Coastal Bancorp Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Cherry Corp.(CHERB,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


The Rich Get Richer Faster
The gap between rich and poor is vast in the United States -- and recent studies show it growing faster here than anywhere else in the West.
The trend is largely the result of technological forces at work around the world.
But the United States Government has done little to ameliorate the problem.
Indeed, if the Republicans get their way on the budget, the Government will make a troubling trend measurably worse.
Some inequality is necessary if society wants to reward investors for taking risks and individuals for working hard and well.
But excessive inequality can break the spirit of those trapped in society's cellar -- and exacerbate social tensions.


CHRONICLE
What's it like for an actor and singer to be on the audience side of the footlights when his son performs?
Just plain fun, says MANDY PATINKIN, who will be a spectator tonight at the Kaye Playhouse when his 12 1/2-year-old son, ISAAC GRODY-PATINKIN, plays Claudius in "The Death of Hamlet." The occasion is a benefit for Jacques d'Amboise's National Dance Institute.
"I just love watching my kid perform," Mr.
Patinkin said.
"I always thought that Isaac made his debut with me in 'Dress Casual,' my one-man concert in which he played a gorilla while I was singing. He was brilliant and my mouth literally dropped open. But afterward, he said: 'Dad, that was not my debut. I actually made it with the National Dance Institute.' "


Automotive Industries (AIHI,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 1


Ted Estabrook, 76, TV News Producer
Ted Estabrook, a producer and director whose technical innovations helped shape early television, died on Friday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 76.
The cause was leukemia, said his daughter Dr. Alison Estabrook of Englewood, N.J.


Fastenal Co. (FAST,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


First Among the Sharks, Swimming Quietly
Ron Meyer is known as the "good cop" at Creative Artists Agency, the diplomat, a soft-spoken, seemingly casual and unintimidating president of the most powerful talent agency in Hollywood.
If Michael Ovitz, the chairman of the agency, is coolly formidable and tightly controlled, Mr.
Meyer, his No. 2, seems, on the face of it, the opposite side of the coin.
"I've been characterized more as a street personality," said Mr.
Meyer, picking his words carefully.
"Mike seems more of a business or corporate personality. Maybe I'm more laid back, more patient. But both of us, I think, are essentially very button-down people."


Qualcomm Inc.(QCOM,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 26


Prostitution Tarnishes an Avenue of Hope
As the dim light grows dimmer under the Jerome Avenue El, an evening world emerges from the shadows cast by the filthy metal pylons, full of furtive encounters, wild eyes, and slamming car doors.
Mothers in the adjacent streets hope their children won't see this world or ask about it.
They hope the children won't notice the condoms in the 175th Street tunnel on the way to school, or, worse, find them lying in the schoolyard of P.S. 33, or, worst of all, see the sex acts underneath the stairs of local apartment buildings.
It is a vain hope, mostly, because children notice things, and even in the daylight hours a few of the haggard women are plying their trade.


Kollmorgen (KOL,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Rexene Corp.(RXN,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


PNC Bank Corp.(PNC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Last-Minute Rush to File Tax Returns


Dover Corp.(DOV,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


By Design; The Other Best Friend
At a time when fashion seems to be going through a conservative phase, pearls look better than ever.
Remember Audrey Hepburn in "Breakfast at Tiffany's" with her throat swathed in pearls?
Her style of understated chic has been inspiring many clothing and jewelry designers.
Angela Cummings designed a special collection for Bergdorf Goodman this spring using cultured, baroque and South Sea pearls in pink, gray and a golden tone in addition to the classic cream color.
And Mikimoto, the Japanese company that developed the cultured pearl a century ago, just opened a new store at 730 Fifth Avenue, near 57th Street.


Rockwell Int'l.(ROK,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


School Budget Vote Today
Do people forget to vote, or don't they care?
Local school budgets go before the voters today, and fewer than one in six taxpayers is expected to cast a ballot.
Slightly more than 50 percent of the budgets passed last year.
LAWRENCE VAN GELDER


Lone Star Technologies Inc.(LSST,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Greener Pastures?
Residents in the New York, New Jersey and Connecticut metropolitan area are less satisfied with their quality of life than people in some other urban regions, according to polls taken by a planning group.
One poll found that 42 percent of the people living in the area would move out tomorrow if they could.
Article, page B5.


U.S. Assails an Institution for the Retarded
The Federal Government today charged that many residents of the Southbury Training School, Connecticut's only large institution for the retarded, are living in life-threatening conditions and should be moved out.
The charges, made in a motion filed by the Justice Department in Federal District Court in New Haven, sets the stage for a legal battle between the Federal and state governments over whether the Southbury school should remain open.


Teradyne Inc.(TER,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 2


Criminal Charges on Pap Test Make No Sense
To the Editor:
Regarding your news article about the possibility of homicide charges in the case of misread Pap tests (Science Times, April 11):


Meeting on Meningitis Scare
Panicky parents and bewildered students were summoned to an Ocean County school during spring break yesterday for a lesson about Neisseria meningitis.
Students at Lake Riviera Middle School who rode a school bus, ate lunch or took gym class with a sixth-grader who came down with the acute bacterial illness were given a drug called Ripamfin.
The boy's family has not been infected and he is expected to recover.


Manitowoc Co.(MTW,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Bosnia Peacekeeper's Death Divides French Government
With France approaching the end of its presidential election campaign, the deaths of two French soldiers in Sarajevo over the weekend have exposed divisions within the governing conservative party on what to do about the war in Bosnia.
Foreign Ministry officials said Monday that withdrawal of the 4,530 French soldiers serving with United Nations forces there was not under consideration, though over the weekend Defense Minister Francois Leotard had suggested that a pullout was possible.


Q&amp;A
Weather Patterns
Q.
The world rotates west to east, so you would think we would be meeting not only the rising sun but also the weather to the east of us.
Why do weather systems in the United States always seem to be moving west to east?


Black Unity Finds Voice In Colombia
For Piedad Corboda de Castro, the first black woman to become a senator in Colombia, a recent visit here for a human rights conference also allowed her to solidify a growing relationship between black Latin Americans and black Americans.
Senator Cordoba de Castro, the author of a 1993 law that recognizes equal rights for black Colombians, is among a number of black Latin Americans who argue that without recognition, they will continue to be marginalized citizens of their countries.


Cherry Blossom Heaven, in Newark


Standex Int'l. Corp.(SXI,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


New Travel Service for World Wide Web
The New York Times Company and Advance Publications Inc., owner of Conde Nast Publications and Random House, said yesterday that they would cooperate to create a travel information service on the World Wide Web of the Internet.
The new service, to be called Travel Connect, is expected to begin limited operations in June.
Plans include the electronic publication of selected travel articles and photographs gathered from Times Company publications, Conde Nast Traveler magazine, Fodor's Travel Guides and other publications owned by Advance.


Giuliani's 'Approval' Rating Below 50% in a Second Poll
A second poll in five weeks has put Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani's popularity below 50 percent as the glow from his endorsement of former Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo begins to fade next to the dour impact of his austerity program.
The new poll, released yesterday by the Marist College Institute for Public Opinion, indicates that 44 percent of registered voters approve of the job the Mayor is doing, down from 51 percent in a December Marist poll.
The poll, conducted last week, was based on the views of 452 registered voters around New York City, and has a margin of sampling error of plus of minus 4.5 percentage points.


Manila Minister Dismissed in Furor Over Singapore Hanging
President Fidel V. Ramos forced the resignation of Foreign Secretary Roberto Romulo today, making Mr.
Romulo the most prominent casualty to date of the uproar here over Singapore's execution of a Filipino maid.
The departure of Mr.
Romulo showed just how seriously Mr.
Ramos and his administration have been stung by the furor over the hanging last month of Flor Contemplacion, a mother of four.
She had been convicted in Singapore of the murder of another Filipino maid and of a four-year-old Singaporean boy.


CHRONICLE
Fighting words from a former President: GEORGE BUSH gets very angry at the suggestion that there are ulterior motives to his love for country music.
"A lot of the sophisticated Beltway pundits would have had the American people believe that this was an affectation on my part, that I was saying I liked country music to be a good ol' boy and thus get people along the South or in Tennessee or Texas to vote for me," Mr.
Bush said in an interview for a cable television station in Nashville, The Associated Press reported.
The conversation will be broadcast tomorrow on the Nashville Network.
"It burned me up," he said.


Carolina Freight (CAO,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 25


Sports of The Times; Steinberg's Doing This Other Thing
HE is the Jets' general manager, but he didn't go to any of the college all-star games or bowl games.
He wasn't at the scouting combine in Indianapolis to inspect the huge slabs of prime beef that will go to market in the National Football League draft this weekend.
He didn't stop at any campus to time a whippet wide receiver in the 40-yard dash.
"I missed it," Dick Steinberg was saying now behind his desk on the second floor of the Jets' complex, "but I'm doing this other thing."


Gabelli Mails Flawed Data To Mutual Fund Shareholders
Gabelli &amp; Company mailed flawed first-quarter account statements last week to thousands of its mutual fund shareholders, providing the investors with incorrect account balances and faulty summaries of which funds they owned.
Mario Gabelli, chief investment officer and proprietor of the fund company, called the problem "a minor glitch" that affected less than half of the 250,000 investors in Gabelli mutual funds.
The company mailed new statements to all mutual fund shareholders yesterday, Mr.
Gabelli said, and a recording on the company's toll-free customer-service line advised callers to disregard the previous statements.


North Fork Bancorp (NFB,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Comptroller Backs Bonds To Aid Irish
City Comptroller Alan G. Hevesi said yesterday that he supported the idea of purchasing bonds with New York City pension funds to help economic development in Northern Ireland.
Mr.
Hevesi, who as Comptroller is the investment adviser to New York City's $51 billion in pension funds, last year proposed establishing an Ireland Development Bank, which would issue bonds to support economic development in Northern Ireland.
The bank would primarily lend to small businesses.


L.A. Gear Inc.(LA,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


Varco Int'l.(VRC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Now Hundley Catches Pitches Instead of Flak
This is the fourth year that Todd Hundley has come to the Mets' spring camp with the club-wide expectation that he would be the everyday catcher.
In each of the three previous years, he found himself dogged by questions -- about his throwing ability, his confidence, his hitting.
It was suggested that he wasn't ready.
Or that he would lose his job to Charlie O'Brien.
Or that Kelly Stinnett would be the Mets' opening-day starter in 1994.
It is different this time.


Earth Day at 25: The State of Nature
With the 25th anniversary of Earth Day coming up, a debate is raging over just how successful the environmental movement it spawned has been.
A spate of recent books and articles declare that the worst is over and a green and healthy future lies ahead.
Several types of air and water pollution have been reduced, as the optimists point out, and industrial toxins are being released at a markedly lower rate.


Gilbert Moses Is Dead at 52; Award-Winning Stage Director
Gilbert Moses, who directed award-winning plays and musicals by Melvin Van Peebles, Ed Bullins, Imamu Baraka and other writers, died on Friday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 52.
The cause was multiple myeloma, said Eda Godel Hallinan, his companion.


Del Laboratories Inc.(DLI,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Review/Fashion; Transcending The Machine-Made
The vast building in lower Manhattan where Pucci International makes its mannequins is a hive of fashion manufacturing, the elevators rattling with the many languages of the workers who crowd the cars.
But last week, when the doors opened on Pucci's 12th-floor display room, outfitted with couches by Andree Putman, visitors were instantly enveloped by the still, calm world of Isabel Toledo and her finely wrought take on American sportswear.


VLSI Technology Inc.(VLSI,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Rawlings Sporting Goods Co.(RAWL,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


Tennant Co.(TANT,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Flexsteel Industries Inc.(FLXS,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Executive Changes
FOUR SEASONS HOTELS LTD., Toronto, named John Sharpe president and chief operating officer.
He has been the executive vice president of operations since 1983.
MORGAN STANLEY GROUP INC., New York, named Barry Hall chief executive and president of the Morgan Stanley India office.
READER'S DIGEST ASSOCIATION INC., Pleasantville, N.Y., named Stephen R. Wilson executive vice president and chief financial officer.


Jury for Cat-Show Judge
Did Irene B. Brounstein of Montville lose her license to judge cat shows because she is Jewish and protested the annual election of the American Cat Fanciers Association?
Or was she simply not suited for judging?
Those questions were before a jury in Federal Court yesterday in a lawsuit in which Ms.
Brounstein, a prize-winning cat breeder, is seeking unspecified compensation for humiliation and damage to her reputation.


Child's Play No Longer A Simple Proposition
PARENTS know that computers will be a major part of their children's futures, but often they do not know what to do about it.
Buy a computer?
Sure, but what kind?
Buy software?
Sure, but which few titles out of thousands?
The best answers to the hardware questions may not be the obvious ones.
An adult writing letters or keeping track of personal finances may well be able to get by with an old 286 or Mac SE.
But software for children requires hundreds or thousands of colors, sound and other top-of-the-line features.
Michael Perkins and Celia Nunez touch on hardware in their book "Kidware: The Parent's Guide to Software for Children" (Prima Publishing; $14.95), and it takes the reader on a shopping trip for "one of the most important tools" children will ever learn to use.
But the bulk of the book is an exhaustive, but not exhausting, examination of 110 software titles for children.


Court Rejects Coupon Settlement In Suit Over G.M. Pickup Trucks
A Federal appeals court yesterday threw out the settlement of a huge class-action lawsuit that would have given $1,000 coupons to owners of 5.7 million older General Motors pickup trucks that are suspected of posing a fire hazard in sideways crashes.
In its ruling, the three-member panel of the United States Court of Appeals for the Third Circuit, in Philadelphia, said the settlement was worth little to consumers and agreed with the arguments of opponents of the deal, who had called it a "sophisticated marketing program" aimed at selling more G.M. trucks.


New Milk Campaign Has Critical Edge
A campaign featuring celebrities sporting milk mustaches has inspired a second parody version, but this one is critical not laudatory.
Phil Sokolof, a wealthy industrialist turned health advocate who is president of the National Heart Savers Association in Omaha, bought advertisements yesterday in 40 newspapers asserting that consumers should switch to skim milk from milk with 2 percent fat because three glasses of 2 percent milk are as fatty as nine strips of bacon.
Mr.
Sokolof, spending $500,000 on his ads created in-house, is spoofing a campaign for the Milk Processors Education Program of the National Fluid Milk Processor Promotion Board, created by Bozell Worldwide in New York.
The ads by Bozell, a unit of Bozell, Jacobs, Kenyon &amp; Eckhardt, present celebrities sporting milk mustaches; Mr.
Sokolof's ads feature an overweight woman with one.
A campaign for the Magazine Publishers of America by Emmerling Post in New York, which begins this week, pays tribute to the Bozell ads, running solely in magazines, by showing magazine executives with fake milk mustaches.


Old Kent Financial (OKEN,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Science Times E-Mail
Science Times has an electronic mail address for comments from readers about published articles and suggested areas of coverage:
scitimes@nytimes.com.


Charges of Child Abuse Split a Town
This Columbia River orchard town, which in the last year has been scandalized by stories of a doctor liberally prescribing the antidepressant drug Prozac and two 12-year-old boys who shot a homeless man to death, now is confronted by accusations of child abuse that have divided residents.
The worst blow to the psyche of this community came when a minister and his wife, founders of a celebrated food bank and much loved by their congregation, were jailed and charged with being part of a child sex ring involving dozens of adults and numerous children.


First Fidelity Bancorp (FFB,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Raw Roots Of What Became Today
The Laughing Hyenas, a 10-year-old Detroit-based band that performed at CBGB on Friday night, look back to a crystalline moment when there was no such thing as punk or heavy metal.
Only the sounds that would one day become punk and heavy metal existed: the coarse power of Detroit bands like the Stooges and MC5, the rough-hewn garage-rock of groups like the Standells and the Count Five, and the overdriven roots-music of British bands like Cream and Led Zeppelin.
Without sounding overly derivative, the Laughing Hyenas take the rawest, most energetic elements of these influences, spice them with a little 1960's British rock (courtesy of the Rolling Stones and the Troggs) and reinvigorate them all with the blues they came from.


John Nuveen Co. (JNC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


No Headline
"How in the world could we ever create something so exciting in church, where people would wait four and a half hours to get in?" -- THE REV.
WALT KALLESTAD, pastor of the Lutheran Community Church of Joy.  [ A1:1. ]


Thirty-Two Cents Short
On a day when they did not need it, New Jerseyans got bad news about their taxes.
Their state ranked last -- again -- for return on the tax dollar, according to a study released yesterday.
New Jersey gets back only 68 cents of every dollar it sends to Washington.


Shootout at the On-Line Corral
WHEN the smoke cleared, Prodigy stood over its two main rivals in a "shootout" among on-line information services held last week at the Internet World trade show in San Jose, Calif.
Compuserve finished second, and America Online, the fastest-growing service, brought up the rear in the contest, which was organized by Internet World magazine to determine which of the major information services gave consumers the best access to the global web of computer networks known as the Internet.


Union Lists Those Who Did Not Back Strike
Nearly 300 players who once played in the major leagues and were members of the union served the 27 clubs as replacement players during the strike-stricken exhibition schedule, lists compiled by the union show.
The team-by-team lists the union sent to members of its executive board last week totaled 1,554 players who appeared in exhibition games before the players ended their strike on April 1.
Included on the 27 lists, in bold-face capital letters and underlined, were 291 players, or just under one-fifth, who formerly played in the majors, paid union dues and received union benefits, including money from sales of union-licensed products.


Healthtrust Inc.(HTI,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


Teco Energy Inc.(TE,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Virginia Woolf, Every Last Bit of Her
VIRGINIA WOOLF  By James King  Illustrated. 699 pages. W.W. Norton. $35.
"How queer," Virginia Woolf once observed, "to have so many selves." In her novels and essays, not to mention nearly 4,000 letters and a 30-volume diary, Woolf left behind her a voluminous anatomy of self, and in the years since her 1941 suicide, biographers and critics have created a succession of further portraits.


Johnson Controls Inc.(JCI,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


O'Sullivan Corp.(OSL,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Accounts
*
New York Racing Association to Lowe &amp; Partners/SMS, New York, part of the Interpublic Group, to handle its account, previously at the Bates U.S.A. unit of Cordiant P.L.C., New York.
The billings were estimated at $3 million to $4 million. *
Asea Brown Boveri, Stamford, Conn., a unit of ABB Asea Brown Boveri, to Schell/Mullaney, New York, to handle the North American corporate advertising account of the engineering company, previously handled in house and farmed out on a project basis.
The billings were estimated at $2 million. *
Pivot Rules, New York, to Culver Moriarty Glavin, New York, to handle the sportswear manufacturer's account, previously in-house.
The billings were estimated at more than $1 million.


A Good Listener Who Writes Plays On Social Justice
Emily Mann specializes in "theater of testimony," a phrase she borrows from the South African director Barney Simon.
In her plays, real-life characters act as witnesses to dramatic events in their own lives.
In her new play, "Having Our Say," Ms.
Mann offers an essential example of her approach, as testimony is delivered by those indomitable centenarian sisters, Sadie and Bessie Delany.
The recollections of the Delanys first appeared in the best-selling memoir of the same title, which they wrote in collaboration with Amy Hill Hearth.
In the play, as in the 1991 book, the sisters (portrayed by Gloria Foster and Mary Alice) look back on 100 years of their family life and of black history in America.
As children from a middle-class background the sisters may be atypical, but their story is archetypal.
Because they are black, or Negro as they refer to themselves, they have had to face a lifetime of obstacles.
Onstage, their story is so personalized that it becomes inspirational.


Wabash National Corp.(WNC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Wartime Atomic Strategy Is Reassessed
From the start, the American effort to build the first atomic bomb was cast as a race against Nazi Germany.
When Einstein wrote Roosevelt in 1939 it was to warn that Hitler might build the bomb first.
And when teams of bright scientists, including Jewish refugees of Nazism, secreted themselves atop a mountain in New Mexico early in 1943 to start designing the bomb, it was to make sure the United States had it before Germany.


Touring the Glories of Newark
WHENEVER Emma Fantone gives one of her Newark tours be it the walking ones or the formal kind on a chartered bus -- people always say the same things.
"It's 'Oh, this is beautiful,' 'Ooh, how nice,' "Oh, I didn't know,' " she said. "You know."
Surprising the public is half her fun, but it's almost too easy this time of year.
April is Newark's chance to brag.
A five-minute drive from neighborhoods that make commuters thank their lucky stars they live elsewhere, the cherry blossoms are blooming in Branch Brook Park.
Gawkers are out in droves, stopping traffic to gape at the colors exploding from nearly 3,000 trees.


Chess
It was scarcely over a year ago when Peter Leko fulfilled his credentials for grandmaster rank at the earliest age in history, 14 years, 9 months.
In late March, the precocious Hungarian advanced his career another signal step by winning outright for the first time in high-level competition.
Leko captured first place in the Copenhagen International Tournament with an 8-3 score, surpassing seven grandmasters and four international masters in an event held to celebrate the 60th jubilee of the Bronshoi Skak Forening club.
He went undefeated and finished a point ahead of his closest rival, the Ukrainian international master Andrei Maksimenko.


Glatfelter (P.H.) (GLT,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


SOCCER REPORT
United States
Bora Milutinovic's downfall as coach of the United States soccer team apparently occurred because he lost points with two men that the president of the United States Soccer Federation listens to the most when it comes to soccer.


Eli Lilly and Upjohn Report Sharp Increases in Earnings
Helped by sales growth overseas and weakness in the dollar, many big pharmaceutical companies are having the best first quarter in several years, but analysts said the drug makers might face rougher waters ahead as bulk purchasers insist on price discounts.
Yesterday, Eli Lilly &amp; Company reported an 18.9 percent gain in its earnings, while the Upjohn Company posted a 12.5 percent increase.
Both companies' earnings exceeded Wall Street's expectations.


A Church's Chief Executive Seeks the Target Audience
Like many other chief executives, H. Edwin Young has spent the 90's streamlining.
Through a series of land deals, he sold off chunks of a 180-acre site on which he had hoped to build a new headquarters.
That helped him slash long-term debt to $13 million from $26 million.
Like many other chief executives, Dr.
Young finds inspiration in best sellers by management gurus.


Analysts Int'l.  Corp.(ANLY,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


In Vietnam War's Costs, the Poor Bore More Than Their Share
To the Editor:
If Vietnam proved anything, it's the absurdity of Jude Wanniski's contention (letter, April 14) that "in a representative democracy such as ours, the whole of the nation shares equally in the costs history extracts from us." Vietnam demonstrated that equally shared cost was no longer a feature of American democracy.


Alfa Corp.(ALFA,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Reds Get Santiago
The Cincinnati Reds signed BENITO SANTIAGO to a one-year contract yesterday, ending weeks of uncertainty for one of the major leagues' best defensive catchers.
Santiago, 30, was one of the free agents working out in Homestead, Fla.
He made $3.8 million last year with Florida and led National League catchers in assists.


A struggling Kmart chooses Campbell Mithun to replace Ross Roy on its account.
THE Kmart Corporation, struggling with merchandising and leadership problems that threaten to render the retailer as outmoded as blue-light specials, is changing agencies to help solve its myriad difficulties.
Kmart, the nation's third-largest retailer, said late yesterday that it had selected Campbell Mithun Esty in Minneapolis to handle its account, with billings estimated at $125 million to $175 million.
Campbell Mithun replaces Ross Roy Communications in Bloomfield Hills, Mich., which has handled the account for 26 years but declined to participate in a review.


Was It Temptation at Tiffany's?
Scott Jackson dropped out of Food and Maritime High School in the 10th grade, but he did not give up on life: He earned his high school equivalency diploma and in the next decade worked as a security guard at institutions like the South Street Seaport and the New York Public Library, where he won promotion after promotion.
One day in June 1990, as he walked the streets looking for a second job, he entered Tiffany &amp; Company for the first time.


Gay Movie Theater Allowed to Reopen
A gay movie theater in Queens that was closed two months ago, after inspectors said they saw numerous sex acts occur, was allowed to reopen yesterday under conditions meant to guarantee that the sex will stop.
The theater, the Earle, at 73-07 37th Road in Jackson Heights, is one of two gay theaters that New York City officials closed this year along with a gay club in an effort to curb transmission of the AIDS virus.


U.N. Chief Regrets Iraq's Attitude Toward Offer to Allow Oil Sales
Secretary General Boutros Boutros-Ghali "regrets" Iraq's seeming rejection of a United Nations plan to allow Baghdad to sell up to $2 billion in oil over six months to pay for its food, medicine and other urgent needs, the Secretary General's spokesman said today.
The United Nations has received no formal comment from Iraq on whether it intends to take up the offer, extended in a Security Council resolution passed on Friday.
But in Baghdad on Saturday, orchestrated demonstrations against the resolution and results of a long session between President Saddam Hussein and his ministers have left the impression that Iraq does not intend to make use of the offer any time soon.


Pataki Finds Model Family for Tax Plan
John and Alyce Muller have two cute children, a house in the suburbs and a dog named Snuggles, and today they found the Governor of New York standing on their front lawn here, proclaiming them average New Yorkers who would benefit greatly from his plan to cut state income taxes.
Aides to Gov.
George E. Pataki said it was no easy chore to find a couple who would meet their idea of what the average New Yorker is like.
But the Mullers seemed to fit their bill: middle income, Republican, and they just happened to live down the street from the Suffolk County Police Department's heliport, where Mr.
Pataki flew in this morning for a quick campaign-style strike against the Assembly Democrats in the battle over the state budget.


Leagues Unimpressed by Umpires' Offer
Major league umpires lowered their salary demands yesterday, but the salaries in their new proposal weren't low enough to prompt the American and National leagues to consider ending their lockout of the umpires.
"We're very discouraged," said Robert Kheel, the leagues' negotiator, adding that the proposal was "grossly excessive and does not form the basis of optimism for an early agreement."


INSIDE
A Boston Marathon First
In the 99th running, both the male and female winners of Boston's most famous race -- Cosmas Ndeti of Kenya and Uta Pippig of Germany -- repeated as champions.
Page B9. 'I Didn't Kill My Babies'
Waneta E. Hoyt took the witness stand in her own defense to recall the deaths of her five young children a quarter century ago and to deny that she had murdered them.
Page B1.
Of 2 Lengthy Court Battles
The Supreme Court refused to review a ruling that race-based promotions are unfair to whites and heard arguments on protecting endangered species.
Page A14.


TDK Electronics Picks New Agency
The TDK Electronics Corporation, the maker of consumer and professional audio, video and computer recording products, said yesterday that it had selected Merkley Newman Harty in New York, a unit of the Omnicom Group, to handle its account, which for the last three years had been handled by Lord, Dentsu &amp; Partners in New York, a joint venture of Dentsu Inc. and Young &amp; Rubicam Inc.
The billings were estimated at $5 million to $6 million.


Syquest Technology Inc.(SYQT,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Shopkeeper Claims Jackpot
Pravin T. Patel, 40, of Jersey City, and his wife, Sumitra, 37, came forward yesterday to claim their half of last week's $35.7 million lottery jackpot.
The storekeeper said he would share his fortune -- a yearly check for more than $600,000 -- with his three children and 60 other relatives who live in New Jersey.
The owner of the other winning ticket, bought in Essex County, has yet to come forward.


Human Rights TV Series Transcends Politics
To the Editor:
In response to your television review (April 8) of "Rights and Wrongs: Human Rights Television," allow me to share our program's mission -- minus the political labels.


Franklin Electric Co.(FELE,NNMX) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 1


CHRONICLE
The reason 500 people are coming to New York this week for the International Citizens' Assembly to Stop the Spread of Weapons could hardly be more serious.
"We want to demonstrate that while people are talking about renewing the Treaty on the Nonproliferation of Nuclear Weapons at the United Nations, we are also concerned about the proliferation of guns on the streets of our cities," CORA WEISS, a founder of Peace Action, a sponsor of the assembly, said yesterday.
"We want to say, 'Stop the proliferation of all weapons, big guns or little ones.' "


BUSINESS DIGEST
Stocks Reverse Course On Dollar Drop and Oil Surge The stock market fell in the last hour of trading after rising for much of the day, brought down by rising oil prices and the continued weakness in the dollar.
The Dow was up as much as 30 points before closing down 12.80 points at 4,195.38.


Corrections
An illustration with the Cuttings column on Sunday omitted the names of the plants shown.
They were, from left, henbit, toadflax and Queen Anne's lace.


The Brain's Evolution In the Family of Man
Running somewhat athwart the current fashion for diversity, Roger Bingham, host of "The Human Quest," asks, "Why are we so alike?" In the enlightening four-hour series tonight and tomorrow night at 8 on PBS, the answer is traced to the brain, mankind's common heritage.
Be it Britain or Bali, similarities abound: the way mothers coo to babies; the facial expressions that signal pleasure, anger, fear; the craving for fats, sugar and salt; sexual possessiveness.
All are seen here as adaptations to needs rooted in countless societies over thousands of years.


Attari Road Journal; At the Border, Smiles and Tea (and Hidden Tanks)
This quiet way station on the frontier between India and Pakistan has been called Asia's Checkpoint Charlie.
But to many travelers who have passed this way, the comparison seems to mistake something in the complex relations between India and Pakistan.
As in Germany after World War II, politics drove a cleaver through the heart of a nation, sundering India in 1947 into two hostile states.
Yet at this remote junction in the Punjab, the heartland state of India that was divided by partition in 1947, there is none of the relentless enmity that made the crossing point in Berlin so chilly a junction of the cold war.


Brothers Arrested in Smuggling
Two brothers from India were arrested yesterday in connection with a conspiracy to smuggle aliens from India into the United States through Belize and Mexico, prosecutors said.
The brothers, Gurmit Singh, 27, and Harvinder Singh, 23, who live in Roselle Park, were also charged in a Federal indictment with laundering some $285,000 from drug trafficking.


Hancock Holding (HBHC,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Shellshocked by Yen, Companies In Japan Still Find Ways to Cope
The Mazda Motor Corporation is shutting its Japanese factories for two days this month and two next month to cut production of cars bound for the United States that it can no longer sell.
Mitsubishi Materials is shutting a zinc smelter in northern Japan.
Sumitomo Metal Industries, a steelmaker, is planning to eliminate 1,500 more people from its work force by March 1997.
These measures, which are at least partly due to the sharp appreciation of the Japanese yen, is beginning to mount.
Economists and even Government officials say the recent surge in the exchange value of the yen threatens to send Japan back into a recession from which it was just emerging after three years.
The pressure is expected to worsen now that the Government's emergency economic plan, announced Friday, has failed to halt the yen's rise.


Megachurches -- Second article of a series: The Gospels of Management; The Minister as Marketer: Learning From Business
In a vivid encounter with the allures of secular culture a few years back, the Rev.
Walt Kalle stad, a Lutheran pastor in suburban Phoenix, found a hard lesson for the church.
At a shopping mall, he came across a long, snaking line of people waiting to see the movie "Batman."


Losses on Real Estate Cut Pataki's Taxes Last Year
Gov.
George E. Pataki earned $121,000 from his law practice and legislative salary last year, according to tax returns made available today.
But a variety of losses on real-estate holdings and his family farm and deductions for legislative expenses kept his Federal taxes to $10,398.
Mr.
Pataki also paid $4,617 in state taxes.


RESULTS PLUS
N.H.L.
Hat Trick for Turgeon  Pierre Turgeon, continuing his strong play since joining the Canadiens, scored three goals last night, lifting Montreal to a 5-2 victory over visiting Washington.
The victory moved Montreal within 2 points of the Rangers and Whalers, who are tied for the eighth and final playoff spot in the Eastern Conference.
The Canadiens have seven games remaining.
Turgeon, acquired in a trade with the Islanders on April 5, scored on a power play in the first period.
He also connected twice in the third period, including an empty-net goal with 21 seconds remaining.
Since being acquired by the Canadiens, Turgeon has scored eight goals in eight games. (AP)
STARS 2, CANUCKS 2: Kevin Hatcher's goal with 10 minutes 48 seconds to go in regulation at Dallas produced the fourth tie in as many meetings between the teams. (AP) COLLEGE BASEBALL  Russo Wins No. 600  Coach Joe Russo of St.
John's notched his 600th victory yesterday as the Red Storm (6-10) was a 15-6 winner over Iona (13-14-1) at McCallen Field in Queens.
Russo, a former St.
John's player who has been the team's coach for the last 23 years, has a career record of 600-304, with four Big East Conference titles and two College World Series appearances.


Churla Is Suspended
Dallas right wing SHANE CHURLA was suspended for four games without pay for his role in an incident Sunday afternoon against Chicago, the National Hockey League announced last night.
Churla, who leads the Stars with 184 penalty minutes, resisted the linesman, MARK VINES, during the third-period brawl in Dallas's 2-0 victory over Chicago.
Churla's suspension began with last night's game against the Vancouver Canucks.


Simpson Industries(SMPS,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Global Marine (GLM,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Haverty Furniture Cos.  (HAVT,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Time Warner to Sell Control Of Six Flags for $1 Billion
Time Warner Inc. announced yesterday its expected $1 billion deal to sell control of its Six Flags theme park business, in a move that will help it reduce its huge debt load.
Time Warner, the media and entertainment giant, also reported that it had narrowed its losses and increased its operating cash flow in the first quarter, as its five core businesses reported operating gains.


Infomercials Coming To the Internet
The infomercial, the program-length television commercial that poses as a program, is making its way onto the Internet.
Williams Television Time in Santa Monica, Calif., an agency specializing in infomercial advertising, said yesterday that two infomercial clients would introduce by the end of the month "extended informational" commercials on the Internet, the worldwide computer network.


Pat Robertson Has Often Spoken Out Against Anti-Semitism
To the Editor:
Frank Rich is guilty in "Bait and Switch II" (column, April 6) of the same antireligious prejudice that the religious broadcaster Pat Robertson is working so hard to combat.
Mr.
Rich's claim that Mr.
Robertson's views are at odds with the statements made by Ralph Reed, executive director of the Christian Coalition, before the Anti-Defamation League on April 3 are absurd.
Mr.
Robertson is an outspoken critic of anti-Semitism and longtime defender of Israel and the Jewish people.
The record is clear:


On Witness Stand, Woman Denies Killing Her 5 Young Children
Waneta E. Hoyt took the witness stand in her own defense today to recall the deaths of her five young children a quarter-century ago and to deny that she had murdered them.
In a voice so faint that she was continually instructed to speak up, Mrs.
Hoyt disputed the detailed confession that she had signed last spring after being interrogated by state police investigators.


U.N. Won't Say Which Side Killed Peacekeeper in Bosnia
The United Nations, apparently seeking to avoid confrontation with the Serbs, said today that it was unclear who killed a French soldier here on Saturday.
Lieut.
Col.
Gary Coward, the military spokesman for the United Nations peacekeeping force, said a first bullet fired at Cpl.
Eric Hardoin unquestionably came from a Serbian position.
But, he added, a second shot fired just three seconds later might conceivably have come from the Bosnian Government side.


Margaret Ryan Tribute
A concert in memory of Margaret Kahn Ryan is to be given at the Metropolitan Opera House on Thursday at 5 P.M.
Mrs.
Ryan served on the Met's board from 1956 until 1981, when she became an honorary director.
She worked on fund drives for the company, and her personal donations enabled the Met to offer new productions of several operas, including "Don Carlo" and "Cosi Fan Tutte." Among those taking part in the concert, which is free and open to the public, are the mezzo-sopranos Marilyn Horne and Frederica von Stade, the soprano Hei-Kyung Hong, the tenor Paul Groves, several members of the Metropolitan Opera Orchestra, and James Levine, the company's music director.
Remaining tickets are available at the box office.
Information: (212) 362-6000.


Arts Library to Close a Floor
The New York Public Library for the Performing Arts at Lincoln Center has announced that it will close its third-floor research collections on June 26 for two and a half months to install a new heating and ventilation system.
The divisions involved are the Billy Rose Collection, the Dance Collection, the Music Division, and the Rodgers and Hammerstein Archives of Recorded Sound.
The renovations, to be financed with $2 million in city capital funds, will include a humidity control system to improve the conservation of research material and new mechanisms for air circulation and fire safety.
The collections are expected to reopen on Sept. 18, although minor construction is to continue for 12 more weeks.


Mayor's Rationale for Selling Three Public Hospitals Facing Strong Criticism
Five members of the board of directors of New York City's Health and Hospitals Corporation have harshly criticized a report that Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani has used as a rationale for trying to sell three of the city's public hospitals.
The report, prepared by the consulting firm of J. P. Morgan, was commissioned by the Mayor's office to evaluate the financial feasibility of selling Coney Island Hospital, Elmhurst Hospital Center and Queens Hospital Center.
It concluded that the hospitals were a financial drain on the city and could probably attract buyers.


Officer Injured in Scuffle at Coney Island
A police officer was injured by a bottle thrown during a scuffle with a group of youths at Coney Island early yesterday morning, a police spokesman said.
A group of police officers moved into the area about 1:15 A.M. to disperse a disorderly group of more than 500 youths near West 12th Street and Surf Avenue, which is adjacent to the Coney Island amusement park, he said.
The police arrested 12 youths on charges of reckless endangerment, resisting arrest, assault or disorderly conduct.


Mighty Mary Sails Into A 3-Way Tie
It pays to carry along a boat's most critical spare parts when it comes to America's Cup racing.
The crew on Mighty Mary found that out today when its 27-foot spinnaker pole broke in half like a bent matchstick.
The mishap could have robbed Mighty Mary of its lead in a crucial race against Stars &amp; Stripes.
But the Mighty Mary crew was able to simply reach out for a second pole -- a $20,000 carbon-fiber strut -- and set it in place before Dennis Conner's team could catch up.
Mighty Mary won by 41 seconds.


2 Chiron Executives Quit To Join Smaller Enterprises
The Chiron Corporation, a leading biotechnology company, lost two senior executives today to smaller privately held enterprises in which it owns minority stakes.
The departures illustrate the difficulty that entrepreneurial companies like Chiron have as they grow and mature into mainstream corporations.
Moreover, in a relatively new field like biotechnology, there is much greater potential for executives to realize substantial wealth by joining a privately held company in its youth rather than remaining at a company like Chiron that has long been public.


On My Mind; Dole In Bosnia
Senator Robert Dole is talking about how the United States got into and fought the war in Vietnam.
He calls it incrementalism and is critical.
He also talks about Bosnia and what he intends to do about that.
As he speaks I remember another April day.
I was walking down a street in Saigon, from the telegraph office where I had filed a story to an outdoor cafe a few blocks away.
I used to have an early evening drink there with American officers.


Larry Doby Gets A.L. Post
Larry Doby, the first black to play in the American League, was hired today as a special assistant to Gene Budig, the American League president.
Doby joined the Indians in 1947, the same year Jackie Robinson made his debut for the Brooklyn Dodgers.
Doby hit .301 in 1948 as the Indians won the A.L. pennant.


Met Orchestra Gets A 14.7 Percent Raise
The Metropolitan Opera and Local 802 of the American Federation of Musicians have reached an agreement on a new contract for the company's orchestra, 15 months before the expiration of the current contract, the Met announced yesterday.
The new contract is to run from 1996 to 2001, and includes a 14.75 percent wage increase as well as increases in rehearsal pay and improvements in benefits.
When the contract ends, base pay for a Met orchestra player will be $1,557 a week, or $80,964 a year, up from $1,305 this season, or $67,860 a year.


Temple-Inland Inc.(TIN,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 1


Universal Foods Corp.(UFC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


It's Home, Sweet Home As Magic Clinch a Title
Magic 111, Bullets 110
The Orlando Magic claimed the Atlantic Division title as well as the top seeding in the Eastern Conference playoffs with a 111-100 victory over the Washington Bullets last night in Orlando, Fla.


Lions Find Peace Without Rankings
FOR most group-living species, the definition of social means knowing your place and showing it at every opportunity.
In rare cases, however, the assembled animals do not bother forming a dominance hierarchy, preferring instead a form of relaxed anarchy.
The most outstanding example of a species that lives in a stable group without bothering to assign rank to its citizens is the lion.
Within a pride, the resident males clearly dominate the females, and the adult females in turn take precedence over the cubs when it comes to divvying up the prey.
But the great cats do not establish class systems along gender lines, as social animals usually do.
If there are multiple males in the pride, they all behave like lazy, surly, demanding princes; while the females, who may number 20 per group, live in a democratic sisterhood, with no single lioness displaying pretensions of royalty.


Federal Paper Board Co.  (FBO,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 25


Darling International Inc reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 1


Ndeti and Pippig Transform the Big Run Into a Rerun
They stood side by side -- Cosmas Ndeti of Kenya holding three fingers aloft, Uta Pippig of Germany holding two -- signifying their consecutive victories in the Boston Marathon, one having silenced a legion of doubters, the other having charmingly satisfied all expectations, both having combined to establish a first in the event.
It happens year after the year.
The experts predict that Ndeti will fail in Boston because he runs infrequently and unimpressively elsewhere.
Yet, today, in the 99th running, he became only the third man to win Boston three times in succession, joining Clarence DeMar (1922-24) and Bill Rodgers (1978-80) in this racing hat trick.


What Will a Dollar Buy? A Ticket to See the Mets
In a bid to lure fans back to the ball park, the Mets announced a promotional package today that includes half-priced refreshments during the month of May and $1 tickets for two games on opening weekend at Shea Stadium.
David Howard, the Mets' vice president for business affairs, said all tickets for the Mets' games against the St.
Louis Cardinals on April 29 and 30 will cost $1.
All individual game tickets already purchased for those dates can be taken to the Mets' ticket office at Shea Stadium for a rebate.


In Vietnam War's Costs, the Poor Bore More Than Their Share; They Didn't Die in Vain
To the Editor:
Although it is said that Robert S. McNamara was always a hard man to like, you were very hard on him, and inaccurate, when stating in "Mr. McNamara's War" (editorial, April 12) that our soldiers in Vietnam died "platoon by platoon, for no purpose."


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League  AL -- Named Larry Doby special assistant to the league president.


Valmont Industries(VALM,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 1


First National Bancorp (Ga.) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


First Interstate Bancorp (I,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


First Tennessee National Corp.(FTEN,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Beijing Rebuffs U.S. on Halting Iran Atom Deal
The United States failed yesterday to persuade China to end its nuclear cooperation with Iran or to improve its human rights performance, as representatives from 174 countries gathered at the United Nations to decide the fate of a treaty that has limited the spread of nuclear weapons for a quarter of a century.
Secretary of State Warren Christopher and the Chinese Foreign Minister, Qian Qichen, discussed their differences in a two-hour meeting and lunch at the Waldorf-Astoria Hotel hours before the start of the monthlong conference to extend the 25-year-old nuclear treaty.


Washington Memo; Debate on Flat Tax Revives Simplicity vs. Fairness Issue
Three years ago, when Edmund G. Brown Jr. made his proposal for a flat tax the keystone of his campaign for the Democratic Presidential nomination, the idea fell -- well -- flat.
Bill Clinton mocked it as a sop to the rich that would wreck Social Security and inflict a crushing blow to the poor.
In New York, where Mr.
Brown finished third in the primary behind Mr.
Clinton and Paul S. Tsongas, voters who were interviewed after they left their polling places were decidedly unenthusiastic about Mr.
Brown's tax plan.


Supreme Court Roundup; Supreme Court Lets Stand a Decision That Found an Affirmative-Action Plan Unfair
The Supreme Court ended one chapter in the long-running legal battle over the integration of the Birmingham, Ala., Fire Department today, when it refused to review a lower-court ruling that race-based promotions were unfair to 14 white firefighters.
Without comment, the Justices turned down appeals filed by Birmingham officials and by a group of black firefighters from a Federal lower court's decision invalidating the promotion plan, part of a 1981 consent decree that promoted white and black firefighters to the rank of lieutenant on a 1-to-1 basis until the number of black lieutenants equaled the 28 percent of the surrounding county's work force that was black.


Intel and Sun Register Strong Profit Surges
Fueled by a strong computer market, the Intel Corporation and Sun Microsystems Inc. both reported financial results today that far exceeded the most optimistic of Wall Street analysts' expectations.
Intel attributed its strong financial results to a robust personal-computer market and the growing acceptance of its Pentium microprocessor.
For the first time, revenues from Pentium exceeded those from the 486, a predecessor chip, Intel said.
Intel's main competitors, Advanced Micro Devices Inc. and the Cyrix Corporation, have both said they will not be able to ship Pentium-equivalent microprocessors until the first quarter of next year, leaving tiny Nexgen Inc. the only company with a comparable chip on the market.


Carlisle Plastics (CPA,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Editorial Notebook: Thomas Jefferson and 'Dashing Sally'; In Love - or Just Master and Slave?
If it is true that books and newspapers reach the afterlife, then Thomas Jefferson, voracious reader, is surely having a fitful time in that great Monticello in the sky.
From the right, the Jeffersonian declaration that "all men are created equal" is under heavy attack from neo-Victorian elitists.
From the tattered remnant that remains of the left, both Jefferson and the Declaration of Independence are derided as hypocritical on the grounds that Jefferson owned slaves.
Historians are right to dismiss the charge because it applies contemporary standards to a man who lived two centuries ago.
As the Jefferson scholar Douglas Wilson points out, the question of why Jefferson held slaves gets us nowhere.
The more interesting question is: Why did a man who inherited slaves and a fortune dependent upon them, and who lived in a society that was inured to slavery, decide at an early age that slavery was morally wrong and forcefully declare that it ought to be abolished?
The answer is that Jefferson was exceptional, ahead of his time -- but not completely free of it.


No Headline


Western Digital Corp.(WDC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 1


Schwab (Charles) Corp.(SCH,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


New Planes for the Intrepid


Guidant Corp.(GDT,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Market Place; A buyback and the economy cloud Du Pont's prospects.
THE Du Pont Company, which brought the world nylon, Teflon and spandex, is now bringing forth the world's largest stock buyback.
Last week, as a result of the Seagram Company's shifting interest from chemicals to entertainment, Du Pont bought 156 million of its shares back from Seagram, its largest shareholder, for $8.8 billion.
As a result of the huge transaction, analysts are recalculating their earnings estimates for E.I. du Pont de Nemours &amp; Company; in terms of an investment outlook, the reaction is split.
Because there are fewer shares outstanding, Du Pont could see its earnings rise automatically by as much as 50 cents a share.
But this good news is offset by a crushing amount of debt -- it now fills up more than 70 percent of the company's balance sheet, compared with 39 percent before the buyback.
Credit agencies have lowered their ratings on some company bonds until the debt is reduced.


First Chicago (FNB,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


F.A.A. to Install New Radar At Nation's Busiest Airports
The Federal Aviation Administration pledged today that by the fall of 1996, the nation's busiest airports would be equipped with advanced radar systems that reduce the risk of planes colliding on runways.
That schedule is nearly four years behind the one the agency described to Congress in 1990 and a decade after safety experts raised alarm about the dangers of runway accidents.


Dauphin Deposit (DAPN,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Smart &amp; Final Inc.(SMF,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 26


Answering Whitman's Remarks
High school students and politicians joined Walter Fields Jr., the political director of the New Jersey N.A.A.C.P., as he pledged yesterday to mobilize black voters against Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman, no matter what office she might seek in the future.
Mrs.
Whitman has apologized for an interview published in Britain last week, in which she said she had been told that young black men make a game of seeing how many children they can "sire" out of wedlock.
Mr.
Fields and others, many of whom question the existence of such a game, said that her apology cannot erase the damage her words caused.


American Standard Cos.  (ASD,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Unicom Corp.(UCM,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Safety-Kleen Corp.(SK,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 25


In a Louisiana Bayou Town, 'Uncle Pat' Is the Law
This town, surrounded by swamps, has one road in, one road out.
If Police Chief Clarence (Uncle Pat) Matherne parks his police cruiser sideways across it, it is a dragnet.
Crime fighting is not much more complicated than that in Jean Lafitte, a town of about 2,000 people -- including a considerable number of first and second cousins -- just 30 minutes south of New Orleans.
The Chief cannot remember the last time this town had a killing.
And armed robberies, drive-by shootings and other ugly things happen to other people, not to his people.


Micro Warehouse Inc.(MWHS,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Green Tree Financial Corp.(GNT,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Armstrong World Industries Inc.(ACK,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Matching Whiskies With Food: Best in the Smallest of Doses
IN Scotland, those who overindulge in single-malt whiskies sometimes find their way home in wheelbarrows.
This is not the image the distillers are seeking to cultivate abroad.
They want imbibers to savor the aroma of the amber liquid and to hold it in their mouths like a first-growth Bordeaux -- not throw back their heads and toss it off from a shot glass.


Val Telberg, 85, An Experimenter In Photomontage
Val Telberg, a Surrealist-influenced photomontagist who collaborated with Anais Nin, died April 5 in Southampton Hospital.
He was 85 and had lived in Sag Harbor, L.I., since 1968.
The cause was heart failure, said his wife, Lelia Katayen.
Mr.
Telberg was born of Finnish parents in Moscow in 1910 and was reared in northern China.
He earned a bachelor's degree from Wittenberg College in Springfield, Ohio, in 1932, and after pursuing a business career in China, settled in New York City in 1938.
A job as a photographer sparked an interest in experimental photography and film and led to study at the Art Students League of New York in the early 1940's.
Around that time, Mr.
Telberg began experimenting with the multiple-image photographic technique for which he became known.
His photomontages, which sometimes were mural-size, consisted of layered images of figures in motion and had a dreamlike weightlessness associated with Surrealism.
He had his first major show at the Brooklyn Museum in 1948.
In the mid-1950's he collaborated with Nin, creating images for the 1958 edition of her book "The House of Incest."
Works by Mr.
Telberg, who also made paintings, sculptures and films, are part of many public collections, including those in the Museum of Modern Art, the Metropolitan Museum of Art, the Brooklyn Museum and the Los Angeles County Museum of Art.
In 1983 the San Francisco Museum of Modern Art organized a retrospective of his photomontages.
His most recent one-man show was at the Laurence Miller Gallery in SoHo in 1992.
Mr.
Telberg's first marriage ended in divorce.
In addition to his second wife, he is survived by a son, Rurick, of Dobbs Ferry, N.Y.; a daughter, Tamara Telberg De Petris of Manhattan, and four grandchildren.


Alou Beats Showalter in 'All-Star Game Preview'
Buck Showalter of the Yankees and Felipe Alou of the Expos managed against each other tonight as Montreal edged New York, 2-1, in an exhibition game.
They used to manage against each other in the Class A Florida State League and they will be doing it again this summer in the All-Star Game.
Since the Yankees (70-43) and the Expos (74-40) had the best records in the American and National leagues during the strike-shortened 1994 season, the leagues have designated Showalter and Alou as the All-Star managers for the game in Arlington, Tex., on July 11.
The managers of the teams who appeared in the previous World Series are usually selected, but there was no World Series in 1994.


Bankers Trust New York Corp.(BT,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Corrections
An article on Monday about an expedition to find the source of the Mekong River misstated the location of the Rup-sa Pass in northwest China in some editions.
It is at the western end of the river, not the eastern end.
The article also misidentified a British member of the expedition.
He was Sebastian Guinness, not Brian Guinness.


After 9 Days, Reconciliation at Simpson Trial


Mayor Says Bus Companies Scuttle Tentative Strike Pact
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani yesterday said the private companies that provide busing to New York City's schoolchildren had scuttled a tentative agreement between his office and the union representing school bus drivers to avert a looming strike.
He accused the companies of acting as a cartel to preserve the status quo and maintain their profits.


Frontier Corp.(FRO,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Opening Day Nod Is Shifting to Jones From Saberhagen
Bret Saberhagen was one of the top pitchers in the National League and the centerpiece of the Mets' pitching staff in 1994, but it appears more and more likely that he won't be the Mets' starting pitcher when they open the season in Colorado on April 26.
Saberhagen said today that he had been approached by both Manager Dallas Dallas Green and the pitching coach, Greg Pavlick, about pitching the third game of the season -- the home opener against the Cardinals at Shea Stadium on April 28 -- rather than the season opener.
No official decision has been made, but if Saberhagen is bumped, he will probably be replaced by Bobby Jones, the Mets' No. 3 starter, with Pete Harnisch the logical choice to pitch the second game in Colorado.
Jones is ahead of Saberhagen in terms of fitness and arm preparation, and he impressed Green with four no-hit innings Monday against the Braves.


Moments Of Inspired Insanity
In his three sonatas, Opus 10, Beethoven performs radical renovations on houses built by his predecessors.
The vestiges of sonata-form practice are visible, but the C-minor's first movement, for example -- with its sudden excursions to C major, then G-flat minor -- jolt the ear from any Classical-era expectations.
Alfred Brendel's second Beethoven recital, on Monday at Carnegie Hall, began with these three pieces and ended with the "Hammerklavier" Sonata.
In the last, Beethoven is his own architect; no one has built anything like it before or after.
The tools are also different, namely a piano of newly developed construction: larger, wider and more powerful than the clear, discreet instrument of the early sonatas.
If the Opus 10 pieces shock, it is because we have Mozart to measure them against.
The "Hammerklavier" is by itself, a work of sheer madness yet insane in the divinely Platonic sense.
Were it not for the sonata's breathtaking freedom of thought and utter confidence in exercising it, we would quickly have its author put away.
The fugue is obsessed with a trilling, angular subject and, page after savage page, will simply not let it go.
The slow movement is a long and arduous trail of discovery; the quiet flurry of octaves that immediately follows is musical throat-clearing at its most sublime.


Morton Int'l.(MII,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Asian Rhinos and Elephants Go Quietly
To the Editor:
Re "Of Rhinos, Elephants and Humans," your April 11 editorial on the need for international agencies to recognize the economic importance of African rhinos and elephants:
While all eyes are on their better-off African cousins, Asian elephants and rhinos are quietly disappearing.
Although there are 600,000 remaining African elephants, we estimate fewer than 65,000 Asian elephants throughout their range from India to Indonesia.


Johnson Wants to Compete in Atlanta
MAGIC JOHNSON, whose brilliant National Basketball Association career was cut short in 1991 after he tested positive for the AIDS virus, wants to play again in the Olympics.
"It's his desire to participate in the Olympics in 1996," Johnson's agent, LON ROSEN, said yesterday.
"He's been playing for the last year and a half on his tour. The team is 45-0."


Market Place; Circus Circus Enterprises, some say, is worth the higher ante.
INVESTORS who like gambling but prefer betting on casino companies to betting in casinos should take a look at Circus Circus Enterprises, even after the recent run-up in its stock.
Analysts on both the buy and sell sides, as well as some rivals in the green-felt jungle, say that the Las Vegas, Nev., company, after two years of executive-suite turmoil, will prosper with the return of two talented managers.
The new management, the argument goes, will be able to capitalize on Circus Circus's strong cash flow, three large casinos on the Las Vegas Strip, plus its smaller properties in Las Vegas, on the Colorado River, in Reno, on two Mississippi river-boat casinos and on a one-third stake in the biggest commercial tourist attraction in Canada, a casino in Windsor, Ontario.


City Council Orders Review of 33 Business Improvement Districts
The City Council has ordered the 33 business improvement districts in New York City to open their books for an investigation that seeks to determine whether they have amassed too much power without adequate oversight.
The review, called for in a letter to the districts' directors from Herbert Berman, chairman of the council's Finance Committee, seems mainly directed at one of the largest districts, the Grand Central Partnership, which has been the subject of growing scrutiny in recent weeks over allegations of financial wrongdoing and assaults on the homeless.


China Breaks Ranks With Other Nuclear Nations on Treaty
China, publicly breaking ranks with the other acknowledged nuclear-weapons powers, said today that it could back an extension of the nuclear nonproliferation treaty for either an indefinite period or a series of fixed periods of no less than 25 years' duration.
The other four nuclear-weapons powers -- the United States, Britain, France and Russia -- are lobbying for an indefinite and unconditional extension of the Treaty on the Nonproliferation of Nuclear Weapons, which came into force in 1970 and is due for renewal this year.
They argue that any other outcome would weaken the treaty.


Pentagon, Under G.O.P. Fire, Defends Its Somalia Security
The Pentagon said today that there had been no serious security breach involving classified information given to United Nations peacekeepers in Somalia by United States military forces there.
Republican lawmakers skeptical of the value of joint operations with United Nations forces had asserted that reams of highly classified information that could have endangered United States intelligence techniques lay unattended in a vacant office days before United Nations forces pulled out last month.


Fire Rips Through Ossining's Historic Crescent


Jostens (JOS,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Truth Holds Key to Harvard Rejection Case
To the Editor:
"Harvard's Unseemly Haste," your confused April 13 editorial, fails to appreciate what happened in the case of Gina Grant.
Based on the information presented to Harvard's admissions committee, Ms.
Grant was terrific.
She stopped being terrific when Harvard found out that she had failed to disclose an enormously material fact.


Simpson Team Embraces A Witness It Skewered
The Police Department's principal evidence collector in the O. J. Simpson case finally completed his testimony today, and on his way out of the courtroom his main interrogator thanked him twice, another defense lawyer embraced him, and both Johnnie L. Cochran Jr. and Mr.
Simpson himself shook his hand heartily.
The bizarre spectacle suggested that the nine-day-long appearance by the witness, Dennis Fung, had been a standoff, one that both sides were happy to see end.
It hinted, too, at the peculiar bonds that can sometimes develop between even the fiercest combatants.


Widow of a Pan Am Crash Victim Is Awarded $19 Million
In one of the largest financial awards to an individual in the history of commercial airline disasters, a Federal jury on Long Island has awarded $19 million to the widow of one of 270 people killed in the 1988 bombing of Pan Am Flight 103 over Lockerbie, Scotland.
Lawyers for other plaintiffs against Pan Am said the size of the award -- in one of the first of more than 200 damage cases to be tried in connection with the bombing -- showed that juries were willing to assess extraordinarily high amounts for Pan Am's actions leading up to the bombing.
A separate jury had found the airline liable on the grounds that its security procedures had failed to prevent the bomb from getting on board.


Thurman, Rhodes and Carr to Enter Draft
Three more prominent underclassmen -- SCOTTY THURMAN of Arkansas, RODRICK RHODES of Kentucky and CHRIS CARR of Southern Illinois -- decided yesterday to declare for the National Basketball Association draft.
The possibility that any collective bargaining agreement reached between the N.B.A. and its players might include a salary cap for rookies has spurred a number of college stars to announce they were coming out.
Players have until May 15 to announce for the draft, which is scheduled for June 18 in Toronto.
Last year, 20 underclassmen declared and 12 were selected.


Mayor Takes Council to Court On Independent Police Panel
The impasse between Mayor Rudolph W. Guiliani and the City Council over how to monitor police corruption moved to the courts yesterday as aides to the Mayor filed suit against the Council, saying its plan for an independent watchdog panel infringed on the Mayor's powers.
The lawsuit, which was filed in State Supreme Court, asserts that the law passed by the Council impedes on the Mayor's authority to manage and supervise the Police Department and its ability to fight corruption.


Jacobs Engineering Group (JEC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


METRO DIGEST
SCREENING TRIMS WELFARE APPLICANTS
Using a tough new screening process for welfare recipients, New York City has sharply reduced the number of childless, able-bodied adults accepted for benefits this year, Mayor Giuliani announced.
A1.
NEW YORK CITY


In Hebron, Many Israelis Pray for Change of Government
By the thousands, Israelis flooded into Hebron today to worship at the Cave of the Patriarchs shrine, prayers that for many were also a bitter anti-Government protest.
This is Passover week, when Israel slows to a crawl and many people skip work.
It has been seized by religious and political critics of Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin as an opportunity to rally large crowds and, they hope, show that his peace policies lack popular support.


Huffy Corp.(HUF,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Yacht Races Delayed a Day
A fickle weather pattern prevented either a defenders or challengers race from getting under way today.
Postponed until Wednesday was a race between Team New Zealand's yacht, Black Magic 1, and One Australia.
With a 4-1 record in the Louis Vuitton challengers finals, the crew on Black Magic 1 was poised to wrap up the best five-of-nine series.
With victory comes the right to challenge the San Diego Yacht Club for the America's Cup beginning May 6.


Topics of The Times; The Huddled Masses Had No Bridge
A pending House bill to cut billions in Federal spending seeks to eliminate $15 million for a history-defiling footbridge from New Jersey to Ellis Island.
Too bad the Senate's version leaves the money in place.
The bridge is Senator Frank Lautenberg's notion of essential spending at a time when crucial social programs are being chopped.
His parochialism is obvious.
The bridge is nothing more than an attempt to route tourists through his state who now go to the island by ferry from lower Manhattan.


Rubbermaid Inc.(RBD,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


A Cake Fit for Queens


Quno Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 26


Earnings Results Differ Broadly for Several Big Banks
Volatile trading markets led to strikingly different results among several large banking companies that reported first-quarter earnings yesterday.
Citicorp's profits surged largely because of increased revenue from currency trading, while the Bankers Trust New York Corporation posted a huge loss from its previously disclosed trading problems in emerging markets as well as a charge for a cost-cutting campaign.
Chemical Banking had weak trading results, but its cost-cutting efforts helped increase its profits as well.


District Attorney to Review Homeless Abuse by 'Squads'
The chairman of the Grand Central Partnership has asked the Manhattan District Attorney to investigate accusations from former employees that they beat homeless people to roust them from banks and other sites around Manhattan.
A spokesman for District Attorney Robert M. Morgenthau said the request was under review.
The spokesman, Gerald McKelvey, said, "We at this point are determining whether there are grounds for a criminal investigation of these complaints."


DOLLAR SETS LOWS VS. YEN AND MARK
The already beleaguered American dollar plunged to new post-World War II lows against the Japanese yen and the German mark in New York yesterday, shaking both the stock and bond markets.
Currency traders scrambled to sell dollars as Clinton Administration officials again threatened sanctions against Japan if the current round of automobile trade talks fail.


Livery-Cab Driver Killed
A livery-cab driver was struck and killed on Monday night by a stolen car being chased at up to 90 miles an hour through Washington Heights in Manhattan, the police said yesterday.
The victim, Manuel Reyes, 49, was struck while standing next to his cab at West 193d Street and Broadway by a car that had been stolen from a woman at 178th Street and St.
Nicholas Avenue, the police said.


For Top 2, Unity and Smiles
The Governor and the Mayor smiled, praised each other effusively and even shook hands twice before the cameras yesterday at City Hall.
They made every effort to make it seem as if they were friendly, though it still remained unclear if they actually like each other.
"Mayor," Gov.
George E. Pataki said to a beaming Rudolph W. Giuliani, "Let me say, you said the program appeared to be a success. I would disagree. It's been an extraordinary success."


Islanders and Salo Prove Full of Surprises
After one period tonight, the Quebec Nordiques probably thought they had the Islanders right where they wanted them.
So what if the Islanders led, 3-0, after one period?
After all, this is the same team that has squandered the exact same lead three times since March 14 -- each time losing the game.


U.S.C.'s Boselli Is Hungry, but the Pro Scouts Are Hungrier
Nuns vouch for him, pro scouts drool over him and Tony Mandarich will not be held against him.
National Football League teams are aching to take Southern California's Tony Boselli, a 6-foot-7-inch, 325-pound offensive tackle with stomach muscles.
If he lasts more than a half-hour in Saturday's draft, it will be a shock; if he lasts fewer seasons than Mandarich, it will be heresy.
Mandarich was the last offensive lineman to be selected as high as No. 2 over all, six years ago by Green Bay.
Injuries and illness led to his release in 1992.
Boselli, though, is in no way even a distant relative.
The Jacksonville Jaguars are expected to select Boselli with the second choice over all and, according to his college coach, John Robinson, Boselli has graded out better than the Hall-of-Famer-to-be Anthony Munoz.
"Best lineman I've ever coached," said Robinson, who at U.S.C. has had Munoz, Marvin Powell, Brad Budde, Keith Van Horne, Roy Foster, Don Mosebar and Bruce Matthews.


McGraw-Hill Inc. (MHP,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Multimedia Inc.(MMEDC,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Chemical Banking Corp.(CHL,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Other Worlds, Other Times
What, you might be wondering, is Rupert Murdoch up to these days, apart from wresting eye-popping tax breaks from Washington politicians?
Well, Mr.
Murdoch's Fox Broadcasting, still aggressively wooing the young audience dear to the scheming hearts of advertisers, is doing its best to make sure viewers focus on any world other than the world they live in.
Forget about what is really happening; fantasize about what might happen.
Diversions, diversions.
Going determinedly out of this world are two new one-hour adventure series: "Sliders," Wednesdays at 9 P.M., and "V.R. 5," Fridays at 8 P.M., just before "The X-Files," another spacey excursion into, using the catch-all term, the unknown.


Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corp.(FRE,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


HBO &amp; Co. (HBOC,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


The Pulitzer Prizes: Journalism and the Arts Bestow a Most Prestigious Honor
The Pulitzer Prizes were awarded yesterday by Columbia University in 21 categories for excellence in the arts and journalism.
PUBLIC SERVICE  The Virgin Islands Daily News
The Virgin Islands Daily News, a Gannett newspaper in St.
Thomas with a circulation of 16,400, was recognized for a 10-part series on crime that initiated many reforms.
The series, "Virgin Island Crime: Who's to Blame?" described a police department that seldom catches criminals, prosecutors who rarely win cases, judges who give light sentences and a special narcotics force riddled with corruption.


Kaman Corp.(KAMNA,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Personal Health
SMOKERS are finding it harder and harder to pursue their habit in socially acceptable ways.
Smoking has been banned in most public buildings, at work sites and on public transportation and is becoming increasingly unacceptable in restaurants, private homes and cars.
Smokers, no longer welcome to light up with cocktails or coffee, while reading the paper or doing their work, are being forced to go outside when they can no longer resist the urge.
Yet forty-six million American adults continue to smoke, mainly because nicotine, like heroin and crack cocaine, is an addictive drug.
For smokers who have become dependent on nicotine, each dose -- each cigarette -- sets up a craving for the next one.
If that craving is not satisfied, the smoker begins to experience withdrawal symptoms: anxiety, irritability, restlessness, difficulty concentrating, drowsiness, disturbed sleep, hunger and a strong urge for nicotine.


INSIDE
Bank-Lending Plan Dropped Federal regulators have dropped a proposal to require lenders to report on the race and sex of their small-business borrowers.
Page D1.
Court Chastises Congress
Ruling that Congress had overstepped the Constitutional bounds of separation of powers, the Supreme Court struck down a law.
Page A21.
Limited Gain in Experiment
Officials want to expand a Milwaukee program sending children to private school at public expense, despite its mixed results.
Page B12.
Guilty Plea for Solarz's Wife
The wife of the former Congressman pleaded guilty in a case linked to the House bank scandal.
Page B1.


Criminals and Children on File
On the theory that one picture is worth a thousand words in fighting crime, Hudson County unveiled a new, $300,000, CD-ROM-based identification system yesterday.


A Landmark Repair In Brooklyn


A Forecast From Thatcher
Take it from Margaret Thatcher, the former Prime Minister of Britain:
Gov. Christine Todd Whitman has "a very big future."


Earnings for Times Company Climbed 54% in First Quarter
The New York Times Company reported yesterday that its earnings rose 54 percent in the first quarter, reflecting higher profits in the company's operating groups as well as higher equity from forest products operations.
The company said its net income totaled $27.4 million, or 28 cents a share, compared with $17.7 million, or 17 cents a share, in the corresponding period a year earlier.


Breed Technologies Inc.(BDT,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


U.S. Petroleum Data
In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
Apr 14
Apr 7
Apr 15
1995
1995
1994
Gasoline production, daily
7.6
7.2
7.2
Distillate production, daily
3.2
3.2
3.2
Gasoline stocks
212.1
213.2
212.5
Distillate stocks
114.4
116.6
102.1
Crude imports, daily
6.5
6.8
6.2
Product imports, daily
1.0
1.6
2.0
Crude stocks
336.0
335.4
338.9
Crude production, daily
6.6
6.6
6.7
Refinery utilization (%)
91.0
90.5
90.9
Source: American Petroleum Institute


Bernice Levy Rudnick; Philanthropist, 77
Bernice Levy Rudnick, a philanthropist active with organizations in New York City and in Palm Beach, Fla., died on Saturday at her home in Manhattan.
She was 77 and also lived in Palm Beach.
The cause was cancer, according to a spokeswoman for Albert Einstein College of Medicine and Yeshiva University, which her family had long supported.


COMPANY BRIEFS
ELECTRONIC DATA SYSTEMS CORP., Dallas, a unit of the General Motors Corp., has signed a 10-year agreement worth about $100 million to manage the computer operations of the Birmingham Steel Corp.
MCKESSON CORP., San Francisco, a health care products concern, has announced the creation of Mckesson Health Systems, a new unit which will provide pharmaceutical products, information technology services and custom delivery services to health care providers.


Executive Changes
GREYHOUND LINES INC., Dallas, appointed Jack W. Haugsland executive vice president and chief operating officer and Steven L. Korby executive vice president and chief financial officer.
INTERNATIONAL FAMILY ENTERTAINMENT INC., Virginia Beach, Va., named Rick Sirvaitis president of advertiser sales.
He will be based in New York.


Sports of The Times; Let's Get The Show On the Road
ONE of baseball's grand old traditions has been exposed as a fraud.
We now know for a fact that baseball does not need six weeks of spring training.
This dawned on me the other day when I watched Don Mattingly stroke three hits to different corners of the outfield.
He also took advantage of a dawdling Dodger left fielder to break for second base.
In my book, Mattingly was in midseason form.


Truth Holds Key to Harvard Rejection Case; A Merciless Attitude
To the Editor:
Re "Harvard's Unseemly Haste" (editorial, April 13): As a single parent whose daughter has just gone through the process of early acceptance (to Swarthmore), I am especially sensitive to the story of Gina Grant.
When I saw my daughter at Andover this past weekend, I discussed at length the report that appeared April 8 in The Times.


Treasury Chief Goes to India And Is Upstaged by Iranian
Nobody told Robert E. Rubin that his first venture abroad as Treasury Secretary would be as much fun as one of Hillary Rodham Clinton's elephant rides.
But then again, no one told him he would have to stay one limousine behind the state visitor whom India is really out to impress: President Hashemi Rafsanjani of Iran, a country the Clinton Administration calls an "outlaw nation" that must be economically isolated.


Closing of a Gay Theater, the Site of High-Risk Sex, Is Upheld
New York City did not violate free-speech rights when it closed a gay movie theater at which health officials said they had found high-risk sexual activity, a judge has ruled.
The court decision could bolster the city's effort to reduce transmission of the AIDS virus through the increased inspection and regulation of commercial sex outlets, including pornographic theaters and bookstores, which have relied for protection on free-speech guarantees in the Federal and state constitutions.


Agents of Graft -- A special report.; A Cocaine Trail in Mexico Points to Official Corruption
On the night last summer that a jet loaded with cocaine touched down near this old mining town in the foothills of the western Sierra Madre, state police officers reported something odd at the local gas station.
At an hour when most of Sombrerete was already asleep, three Chevrolet Suburban wagons pulled up, driven by men they recognized as federal police agents.
The men quietly filled the vehicles with gas, an official familiar with the officers' report said, then headed toward the airstrip where the plane would land.


Corporate ExpressInc.(CEXP,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 25


Giants Sign Widmer as a Free Agent
COREY WIDMER, a part-time starter at middle linebacker last year, has signed again with the Giants and will probably back up MICHAEL BROOKS, who will move from the outside to the middle.


U.S. Disaster Relief Expert Missing on Chechnya Mission
An American disaster relief expert and five Russian aid workers have disappeared while on an emergency mission to Chechnya, the breakaway region under attack by Russian troops, the State Department and his friends said today.
The expert, Frederick C. Cuny, has worked on emergency relief projects in Biafra, Bosnia, Ethiopia and Somalia.
He was last heard from in Chechnya nine days ago.


Citicorp (CCI,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Polaroid Corp.(PRD,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 2


Gtech Holdings (GTK,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 25


Oak Industries(OAK,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Ancient Mosques Along Silk Road Are Falling Apart
The dazzling mosques, cupolas and minarets of this ancient caravan city, which have helped shape the sacred framework of Islamic life for more than a thousand years, are falling to pieces.
So are many of the mosaics and mausoleums of Samarkand and Khiva, this struggling country's two other fabled staging posts for the Silk Road, the route of spiritual, economic and intellectual commerce between Asia and Europe for centuries.
Ravaged not only by time and neglect, but also by disastrous irrigation policies that have left aged foundations so soaked and swollen that many have begun to crack and buckle, hundreds of buildings in the three cities are unlikely to make it to the next millennium.


How F.D.R.'s Disability Can Inspire Us
To the Editor:
My disability is part of me, but merely part of me.
It usually comes to mind when I encounter either illegal hazards such as four-inch-high "curbcuts," steps at entrances to new businesses or the condescending attitudes of their owners, who say, "Then use the back door by the dumpster; what does it matter?"


Russia Dusts Off an Old Hero for V-E Day


Boatmen's Bancshares (BOAT,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


In America; Safety? Too Costly.
How much is a life worth?
How much is lost, in dollars, when a little girl dies in agony because her pajamas were not flame-retardant?
Or when a baby boy is strangled because the slats on his crib were far enough apart to let him squeeze his head through?
If you were running the government, would you ask whether it would be cost-effective to make children's pajamas flame-resistant, or would you just order the manufacturers to do it?
Would you be moved by the pleas of crib manufacturers who told you it would cost them a bundle to move those slats closer together?


Restaurant Group Finds It's Niche: Raw, Vegetarian and Fast
IMAGINE sitting down to a feast of moussaka marinara, squash, olives and eggplant; Kenyan quiche made with seaweed noodles, corn and carrots; a little coconut soup, enhanced by corn and radishes, and for dessert, Hawaiian sunrise pie, a tropical concoction of bananas, Turkish pears and plums, topped off by a fruit shake sweetened with raisins and dates.
Sounds like the results of long hours over a hot stove, right?
Not so.
Thanks to the ingenuity and culinary expertise of a group of 10 young men who went to college together, these dishes, which are strictly vegetarian, are completely uncooked.


Mellon Bank Corp.(MEL,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


General Signal Corp.(GSX,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Barrick Gold (ABX,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Corrections
A theater review on Saturday about "The Fall Guy" at Playhouse 91 misstated the credits of the actor Mako, who directed the production.
He was nominated for a Tony Award for his work in "Pacific Overtures"; he did not win one.


Anderson &amp; Lembke In Management Shift
Anderson &amp; Lembke in New York said yesterday that as part of a reorganization of top management, Alan J. Zorfas, 35, would join the agency in the new position of client services director, leading all its account management teams.
He was previously general manager and client services director at Berlin Cameron Doyle in New York, which closed on March 31.
Also, Greg Jorgensen, 38, account services director, was promoted to the new position of operations director.
Both executives report to Hans Sydow, managing director.


All Kinds of Love That Include All Kinds
The forms of love that dare not speak their names are pretty scarce in this age of the tabloid talk shows.
But that hasn't stopped Edwin Sanchez, a new playwright of tremendous emotional conviction and uncertain technical skills, from looking for them.
How do you feel, for example, about a 30-year-old Roman Catholic priest in love with a 10-year-old boy?
The relationship -- which, it should probably be noted right away, is never consummated -- is at the center of "Clean," Mr.
Sanchez's rich, messy new play at the Hartford Stage Company.


Morrison Aims to Add I.B.C. Jewel to Crown
Tommy Morrison is eating alone these days.
"I hate this stuff," he said yesterday at Gallagher's, sitting at a table for two with his trainer while others at the news conference in Manhattan were eating banquet-style.
"I hate being around boxing people. I'd rather be back in the gym."


Alco Standard Corp.(ASN,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
9.00
9.00
6.75
DISCOUNT RATE
5.25
5.25
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
5.94
6.14
3.71
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.58
5.56
3.74
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.67
5.69
4.20
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.04
7.02
7.08
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.39
7.37
7.36
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.24
8.25
8.17
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.20
6.22
6.45
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Call for Names in 'Megan' Trial
Lawyers for the man accused of raping and killing 7-year-old Megan Kanka are looking for the names of anyone who signed a petition or made a contribution to help pass the legislation known as "Megan's Law."


Hon Industries Inc.(HONI,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 1


Brinker International Inc.(EAT,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 29


Lukens Inc.(LUC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 1


Other Juror Hazards
To the Editor:
New York City's court clerks, who work with jurors every day, applaud the improvements launched by Chief Judge Judith Kaye (news article, April 12).
However, jury duty will continue to be a chore that many New Yorkers avoid as long as our trial courts remain a physical hazard to all who enter them.


The Pulitzer Prizes: Journalism and the Arts Bestow a Most Prestigious Honor
The Pulitzer Prizes were awarded yesterday by Columbia University in 21 categories for excellence in the arts and journalism.
PUBLIC SERVICE  The Virgin Islands Daily News
The Virgin Islands Daily News, a Gannett newspaper in St.
Thomas with a circulation of 16,400, was recognized for a 10-part series on crime that initiated many reforms.
The series, "Virgin Island Crime: Who's to Blame?" described a police department that seldom catches criminals, prosecutors who rarely win cases, judges who give light sentences and a special narcotics force riddled with corruption.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Move over, Norma Desmond. Postum, the coffee substitute, is looking for a comeback, too.
A PRODUCT sold long ago as a sure cure for the woes caused by "Mr. Coffee-Nerves" is trying something nervy: a comeback.
For the first time since 1983, Postum, an instant powder added to hot water, is being advertised in an attempt to reinvigorate its somnolent sales.
A campaign by FCB/Leber Katz Partners in New York includes print advertisements, radio commercials, recipe promotions and cents-off coupons.


Wine Talk
LIKE many of the flowers just beginning to bloom in Northeast gardens, there are questions about wine that come up again and again.
Here are a few of those asked most frequently with, it is hoped, reasonably accurate answers.
Q.  How important are vintages?


Clinton's Prime-Time Presentation Is Shunned by 2 Networks
President Clinton was upstaged by two fictional television characters this evening when two major television networks declined to broadcast his prime-time news conference.
NBC decided to stick with "Frasier," a situation comedy starring Kelsey Grammar as a psychiatrist with a radio advice show.
ABC said broadcast its "Home Improvement," a comedy in which Tim Allen plays a television show handy man.
Both series are extremely popular, making Tuesday night at 9 Eastern time a lucrative period for both networks.


Slain Woman's Sister Testifies
Nesime Dokur of Morristown took the witness stand at the murder trial of her former brother-in-law yesterday and testified that he had a fiery, domineering attitude toward her sister.
And, she added, the 1986 marriage of Mohammed and Nihal Abequa soured after their first child was born because he "wanted a servant, not a wife."


Cambrex Corp.(CMB,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


At the Nation's Table
Abiquiu, N.M.  A Bean Queen Motivated by Love
Elizabeth Berry popped a small blackish-brown bean from its pod.
"This is the wild rice bean," she said.
"It looks just like wild rice and has a slightly nutty flavor. They're so good."


Still Too Many Secrets
When he campaigned for the Presidency in 1992, Bill Clinton made the noble promise that he would reduce government secrecy.
Three years and many bureaucratic battles later, President Clinton has approved a compromise that moves in the right direction, but not far enough.
Since the rise of the national security state during the cold war, Washington's obsession with secrecy has kept the governed from learning what their Government is doing, or even what it has done over the past years.
From the secret escalation of the Vietnam War three decades ago to the secret links between the Central Intelligence Agency and Guatemala today, the Federal Government has misused secrecy to shield misguided policies and activities.


Grantham's Departure Is Prompting Questions
National Basketball Association players were portrayed yesterday as being outraged that they have not been informed of the reasons behind the abrupt resignation of their union leader.
Some players, according to their agents, believe the union is engaged in a cover-up of the real reasons for the departure of Charles Grantham.
Grantham resigned suddenly last Friday after six and a half years as executive director of the National Basketball Players Association.
A statement issued by the union cited only "irreconcilable differences concerning matters of internal Association governance."


Honeywell Inc.(HON,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 2


Mattel Inc.(MAT,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Alumni Say Thank You In Their Favorite Way
When Charles Kaufman announced that he would step down as dean of the Mannes College of Music this year, the mezzo-soprano Frederica von Stade -- a 1969 graduate of the school -- offered to sing at his farewell concert.
A few more recent graduates were enlisted to round out the bill, and a Charles Kaufman Scholarship Fund was set up so that proceeds from the concert could be put to good use.
There was a full house on hand for the concert at Alice Tully Hall on Monday evening, and by the time the lights went down, the school had taken in $210,000 from ticket sales and donations.
There must have been academics in the house wondering if their retirements would inspire such a send-off, and some might even have observed that Mr.
Kaufman isn't really going anywhere.
A musicologist and professor of music history before he became an administrator, he is to take up his old place on the Mannes faculty in the fall.
But Mr.
Kaufman has been an innovative administrator and a commanding presence in New York's musical life.
And the concert, at which a pamphlet full of praise from musicians and politicians was distributed, seemed the least the school could do for him.


Dana Corp.(DCN,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Scott Paper Co.(SPP,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 1


WMS to Get Bally Gaming in Stock Swap
WMS Industries said yesterday that it had agreed in principle to acquire Bally Gaming International Inc., a producer of slot machines and video poker equipment, in a deal valued at about $127 million.
Under a stock exchange agreement, Bally Gaming shareholders will receive six-tenths of a share of WMS stock for each share of Bally Gaming, although the exchange ratio could increase if warranted, the companies said.
Based on yesterday's closing stock prices, Bally Gaming stock would be worth about $11.85 a share under the plan


Seoul Journal; Defectors Find That the Welcome Mat Is Fraying
During an escape from North Korea last year, Lee Ok Keum fainted on the frozen Yalu River as soldiers patrolled just yards away.
But her husband still managed to bring her and their three children into South Korea to receive a hero's welcome.
Their reception, a typical one for North Korean defectors, began when 100 reporters and officials greeted them at the airport in Seoul.
They were then escorted to a furnished apartment with a banquet waiting on the dinner table and later given a bank account with $100,000.


Japanese Issue Threat to Quit Talks on Cars
Japanese officials said today that they would withdraw from trade talks with the United States on automobiles and parts if the Clinton Administration moved further toward imposing sanctions during the negotiations.
The warning came as Japanese and American officials reported little progress after two days of discussion here.
The Administration is pressing Japan to remove barriers to importing American cars.


Equifax Inc.(EFX,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Idex Corp.(IEX,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Steinway &amp; Sons Is Sold for $100 Million
Steinway &amp; Sons, the piano manufacturer that has been a New York institution since its founding by Heinrich E. Steinway in 1853, was sold yesterday for $100 million to the Selmer Company, a maker of musical instruments.
A private company that is probably most famous for its Selmer saxophone, an instrument used by both amateur and professional musicians including President Clinton and Kenny G, Selmer is controlled by two young former Drexel Burnham Lambert investment bankers who purchased their stake in the company in 1993.


Politician Under Fire; Rockland County Prosecutor Faces Criminal Inquiry -- and Sex Scandal
For his two decades as District Attorney, Kenneth Gribetz has been such a towering figure on Rockland County's political landscape that the Republican opposition meekly endorsed him twice for re-election.
Even a year ago, when Rockland's newspapers and The New York Times reported that the county's chief prosecutor was himself the target of a Federal grand jury investigating whether he was taking kickbacks from lawyers for referring negligence cases and was using campaign funds to make personal purchases, Mr.
Gribetz seemed to weather that storm.


RESULTS PLUS
N.H.L.  Whalers Move Into 7th Spot
Darren Turcotte's soft wrist shot from the point with 3 minutes 14 seconds remaining was enough to give the visiting Hartford Whalers a 2-1 victory over the Buffalo Sabres last night.


Penguins Win Again As Rangers Blink Last
Getting into a run-and-gun battle against the Penguins is like many of life's little vices.
It's fun while it lasts, even thrilling, but there are unpleasant consequences in the aftermath.
The Rangers learned this again the hard way tonight when they lost an entertaining, 6-5 shoot'em-up in Civic Arena.
The result ended the Rangers' three-game winning streak and left them in ninth place in the Eastern Conference, 1 point behind Buffalo in the chase for the last playoff berth.


No Agreement On Extending Truce in Bosnia
Secretary of State Warren Christopher and the Foreign Ministers of France, Britain and Germany pledged today to work to extend a fragile cease-fire in Bosnia, but failed to agree on how to do so.
In a 90-minute meeting on the fringes of an international conference on the nuclear nonproliferation treaty, the four officials acknowledged that the four-month cease-fire, which will officially lapse at the end of this month, had broken down, but that there was no other alternative except to seek to extend it.


Study Says Exercise Must Be Strenuous To Stretch Lifetime
Moderate exercise may well be the route to a healthier life, but if living longer is your goal, you will have to sweat.
A new Harvard study that followed the fates of 17,300 middle-aged men for more than 20 years has found that only vigorous and not nonvigorous activities reduced their risk of dying during the study period.
The beneficial effects of vigorous exercise on longevity have long been assumed but were not firmly established.


For the First Time, Polonia Takes the Field Alone
Luis Polonia only faintly smelled the grass and barely heard the baseballs caroming around Municipal Stadium in West Palm Beach last Saturday during batting practice.
Polonia was preparing for a game against the Expos, but his thoughts drifted into dreary, depressing territory because he could not obscure the recurring vision of his mother's death.
Polonia lost the skirmish with his mind that day and simply speaking about the incident two days later caused his brown eyes to turn glassy.
Luz Polonia was told that she had an aggressive lung cancer last August, and she died in her home in Santiago City, Dominican Republic, last Dec. 23.
Her son, the one she proudly told people played for the Yankees, said Christmas will never be the same again.
He does not think anything will ever be the same again.


Nobody Can Keep Pace With John Grisham
Highbrow critics may shudder, but John Grisham has once again set the publishing world afire, selling about 300,000 copies of "The Rainmaker" in its first week in bookstores (the initial printing was a record 2.8 million copies).
And on May 3, the book will step neatly into the No. 1 spot on the New York Times best-seller list.
No one need ask who the real rainmaker is.
Even by today's publishing standards, with blockbusters all but required to keep publishers afloat, this book is off to a phenomenal start.


Hartford Steam Boiler Inspection &amp; Insurance Co.  (HSB,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Kroger Co. (KR,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 25


Tobacco and Food Sales Drive a Strong Quarter for Philip Morris
Buoyed by significant gains in international tobacco sales and surprising market-share advances in its domestic food operations, the Philip Morris Companies posted strong first-quarter earnings yesterday.
Earnings rose 14 percent, to $1.33 billion, or $1.57 a share, from $1.17 billion, or $1.34 a share, in the corresponding quarter a year earlier.
But before a charge of $28 million to reflect a change in accounting methods and excluding results from businesses that were sold, the most recent earnings amounted to $1.4 billion, or $1.60 a share, higher than analyst estimates of $1.58.


Death Tied to Virulent Illness
The death earlier this month of an Irvington woman is being attributed to the virulent form of the streptococcus bacteria sometimes called the flesh-eating disease.
The woman was not identified.
Officials said yesterday that they did not know of any other cases of the ailment in the state.
Beginning July 1, the infection is to be added to a list of diseases that must be reported to the Department of Health by doctors and hospitals.


First Financial Management (FFM,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


No Headline
"I loved, admired and respected my wife when I married her 28 years ago. I still do, and I always will." STEPHEN J. SOLARZ, former Brooklyn Congressman.  [ B1:3. ]


School Board Fighting Takeover
The Newark Board of Education will try to overturn a judge's order demanding an immediate state takeover of the city's schools.
Lawyers for the board said yesterday that they would focus their appeal on the legality of skipping full public hearings before a takeover, not the broader issue of who is responsible for problems in the state's largest school system.


Bush Boake Allen (BOA,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 25


Health Management Associates Inc.(HMA,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


LIN Broadcasting (LINB,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Riley Urges All Knicks To Step Up Big Now
The Knicks are running out of time to straighten out their problems before the playoffs.
So with just three games left in the regular season, Coach Pat Riley talked to the players today about where they are, and more important, where they want to go.
Instead of holding a grueling practice, the Knicks met at their practice facility, had a film session and tried to regroup after Monday's 99-93 home loss to the Milwaukee Bucks, one of New York's most disappointing performances of the season.
The Knicks (52-27) still need one victory, or a loss by the Indiana Pacers, to clinch the second best record in the Eastern Conference and the homecourt advantage for the first two rounds of the playoffs.
But by losing two consecutive games, the Knicks have killed the momentum they had after winning their five previous games.


In Test of School-Voucher Idea, the Sky's Not Falling but Neither Is Manna
Five years into the nation's only school-voucher program, most parents say they are satisfied with the plan, which sends their children to private school at state expense, and attendance is up slightly.
But academic performance remains about the same for these students as for public school students.
Despite the mixed results, the Governor of Wisconsin, Tommy G. Thompson, a Republican, has announced that he wants to expand the program -- now limited to 1.5 percent of the district's students -- and to allow parochial schools to participate.
And from New Jersey to California, there are renewed calls for voucher programs as a check on deteriorating urban public schools.


Keeping Actors on Pins and Needles
Goose and Tomtom, the titular misfits of David Rabe's peculiar and slight play of that name, appear at first glance to be a couple of brain-damaged acid-heads who carry guns and whip them out at every shadow that flits across what is left of their minds.
"Wanna shoot somebody?" one asks as the two discuss what to do with the day.
"We could find somebody to shoot."
But first impressions can be deceiving.
There is even less to "Goose and Tomtom" than that.
The play, which dates to 1982 and has had a troubled history, is being revived by the Willow Cabin Theater Company.


The Immigration Wave: A Plea to Hold It Back
ALIEN NATION Common Sense About America's Immigration Disaster
By Peter Brimelow
327 pages. Random House. $24.
Three years ago, Peter Brimelow, a writer for Forbes magazine and an immigrant from Britain, wrote a powerful and elegant article, published in National Review, in which he argued that current American immigration policies were leading to disaster.
For many conservatives Mr.
Brimelow's argument was a kind of heresy, because it contradicted the faith in immigration as an aspect of the free market.
Liberals do not generally read National Review, but many of them have tended to view immigration as an enriching process, certainly a humanitarian requirement.


Fiscal Watchdog for D.C.
Two decades after winning limited home rule, the nation's capital has finally had to pay for years of mismanagement by yielding many of its budget powers to a new financial control board of outsiders.
But in signing legislation to create the new board, President Clinton was right to say that the District of Columbia has an opportunity as well as a burden.
An independent panel overseeing the city's books could give the District something it has not had for years -- credibility.
That, in turn, could actually strengthen the case for increased Federal aid.
Like other cities, The District of Columbia is being strangled by crime, drugs and poverty.
But unlike other cities, it has no state government to help care for the poor.
Its most immediate concern is a deficit that could reach $800 million in the current fiscal year, or about a quarter of its revenues.
Unable to borrow from private sources, the District must borrow from the Federal Treasury, for which it has had to accept a control board modeled after the one created for New York City in its fiscal crisis two decades ago.


Motor Vehicles Workers Protest
Need a new driver's license?
Today might not be the best day to get it.
Union leaders say that workers at 26 offices of the Division of Motor Vehicles will stage a one-day sick-out so that they can protest at a legislative budget hearing in Jersey City.
They are unhappy with a Whitman administration proposal to save money by turning some of their work over to private companies.
LAWRENCE VAN GELDER


Davenport Out of Cup; Spot Goes To Frazier
Baseball teams may have phased out replacement players, but they still come in handy on tennis teams.
That's what the Fed Cup captain, Billie Jean King, learned yesterday when Lindsay Davenport, her top singles player for this weekend's Fed Cup competition against Austria, withdrew from the event because of a brush with food poisoning.
King announced that she had been forced to replace the sixth-ranked Davenport, who had previously been sidelined since late March by pneumonia, with 16th-ranked Amy Frazier.
The 22-year-old Michigan resident captured her fifth career title last week at the Japan Open, where she defeated the defending champion, Kimiko Date.
Frazier, who has not played in the Fed Cup before but held 14 titles during her junior career, was named to the team's 10-player roster by King earlier this year.


Arturo Frondizi, Argentine Chief In Time of Austerity, Dies at 86
Arturo Frondizi, a former President of Argentina who bolstered the country's economy through a series of unpopular austerity measures during four tumultuous years in office from 1958 to 1962, died in Buenos Aires yesterday.
He was 86.
His family said he died of a heart ailment.


Ecolab Inc.(ECL,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Ex-Head of Salomon Brothers Files Libel Suit Against Time Inc.
John H. Gutfreund, the former chairman of Salomon Brothers Inc., filed suit yesterday against Time Inc. in New York State Supreme Court in Manhattan, accusing its Fortune magazine of having libeled him in its May 1, 1995, issue by falsely writing that he was barred from the securities industry for life.
Mr.
Gutfreund, who resigned from Salomon in August 1991 and now advises companies on international securities and financial transactions, said that by publishing that false information, Fortune had gravely injured his reputation and severely impaired his ability to retain and attract clients.
His suit demands a settlement including damages that are "sufficient to purchase full-page retractions in major business and general-interest publications worldwide." Time Inc. is a unit of Time Warner Inc.


Ahmanson (H.F.) &amp; Co.  (AHM,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Reebok Int'l.(RBK,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Starts of Home Construction Decline for a Third Month
Construction starts on new homes fell in March for the third consecutive month, the Commerce Department reported yesterday, reinforcing a growing view that the economy is a lot weaker today than it was at the end of last year.
Ground was broken for new homes -- single-family houses, multi-family town houses and apartments -- at an annual rate of 1.2 million buildings, the lowest level in two years.
The decline was 8 percent from the February level, or more than double the drop that forecasters had expected.
Builders finally pulled back, apparently because of a growing inventory of unsold new homes, among other problems.


62 Slain in Raid on Village Near Liberia Port
At least 62 people, most of them women and children, were killed last week in an attack on a village near the Liberian port city of Buchanan, officials of the United Nations Children's Fund said today.
In the attack, the most violent incident in a recent flare-up in Liberia's five-year-old civil war, Unicef officials said unidentified guerrillas surrounded the village of Yosi and proceeded to hack its residents to death with machetes.


AES Corp.(AESC,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Coram to Merge With Lincare in A Billion-Dollar Health Venture
In the second billion-dollar consolidation of home health care companies in two months, the Coram Healthcare Corporation said yesterday that it had agreed to acquire Lincare Holdings Inc. in a stock deal that valued Lincare at about $35 a share, or $1.38 billion, based on yesterday's closing price of Coram.
The new combination would take James M. Sweeney more than halfway to his goal of creating a $2 billion company to provide health care at home and other sites outside hospitals.
Mr.
Sweeney, chief executive of Coram, would also head the new company.


After 4 Weeks, Ex-Governor Ends '96 Challenge to Clinton
Four weeks after announcing that he was planning to run against President Clinton in the 1996 Democratic Presidential primaries, former Gov.
Robert P. Casey of Pennsylvania withdrew from that race today, saying he did not feel up to the pressures and physical demands of a campaign.
His decision leaves the President without a Democratic challenger, at least for now.


Treasury Prices Are Mixed As 30-Year Bonds Decline
With the exception of some long maturities, prices of Treasury securities rose again yesterday, much as they had on Monday.
A surprising drop in housing starts during March fueled investors' optimism that the economy is slowing and inflation is subdued, but early gains in the credit markets evaporated under mounting concern over the weak dollar and rising commodity prices.


Lab Reports Major Gain in Superconductivity
The dream of manufacturing cables capable of conducting huge electrical currents without resistance and at relatively high temperatures has come closer to realization because of a new technology unveiled yesterday by the Los Alamos National Laboratory, scientists there said.
If the technology lives up to its promise, the scientists said, superconducting power lines, magnetically levitated trains, superconducting electricity storage rings and many other imagined marvels will at last become feasible.


U.S. Regulators Drop Bias Proposal for Lenders
Federal regulators, bowing to intense opposition from bankers and Republicans in control of Congress, have dropped a proposal to require lenders to collect and report information on the race and sex of their small-business borrowers.
The decision was disclosed today as the four banking agencies prepared for final adoption on Wednesday of a thorough overhaul of regulations aimed at encouraging banks and savings and loan institutions to make more loans in low-income and moderate-income areas.


Dixons Dismissing Saatchi &amp; Saatchi
In another account loss attributable to the ouster of Maurice Saatchi, Dixons Group P.L.C., the large British retailer, said yesterday that it was dismissing Saatchi &amp; Saatchi Advertising Worldwide in London after a review.
Dixons said it would move its account, with billings estimated at $60 million to $80 million, to two other shops, including the breakaway agency formed by Mr.
Saatchi.
The decision was expected because Stanley Kalms, the chairman of Dixons, had been an outspoken supporter of Mr.
Saatchi, who was removed on Dec. 16 as chairman of the Saatchi &amp; Saatchi Company, now Cordiant P.L.C., the parent of Saatchi &amp; Saatchi Advertising.


Truth Holds Key to Harvard Rejection Case; Successful Applicant
To the Editor:
Your April 13 editorial "Harvard's Unseemly Haste" calls for Harvard University's president, Neil Rudenstine, to intervene in the case of Gina Grant being denied admission to the freshman class after initially being accepted.
You rightly call for her case to undergo due process.
Your exploration of Ms.
Grant's murder of her mother is objective and fair-minded.
Many feel she has paid for her crime and is rehabilitated.


NINTENDO TO BUY STAKE IN BRITISH COMPANY
The Nintendo Company Ltd. said yesterday that it would purchase a 25 percent stake in Rare Toys and Games Ltd. of Britain, the developer of the best-selling video game "Donkey Kong Country." Terms of the deal were not disclosed, but executives close to the companies said the investment was over $25 million.
The investment, Nintendo's first in a software company outside Japan, was motivated by "the opportunity to keep this developer developing games exclusively for the Nintendo platform," said Howard Lincoln, chairman of Nintendo of America.
In addition to "Donkey Kong Country," which has sold over 7.4 million copies, Rare Toys is the developer of "Killer Instinct," the most successful arcade video game, which Nintendo plans to release in a home video format as well, Mr.
Lincoln said.


At the Nation's Table
Rayne, La.  Sweet Crayfish Worth the Hunt
Along Interstate 10, toward the heart of Cajun country, billboard after billboard screams out the names of restaurants boasting the biggest crayfish anywhere.
But as in other matters, size is not everything.


State Street Boston Corp.(STT,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Public Service Enterprise Group Inc.(PEG,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


St. John's McLeod Transfers
After two seasons marked by frustration over lack of playing time at St.
John's, forward Roshown McLeod is planning to transfer to Duke University.
He will have two years of basketball eligibility left after sitting out the 1995-96 season.
McLeod's impending departure is a tough blow for St.
John's, which finished 14-14 this past season after losing in the first round of the National Invitation Tournament.
The 6-foot-8-inch, 220-pound McLeod, a graduate of St.
Anthony's High School in Jersey City, averaged 7.8 points, 4.3 rebounds and 20.1 minutes a game for the Red Storm as a sophomore.
But he started only once in 28 games, and he said he also wanted a more college-like environment than St.
John's offered.


Conner Peripherals Inc.(CNR,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


BUSINESS DIGEST
Dollar Hits More New Lows, Pulling Down Stock Market
Currency traders scrambled to sell dollars, as Administration officials again held out the possibility of trade sanctions against Japan if trade talks fail, pushing the dollar to record lows against the yen and the mark.
In Tokyo early today, the dollar dipped below 80 yen.


Agents of Graft -- A special report.; A Cocaine Trail in Mexico Points to Official Corruption
On the night last summer that a jet loaded with cocaine touched down near this old mining town in the foothills of the western Sierra Madre, state police officers reported something odd at the local gas station.
At an hour when most of Sombrerete was already asleep, three Chevrolet Suburban wagons pulled up, driven by men they recognized as federal police agents.
The men quietly filled the vehicles with gas, an official familiar with the officers' report said, then headed toward the airstrip where the plane would land.


Business Travel; How to find an American-operated clinic in the heart of Moscow, day or night.
BUSINESS travelers and tourists alike can avail themselves of Western medicine while in Russia, at the Columbia-Presbyterian/Moscow Clinic in the heart of Moscow at 4 Dobryninsky Lane.
The outpatient clinic's staff consists of seven United States board-certified doctors who are on contracts and available 24 hours a day.
The clinic provides primary care, family medicine and pediatrics.
Patients have access to CT scanning, ultrasound and full X-ray.


CoreStates Financial Corp.(CFL,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Oakwood Homes Inc.(OH,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


The Pulitzer Prizes
ARTS Fiction -- "The Stone Diaries," by Carol Shields Drama -- "The Young Man From Atlanta," by Horton Foote History -- "No Ordinary Time: Franklin and Eleanor Roosevelt: The Home Front in World War II," by Doris Kearns Goodwin Biography -- "Harriet Beecher Stowe: A Life," by Joan D. Hedrick Poetry -- "The Simple Truth," by Philip Levine General non-fiction -- "The Beak of the Finch: A Story of Evolution in Our Time," by Jonathan Weiner Music -- "String Music," by Morton Gould JOURNALISM
The prize for public service went to The Virgin Islands Daily News, a 16,400-circulation newspaper owned by Gannett that set out to explore the islands' rampant crime problem and ended up implicating the local criminal-justice system itself.
The Associated Press won prizes for reporting and photography for its coverage of Rwanda.
The Wall Street Journal, The Washington Post and Newsday also won two awards each.
The criticism prize went to Margo Jefferson of The New York Times.
The complete list, page B7.


Foreign Affairs; Free Advice
When Bob Dole announced his bid for President last week he got the loudest applause from his hometown crowd with a foreign policy line.
It was when he vowed that when he is President "American policies will be determined by us, not by the United Nations."
Good line, Bob.
You've been getting a lot of mileage out of insisting that you will not turn over U.S. foreign policy to "Boooooootros Boooooootros-Ghali." I like the way you drag out the oooo's to make the U.N.
Secretary General's name sound even more foreign.


Argentine President Vetoes Patent Measure
Bowing to pressure from the United States over the protection of intellectual property, President Carlos Saul Menem vetoed a key piece of drug-patent legislation today.
While Argentina currently has no protection for pharmaceutical patents, United States officials say that the legislation would not have adequately protected the patents of American pharmaceutical companies and that it violated provisions of the new world trade agreement.


Inside Peek at a 3-Star Kitchen
AROUND 9:15 P.M., my out-of-shape knees began to buckle from nonstop standing in the kitchen, and the Saharan front blowing in from 500-degree ovens nearby hardly revived me.
Weeks before, it had seemed like a fine journalistic idea: work for a week in the kitchen of a major Manhattan restaurant to get a worm's-eye view of the apple.


CHRONICLE
When REID VOGELHUT was a 12and just beginning to learn the trumpet, he talked his father into buying him a Dizzy Gillespie album and taught himself to play all the numbers on it.
That summer 35 years ago, Mr.
Gillespie, the jazz trumpeter, performed at the Painters Mill Music Fair about 20 miles from Mr.
Vogelhut's home in Baltimore.
"I left home," Mr.
Vogelhut recalled yesterday, "hitchhiked to the concert, walked backstage during intermission and told him, 'I just learned how to play "A Night in Tunisia." ' He smiled and handed me his trumpet and said, 'Play.' "


GTE Corp.(GTE,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


North American Culture Before the Europeans
Tomorrow night brings the first two hours of "500 Nations," an elaborately produced eight-hour tribute to the achievements of North America's Indians hundreds of years before the coming of Europeans.
With artifacts, paintings and photographs, models and computer graphics, the programs evoke what Kevin Costner, an executive producer and the host of the series, calls "the human history of North America." The music and sounds seem to come from a windswept past, but the voices of actors like Edward James Olmos and Wes Studi are up to the minute, reminders that the series is under the auspices of CBS Entertainment.
This history begins at the grim end, with the Army's massacre of some 200 Sioux at Wounded Knee, in South Dakota.
Then, bridged by Indian tales of creation, it gallops back through the centuries to what are described as flourishing societies in the Southwest, revealed by the distinctive architecture of places like Pueblo Bonito and Mesa Verde, and the mound-building culture along the Mississippi River, notably in Cahokia, called the City of the Sun.


Longtime Informer Is Accused in Killing
Over 40 years, Michael Burnett was a confidence man, stock swindler, international thief and a suspected murderer.
And when he wasn't trying to elude the authorities, Mr.
Burnett was working for them: Across those four decades, Mr.
Burnett, working as an informer, also helped the Government recover stolen art, retrieve millions of dollars in embezzled funds and prosecute corrupt elected officials.
The payoffs for prosecutors were occasionally big.
Information provided by Mr.
Burnett led to the indictment of more than a dozen government officials in Chicago in the 1980's, and his cooperation with prosecutors in New York was pivotal in the investigation of the city's Parking Violations Bureau, which tainted some of Mayor Edward I. Koch's closest allies.


History Lessons
To the Editor:
In your article about Newt Gingrich seeing former Presidents as role models (front page, April 11), Mr.
Gingrich mentions that he is drawing lessons from a television biography of President Eisenhower.


Mercantile Bancorp (MTL,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Baltimore Gas &amp; Electric Co.  (BGE,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


COLLEGE LACROSSE REPORT
Syracuse
Roy Colsey, a big part of the Orange attack for four seasons, scored seven goals as the Orange whipped Loyola, 23-13, in Baltimore yesterday.
Colsey, twice an all-America choice, is a senior midfielder from Yorktown Heights, N.Y.


Subways Delayed By Police Search
Two police officers rode an F train crowded with commuters to find a man wanted on drug charges who fled into a subway tunnel under the East River yesterday morning, a transit authority spokesman said.
Thousands of riders were delayed as the police shut off power in the tunnel twice during the search.
The suspect, William Hernandez, 22, had been arrested by another police officer on an outstanding warrant for criminal sale of narcotics.
He escaped from a police van by wriggling out of a pair of handcuffs, kicking the driver in the head and running into the F train tunnel at East Broadway and Rutgers Street in Lower Manhattan, the police said.


On Permanent Patrol


Houston Might Not Choose McNair
The Oilers may be shifting their sights from quarterback Steve McNair of Alcorn State to Florida defensive end Kevin Carter in this weekend's National Football League college draft.
If that happens, could McNair fall from the top 10?
Houston has the No. 3 pick in the draft, and if it passes on McNair, he could drop all the way to the Jets at No. 9.
With the exception of the Rams at No. 6, the teams that select between the Oilers and New York have drafted quarterbacks in the first round (and have a substantial financial investment in the position) in the last few years.
The Jets have said they would not select McNair if he falls down to their pick.


Excerpts From the News Conference With President Clinton
Following are President Clinton's opening statement at his prime-time news conference last night in Washington and excerpts from the question-and-answer session that followed, as transcribed by The New York Times:
PRESIDENT CLINTON Good evening.


France Threatens to Withdraw Bosnia Force
France, in the last stages of a presidential election campaign, threatened today to withdraw its 4,530 peacekeeping troops from Bosnia unless its diplomatic partners and the United Nations could insure their safety.
The Government also demanded that the belligerents return to the negotiating table and extend a cease-fire set to expire at the end of this month.
A statement issued by Prime Minister Edouard Balladur, struggling to stay in the presidential race until the decisive runoff vote on May 7, said that if the safety of the peacekeepers could not be assured, France "would be forced to decide on a withdrawal of the French soldiers in Bosnia." The statement was issued after a special Cabinet session that was called after the killing of two French soldiers in Sarajevo last weekend.


SBC Communications Inc.(SBC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


With Return Of Remains, A 'Closure'
When they were seniors in Calhoun High School here 28 years ago, Frederick Burns, Joseph Carbone and Stephen Grilli were the best of friends.
They made a pact to join the Marines together and fight for their country in Vietnam.
"Fred and I joined the Marines and Steve went off to college," said Mr.
Carbone, now a 46-year-old detective in the Nassau County Police Department.
"But we all got together one last time late that summer." That night they took a $10 bill and split it three ways.
"For our next time together," Detective Carbone said.


Frank E. Resnik, 66, Chemist Who Led Philip Morris U.S.A.
Frank E. Resnik, who rose from a chemist's test bench at the Philip Morris Companies to become president and chief executive of the corporation's Philip Morris U.S.A. division, died in Florida yesterday at the Hospice of Palm Beach County.
He was 66.
The cause was pancreatic cancer, the company said.


Hubbell (HUB.B,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Clinton Seeks New Welfare Bill, Saying G.O.P. Plan Is Too Harsh
President Clinton tonight repeated his vow to oppose the welfare overhaul passed by the House of Representatives as too harsh on children, and called on Congress to pass by the Fourth of July a comprehensive bill that would put the poor to work and provide greater flexibility for states.
In his first prime-time news conference in more than eight months, Mr.
Clinton also said he was ready 'to go to the mat" for his nomination of Dr. Henry W. Foster Jr. as Surgeon General despite a warning by Senator Bob Dole of Kansas, the majority leader, that he might not bring the nomination up for a vote.


Dial Corp.(DL,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Henry A. Dudley, Lawyer, 82
Henry A. Dudley, a Washington lawyer who aided many educational, civic and charitable organizations, died on Sunday at Sibley Memorial Hospital in Washington.
He was 82 and lived in Washington.
The cause was respiratory failure, said a son, Henry A. Dudley Jr., of Chevy Chase, Md.


Metropolitan Diary
JUDY EPSTEIN was talking with a man in the steam room of her 50th Street gym.
The fellow was complaining that the equipment was always broken.
That day it was the whirlpool and the shower.
He: I'm fed up with this gym.
There's always something in need of repair.
If it's not the sauna, it's the whirlpool.
If it's not the shower, it's the steam room.
That's why I joined the 32d Street branch.


Integra Financial Corp.(ITG,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


NEW POLICY CUTS NUMBERS ON RELIEF IN NEW YORK CITY
Using a tough new screening process for welfare recipients, New York City has sharply reduced the number of childless, able-bodied adults accepted for benefits this year, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani announced yesterday.
Nearly 60 percent of those who applied in the first three months of the year were rejected, the Mayor said, compared with 20 percent who were rejected in the same period last year.
Combined with a requirement that recipients work for their benefits, the screening process has also reduced the total number of people applying for benefits by 27 percent from last year, he said.


Clark Stillman, 87, Rare-Book Collector
E.
Clark Stillman, a collector and dealer in rare books, died last Wednesday at Cabrini Medical Center.
He was 87 and lived in Manhattan.
The cause was cancer, said Herman Liebaers, a friend of 50 years.


An Elder Statesman of the Saxophone, Age 34
A typical Kenny Garrett solo moves from modern, densely harmonic lines to church shouts, deep blues phrases, rhythm and blues ideas and the mathematical logic of post-Coltrane improvising.
Mr.
Garrett, an alto saxophonist who is performing at Sweet Basil's this week, changes the relationship of his phrases to the beat, speeding up lines or slowing them down, repeating phrases to build tension.
He worries notes, bending them in every way possible, spilling classically balanced be-bop lines over the rhythm section.
His is a music of extremes, shouts and repetitions, but it is also an art of increments, of shadings.


Facing Up to Crack Injustice
Like just about anyone familiar with drug crimes, the U.S.
Sentencing Commission believes Congress went far astray a decade ago when it made punishment for sale or possession of the crack form of cocaine far more severe than for cocaine's powder form.
Last week a bare majority of the commission recommended equalizing the two forms of illegal drug trafficking by lowering the crack penalties to those now in place for powder.
This proposed change in sentencing guidelines will be submitted to Congress by May 1 and become law unless Congress passes its own law rejecting it by November.
Reform is clearly needed, but before any change goes forward, the commission must better explain the rationale for its recommendations.


A Hunger Strike Is Abandoned
At least one of the two Rutgers students who began a hunger strike last week has abandoned the effort, intended to force the resignation of the university's president, Francis L. Lawrence.
The second student has not been seen at the protester's unofficial headquarters since Monday.
Mr.
Lawrence has been under fire for remarks about links between heredity and standardized test scores.


Finova Group (FNV,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Justices Rule That Congress Overstepped in Legislating Reversal of a Court Decision
In an important ruling on the constitutional separation of powers, the Supreme Court today struck down a law Congress passed in 1991 to revive a group of suits the Court itself had effectively killed six months earlier.
By commanding the Federal courts to reopen cases, a group of securities fraud suits that had already gone to final judgment, Congress stepped out of its constitutional role and impermissibly exercised judicial power, the Court held in a 7-to-2 decision.


Noranda Forest reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


The Tie Goes to the Runner


After 9 Days, Reconciliation at Simpson Trial


Office Depot Inc.(ODP,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 1


Some Pasta and Pernod And Pretty Peppers
THE unusual flavor in the creamy sauce for this fettuccine dish comes from Pernod, a licorice-flavored liqueur.
If you don't want to invest in a bottle of Pernod, use dry vermouth.
For the pepper dish, choose red and yellow or whatever colors are available.
Fettuccine With Oysters And Pernod
3/4 cup nonfat yogurt  1/4 cup reduced-fat ricotta  1 tablespoon cornstarch  2 tablespoons Pernod or dry vermouth  1 pint fresh oysters  1 large clove garlic  1 1/2 ounces very thinly sliced prosciutto (about 4 slices)  8 ounces fresh fettuccine  1/2 ounce Parmigiano Reggiano or 3 tablespoons coarsely grated  1/8 teaspoon salt  Freshly ground black pepper to taste.
1. Bring 3 quarts of water to boil in a covered pot for fettuccine.
2.
In food processor, process yogurt and ricotta until smooth.
In a small cup, blend cornstarch thoroughly with Pernod to make smooth paste, and pour into yogurt-ricotta mixture.
Process briefly to mix.
3. Cut large oysters in thirds or halves, leaving small oysters whole. Mince garlic.
4.
Simmer oysters and garlic in a medium pot until edges of oysters begin to curl, just a few minutes.
5. Trim external fat from prosciutto, and cut remaining prosciutto into small dice.
6.
Drain liquid from oysters, leaving oyster and garlic mixture in strainer.
Using the same pot, cook the yogurt mixture over medium heat until it begins to thicken, about one minute.
Stir in the prosciutto.
7. Cook fettuccine according to package directions.
8. Coarsely grate cheese.
9.
Combine oysters with "cream" sauce, and season with salt and pepper.
Drain the fettuccine, top with oyster mixture and sprinkle with the cheese.
Yield: 2 servings.
Approximate nutritional analysis per serving: 660 calories, 10 grams fat, 50 milligrams cholesterol, 1,000 milligrams sodium, 35 grams protein, 105 grams carbohydrate.
Sharp-Sweet Peppers
3 tablespoons raisins  1 large clove garlic  24 ounces whole red and yellow bell peppers or 22 ounces ready-cut peppers cut in 1/4-inch-thick strips (6 cups)  2 teaspoons olive oil  1 tablespoon balsamic vinegar.
1. Soak raisins in very hot tap water.
2. Mince the garlic. Wash, trim, seed and slice the whole peppers.
3.
Heat nonstick pan until it is very hot; then, reduce heat to medium high and add oil.
Stir in the garlic and peppers, and saute until peppers begin to soften.
4.
Drain the raisins, and add to the peppers with the vinegar.
Cover, reduce heat to medium and continue cooking peppers until they are soft, about 5 minutes longer.
Yield: 2 servings.
Approximate nutritional analysis per serving: 160 calories, 5 grams fat, 0 milligrams cholesterol, 13 milligrams sodium, 5 grams protein, 30 grams carbohydrate.
Game Plan
After starting water to boil for fettuccine, prepare peppers through Step 3.
Continue with fettuccine through Step 5.
Finish peppers.
Finish fettuccine.


AT LUNCH WITH: Linda Ronstadt; And This Is What 48 Looks Like
I LOVE these pictures!
They're so cute!" bubbles Linda Ronstadt as she surveys the Howard Chandler Christy murals of frolicking nymphs that line the walls of Cafe des Artistes.
"My favorite model in the whole world is that girl over there who looks like a naked version of Snow White," she announces, pointing across the room to a painting of a saucy nymph talking with a Spanish soldier.


A War of the Beaches; Greenwich Battling Suit on Restrictions
Compared with the Jersey Shore and Long Island, Connecticut's beaches are small and tame -- and there are far fewer of them.
But scarcity also makes them the most jealously guarded, and the beaches of Greenwich, within sight of the Manhattan skyline, are the most restricted of all.


For Old Armenians, Sorrows Arrive With Spring
THE forsythia at the Armenian Home in Flushing are blooming cheerily and the dandelions wink from the lawn, but for the old people who live there, April remains a time of heavy sorrows.
They sit silently in sunny rooms, keeping to themselves what they saw and heard and smelled 80 years ago when their people were scattered and killed in the first of the century's many genocides.
"We don't talk to each other about it because everybody has their own terrible stories," said Alice Dosdourian, who is 89 years old.
They also no longer go to the commemorative gatherings, such as the one to be held this Sunday in Times Square, where younger people mark the years of Armenian agony that began when the Turks killed 235 intellectuals on April 24, 1915.
The home's administrators say the memorials were too upsetting for the residents.


Merrill Lynch Net Falls by 38.9% in Quarter
There are signs that the yearlong slump in the securities business is coming to an end, even though Wall Street's first-quarter results have not matched the banner first quarter of a year ago.
Merrill Lynch &amp; Company, the nation's biggest securities firm, yesterday reported first-quarter earnings of $227 million, buoyed particularly by interest income and trading profits, but still 38.9 percent down from last year's first quarter, when the company reported earnings of $372 million.


Solarz's Wife Pleads Guilty in House Bank Case
Nina K. Soarz, the wife of former Brooklyn Congressman Stephen J. Solarz, pleaded guilty today to two criminal charges, confessing to stealing money from a charitable group she ran and to intentionally writing a bad check on the House of Representatives bank.
John Russell, a spokesman at the Justice Department, said that no charges would be filed against Mr.
Solarz, who was not implicated in the case.


Black Teen-Agers Are Turning Away From Smoking, but Whites Puff On
African-American teen-agers have largely eliminated smoking from their lives, while white teenagers are still taking up the habit at high rates, according to a study reported in The Journal of the National Cancer Institute.
"This is the single most interesting change in the use of tobacco in years: the success of black teens," said Dr.
Michael Eriksen, chief of the Office on Smoking and Health at the Federal Centers for Disease Control and Prevention in Atlanta.
"We'd like to bottle it and get it to others, but we haven't figured out how to do that yet."


Topics of The Times; Whitman's Brooklyn, Still
At the Brooklyn end of New York City's most familiar bridge lies a modest patch of green called Walt Whitman Park, named in remembrance of the most American of poets, who lived, schooled and worked nearby.
In the 1840's, Whitman wrote ecstatically of the city's "numberless crowded streets" and the "immigrants arriving, fifteen or twenty thousand a week" and "the teeming nation of nations" taking shape before his eyes.
Whitman's vision finds full flower in Brooklyn today with its vast tracts of Arabs, Asians and especially Caribbean immigrants whose accents, colors and flavorings permeate every cranny of the bard's old home.
Whitman would no doubt be pleased that blunt-talking Brooklyn is deep in poets today.
For years it has even had its own poet laureate -- a job that fell vacant last month with the death of the 81-year-old novelist and playwright Norman Rosten, the first and only poet to hold the grand but meaningless title.
The laureate's job comes with no formal duties -- and no salary.
Yet as The Times's Joe Sexton pointed out on Sunday, the competition to succeed Mr.
Rosten is fierce.
Potential successors include an 80-year-old biologist in Sheepshead Bay, a former subway poet who says he would come out of retirement to accept the laureate title, and a middle-aged man who claims to be the official poet laureate of Bedford-Stuyvesant.
Among the authentic Brooklyn voices is Robert Hershon, who opines in one poem that a neighborhood "ain't no neighborhood" unless the local butcher "comes to ya funeral."


Justin Industries (JSTN,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


International Specialty Products Inc.(ISP,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Devils' Blueprint For Victory Goes Awry
The Devils had it all planned.
They would defeat Tampa Bay tonight and the Florida Panthers on Thursday to set up a Saturday showdown at Byrne Meadowlands Arena against Philadelphia for supremacy in the Atlantic Division.
But the Lightning threw a sobering slap shot into New Jersey's strategy with a 3-2 victory tonight before a boisterous crowd of 18,002 at the Thunderdome.
The loss snapped a three-game winning streak and dropped the Devils to 20-15-7.
Worse, the first-place Flyers won and moved 5 points ahead of New Jersey, which has only 6 games left in the regular season.


Long March Of the Arms Contractors; They Migrate South For Cheaper Labor in The Lower-Cost States
For years, the Lockheed Corporation centered its aircraft manufacturing in Burbank, Calif., where thousands of workers built prosperous lives on wages that reached as high as $20 an hour.
That factory is closed now and wildflowers grow through crevices in the concrete that surrounds the shuttered buildings.
The new heart of Lockheed's operations beats most strongly today here in Georgia, where the company makes its military planes with lower-cost labor.
The nation's manufacturers of military hardware, an industry that still employs nearly 1.5 million people, are migrating.
Like Lockheed, they are transferring operations to Georgia, Colorado, Louisiana, Florida, Mississippi and other low-cost states.
In doing so, they are joining the rest of corporate America in its itinerant search for cheaper wages, fewer unions, less regulation and easier tax policies.
And gradually the South and the Rocky Mountains are becoming the new centers for military spending, edging aside the Northeast and the Pacific Coast.


Samuel M. Green, Art Professor, 85
Samuel Magee Green, a professor emeritus of art at Wesleyan University, died last Wednesday at a convalescent home in Middletown, Conn., the town where he lived.
He was 85.
Mr.
Green, an accomplished water colorist and painter, was born in Oconomowoc, Wis.
He was a graduate of Harvard University, where he also received a doctorate in art history in 1937.


Civics Class Was Never Quite Like This
State leaders transformed the Capitol today into a stage for guerrilla theater, played with both flourish and venom for the cameras.
It began when Lieut.
Gov.
Betsy McCaughey ambushed Assembly Speaker Sheldon Silver by showing up unexpectedly at a news conference that quickly devolved into a raucous shouting match over the state budget.
And it escalated with a verbal firefight between Mr.
Silver and Gov.
George E. Pataki in a budget negotiating session tonight that they opened to reporters, an unprecedented move.


Calgon Carbon Corp.(CCC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Montana, Cool to the End, Says Goodbye
Joe Montana today surpassed Chinatown as a tourist attraction.
More than two years since he threw his last pass as a San Francisco 49er, he stood in front of 20,000 hero worshipers this afternoon and retired from professional football.
The crowd, standing on its toes and attempting in vain to tap him on the shoulder, chanted, "One more year, one more year" -- even if it meant him quarterbacking the Kansas City Chiefs.
"Hardest day of his life," said Montana's father, Joseph Sr., whose son would have quit football at age 7 if he had let him.
"Probably mine, too."


Conrail May Sell or Abandon Some Routes in East
Conrail Inc. might sell or abandon a large part of its marginal Northeastern routes as it shifts investment toward its most profitable and growing lines, a senior executive of the freight railroad said yesterday.
Charles Marshall, senior vice president for development for Conrail, said in an interview that the company was faced with the "wonderful problems of growth" on many of its main lines, such as Chicago to New York.


Taiwan Sets Example Of Freedom for China
To the Editor:
I would like to set right the misconception on the status of Taiwan in "Taiwan for the Taiwanese" by Phyllis Hwang (Op-Ed, April 10).
First, on Oct. 25, 1945, sovereignty over Taiwan was returned by a defeated Japan to the Republic of China as specified in the Allies' Cairo Declaration of 1943.
Second, on April 28, 1952, the Republic of China Government signed a peace treaty with Japan in Taipei that sanctioned the sovereignty of the Republic of China over Taiwan.
In any case, prior to Taiwan's occupation by Japan, it had been a province of China, so there was no need for its status to be decided by self-determination.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League
BALTIMORE ORIOLES -- Agreed to terms with Manny Alexander, infielder; Armando Benitez, pitcher; Cesar Devarez, catcher; and Curtis Goodwin, outfielder, on one-year contracts.
Invited Andy Van Slyke, outfielder, to spring training as a non-roster player.


JOHNSON &amp; JOHNSON (JNJ,N)
Johnson &amp; Johnson reported yesterday a 20 percent increase in first-quarter earnings on strong sales of new products in its professional and pharmaceutical segments.
The giant maker of health care products, including Band-Aids and Tylenol, said net earnings for the first quarter rose to $654 million from $544 million for the similar period in 1994.
The latest quarter's profit of $1.02 a share was several cents above analysts' expectations.


Food Notes
A Lemony Flavor Rum
Bacardi rum, the largest-selling brand of spirits in the world, has introduced its first flavored rum, Bacardi Limon.
A white rum flavored with citrus juices, it has a pleasant, lemony flavor with a hint of grapefruit, making it good on the rocks and delicious with tonic.
"We see it as the first rum that will compete with other categories of spirits like vodka," said Rudy Ruiz, president of Bacardi Imports.
Bacardi Limon is 70 proof and is around $8 a fifth and $10 a liter.
If Bacardi is the world's No. 1 spirit, what is the No. 1 drink? Rum and Coca-Cola.


New York's New Smoking Ban Gives Offense in Several Ways
To the Editor:
At last the much-anticipated, much-ballyhooed and, for some, long-awaited ban on smoking in New York City restaurants has arrived!


Banc One Corp.(ONE,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Allan Scott, Writer; Of Films, Dies at 88
Allan Scott, who as a Hollywood screenwriter was the co-author of Fred Astaire and Ginger Rogers musicals, died on Thursday at St.
John's Hospital in Santa Monica, Calif.
He was 88.
In a career that spanned 50 years, Mr.
Scott wrote or collaborated on the screenplays for "Top Hat," "Follow the Fleet," "Swing Time" and "Shall We Dance," and also contributed, without credit, to the screenplay of "The Gay Divorcee," all before 1938.
His other films included "Quality Street," "Skylark," "So Proudly We Hail" (in which Claudette Colbert, Paulette Goddard and Veronica Lake played Army nurses), "Let's Dance" (starring Astaire and Betty Hutton), "The Five Thousand Fingers of Dr. T." and "The Fourposter."


Tribune Co. (TRB,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 26


CHRONICLE
Anne Frank died 50 years ago this year, and the actress DEBRA WINGER and the composer and conductor MICHAEL TILSON THOMAS are collaborating on a commemoration.
Ms.
Winger will be the narrator for a work composed by Mr.
Thomas called "From the Diary of Anne Frank." It will be performed at the Kennedy Center in Washington on Monday and at Avery Fisher Hall on April 28 by the New World Symphony under the baton of Mr.
Thomas.


ACTIVIST INVESTOR URGES CHANGES AT CHASE
Michael Price, the activist investor who has purchased a 6 percent stake in the Chase Manhattan Corporation, turned up the heat on the big bank's management yesterday, calling for "dramatic change" at its annual shareholders meeting.
In a question to Thomas G. Labrecque, the chairman of the nation's sixth-largest bank, Mr.
Price took credit for the rise in Chase's stock to $44.75 yesterday; it was $35 before the 11-million-share purchase by Mr.
Price's Heine Securities was disclosed.
He said that an acquisition of Chase would be "far superior to the company's current strategy." Officials of Nationsbank, the huge North Carolina banking company, have said they would like to acquire Chase, although they have not approached it.


Disney and 3 Bells to Form Venture for Video Services
The Walt Disney Company and three regional Bell companies said yesterday that they would form a partnership to deliver video programming over phone lines, but the long-expected announcement said little new about the venture's financing or structure.
Disney and the Bells -- Ameritech, SBC Communications and BellSouth -- said they would spend $500 million over five years to create and distribute entertainment and interactive programming in their regions, which cover a giant swath of the Midwestern and Southern United States.


Nobody Can Keep Pace With John Grisham
Highbrow critics may shudder, but John Grisham has once again set the publishing world afire, selling about 300,000 copies of "The Rainmaker" in its first week in bookstores (the initial printing was a record 2.8 million copies).
And on May 3, the book will step neatly into the No. 1 spot on the New York Times best-seller list.
No one need ask who the real rainmaker is.
Even by today's publishing standards, with blockbusters all but required to keep publishers afloat, this book is off to a phenomenal start.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-17  MEXICAN DRUG LINK  An intercepted cocaine shipment at an airport in the Sierra Madre foothills last August demonstrated the extent that official corruption has taken hold in Mexico.
A1  DIPLOMATIC SHUFFLE IN INDIA  For two days, Treasury Secretary Robert E. Rubin and President Hashemi Rafsanjani of Iran, both visiting India, have been playing diplomatic hide-and-seek.
A1


Class Notes; With academia changing, colleges see advantages in nontraditional chiefs.
There is Douglas J. Bennet Jr., best known for running National Public Radio from 1983 to 1993, who was named president of Wesleyan University in Connecticut this month.
There is M. Peter McPherson, a former banker and lawyer who in October 1993 became president of Michigan State University.
There is David L. Boren, who last year left the United States Senate to become president of the University of Oklahoma.
It's not that corporate tycoons and professional managers are displacing classicists and zoologists en masse as university presidents.
But increasingly, as the demands on university presidents center on raising money, restructuring and political savvy rather than traditional academic pursuits, universities are considering less traditional candidates for the pressure-cooker job of university president.


Georgia Gulf Corp.(GGC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Cooper Tire &amp; Rubber Co.  (CTB,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Houston Post Bought and Closed by Rival
The country's fourth-largest city abruptly became a one-newspaper town today, after the 111-year-old Houston Post was sold to the Hearst Corporation, owner of the larger Houston Chronicle, which immediately shut it down.
The owner of The Post, Consolidated Newspapers Inc., said the rising cost of newsprint had discouraged potential buyers who might have been willing to keep the paper operating.
Instead, the best offer came from Hearst, whose chief benefit in the deal is the elimination of The Chronicle's competition.


Best Buy Co. (BBY,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 25


Point, Click, Shop Till You Drop
SHOPPING by computer is not new, but it has yet to catch on with most consumers, especially those who use catalogues.
Part of the reason is that until recently, personal computer screens did not have the clarity and sharpness of the typical four-color catalogue.
Now, however, computer technology has not only caught up with the printed catalogue but surpassed it with the addition of sound, video and animation.
And computer shopping is increasingly attractive to merchants because of the large number of multimedia PC's, which have CD-ROM drives and sound cards, that are being purchased for home use.


Good and Bad News for H.M.O.
The State Supreme Court had good news and bad news for the Health Care Plan of New Jersey, a health maintenance organization.
First the bad: In a unanimous groundbreaking ruling, the court decided that H.M.O.'s -- like doctors and other health care providers -- can be sued for malpractice.
The good: the court said in a unanimous decision that Health Care Plan of North Brunswick was not liable for a share of a nearly $3 million jury award to a patient whose doctor failed to diagnose testicular cancer.
The court said the doctor waited too long to countersue the H.M.O.


Harris Corp.(HRS,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Body From Bay Is Identified
A body fished from Barnegat Bay was identified yesterday as Joseph Schiffino.
Mr.
Schiffino, 22, of the Bayville section of the township, disappeared on March 31 while he was checking duck blinds.


On Ivy League Schooling
To The Home Section:
As the mother of two Ivy League graduates, I want to respond to "Heavy Angst When It's 'Ivy or Else' " (March 30).


Birmingham Steel Corp.(BIR,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Onbancorp Inc.(ONBK,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Wells Fargo &amp; Co. (WFC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


The Fish Spain Loves
To the Editor:
"Spanish Stirred by 'War' Over a Fish They Don't Eat" (news article, April 15) perpetuates a confusion by identifying the creature Spaniards don't eat as "turbot."
The true turbot, genus Psetta, also fished off Newfoundland, is Spanish "rodaballo," a much-appreciated delicacy in Spain.


Testimony Ends in Trial Of Mother In 5 Deaths
Testimony ended today in the murder trial of Waneta E. Hoyt, with the prosecutor charging that Mrs.
Hoyt had deprived her five young children of the chance to reach adulthood by suffocating them a quarter century ago, all because they would not stop crying.
"Five people, five young people, aren't here today because of her," Robert Simpson, the Tioga County District Attorney, told the jury in his closing statement.
"Today I think they would have ranged in age from 24 to 31. They would have families and do all the things you and I enjoy doing in the course of our lives."


Remnants of Branch Davidians Gather to Grieve and Look to Future
The carnage in Oklahoma City came two years to the day after about 80 sect members perished in a fiery assault on the Branch Davidian compound near Waco, Tex.
That raid was staged by agents of the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms, a Federal agency that had offices in the building bombed yesterday.
But by yesterday evening, there was no evidence whatever of a link between the Oklahoma bombing and the Branch Davidians.
One Federal official who has been deeply involved in investigating the sect said yesterday that the "red hot," or most militant, members were in prison or dead, and that the others had been under surveillance.


Newell Co.(NWL,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


In Limbo in Latvia, Wandering Families Settle In


Ohio Edison Co.(OEC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Carlisle Cos. (CSL,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


General Public Utilities Corp.(GPU,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Wolverine Tube (WLV,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 1


Mirage Resorts Inc.(MIR,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


U.N. Eases Libya Flight Ban to Allow Pilgrims to Go to Mecca
The Security Council eased its three-year-old ban on flights from Libya today to permit Egyptian airliners to carry Muslim pilgrims to Mecca.
"It was not the intention of the Security Council to prevent the Muslim population of Libya from fulfilling one of their key religious obligations," the Security Council president, Karel Kovanda of the Czech Republic, told reporters today.


Petty Has Surgery for Prostate Cancer
RICHARD PETTY underwent surgery for prostate cancer Tuesday at a hospital in Greensboro, N.C.
The surgery at the Moses H. Cone Regional Cancer Center lasted about two hours.
Petty's urologist, Dr.
RONALD L. DAVIS, said the procedure went without complication and "there is no evidence that the cancer has spread to other parts of his body."


Fleet Financial (FLT,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


U.S. Wealth Gap Is Also a Vietnam War Legacy; McNamara's 'Sinecure'
To the Editor:
"Mr. McNamara's War" (editorial, April 12) gleams with the same "hubristic glow" of power once enjoyed by our national leaders and now passed by the vagaries of history to the news media.
While your sentiments are surely right and deserve wide understanding, their target deserves better.


Dun &amp; Bradstreet (DNB,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Informix Corp.(IFMX,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 2


U.N. and Bosnia: Why Do the Peacekeepers Stay?
After a week of repeated humiliations for the United Nations, a pointed question is being asked here: Are the 24,000 United Nations soldiers still in Bosnia simply because it it too difficult and dangerous to get them out?
The three-year-old United Nations peacekeeping mission here has long looked parlous, suspended haplessly in the middle of a war.
But in the last few days, the killings of two French soldiers, the humiliation of the departing American Ambassador to Bosnia and the flagrant use of heavy weapons supposedly banned around Sarajevo have suggested that the United Nations may be sacrificing lives, money and its credibility for nothing.


Those Hybrid Made-for-TV Movies
It all used to be simple.
Movies were made in Hollywood studios and released nationally through theater chains.
Then along came television, which in addition to gobbling up Hollywood movies to flesh out skimpy schedules began, around 1969, producing its own made-for-television movies.
These were initially low-budget affairs that gave "real" movie critics irresistible opportunities for sneering.
The dividing line was clear.
For a while.
Today it's one big blur.
Made-for-television movies often hit big-time-budget levels and wind up being released theatrically around the world.
Films made for television abroad are released theatrically here, a practice that began in earnest with "My Beautiful Laundrette," an English film of a Hanif Kureishi story directed by Stephen Frears and starring a promising unknown named Daniel Day-Lewis.
The practice continues this year with the BBC's mini-series version of Mr.
Kureishi's "Buddha of Suburbia."


Pacific Telesis Group (PAC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Rohm &amp; Haas Co.(ROH,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Keystone FinancialInc.(KSTN,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Seagull Says It Saw No Wrongdoing
Seagull Entertainment, a television syndication and programming production company, says it knew of no wrongdoing in business transactions involving two top officials of Wells Rich Greene BDDP Communications.
The officials left the agency company last week after Wells Rich accused them of unauthorized use of $500,000 in corporate funds for personal gain in dealing with an outside company, which was later identified as Seagull.
Wells Rich, a unit of the BDDP Group, said on April 12 that David R. Sklaver, president of Wells Rich Greene BDDP Advertising, and Tom Fagan, executive vice president and chief financial officer of Wells Rich, had used the $500,000 to invest in "a new production company facility" and in turn "personally received stock in that company." At that time, Wells Rich declined to identify the production company because, it said, there were no indications the production company knew of any improprieties.


Fibreboard (FBD,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


IBP Inc.(IBP,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 1


U.S. Wealth Gap Is Also a Vietnam War Legacy; Grief and Responsibility
To the Editor:
Robert S. McNamara, as you note in "Mr. McNamara's War" (editorial, April 12), must assume responsibility for his role in the Vietnam tragedy.


5 Are Found Dead in an Arson-Homicide Case
In one of the worst mass murders in modern Connecticut history, five people were found dead or fatally wounded after a suspicious fire Tuesday night destroyed a three-family home here, the state police said today.
Investigators were treating the case as an arson-homicide, saying there were signs that the fire had been started in more than one place.
Three of the bodies were found Tuesday night, and two more were found this morning -- one at 4 A.M. and another at 10:30.
Authorities said four of the people were burned beyond recognition.


Court Hears Challenges to Black Districts
The Supreme Court today took up perhaps the most basic affirmative-action issue in a democracy: whether election districts can be drawn according to the race of the people who live in them.
At issue were two Congressional districts -- one in Louisiana and the other in Georgia -- specifically created to contain majorities of black voters, with the aim of helping to elect more blacks to Congress.


International Briefs; Sabena Stake Sale Faces European Hurdle
The European Commission said yesterday that it would only approve Swissair's plan to buy a 49.5 percent stake in the Belgian national airline Sabena when it received guarantees that the agreement would not distort competition in the European Union.
The Swiss airline and the Belgian Government have been in talks for a year in an attempt to agree to conditions for the sale.
The Belgian Government said Sabena needed a cash injection to survive.


Kodak Shares Up as Earnings Climb 80%
Shares of the Eastman Kodak Company jumped yesterday after the company reported that its first-quarter earnings shot up more than 80 percent.
The stock rose as high as $59, a 52-week high, before closing at $57.125, up $4.75 on the day, in heavy trading on the New York Stock Exchange.


Big Newspapers to Help Locals on Internet
Eight of the largest newspaper companies in the United States said yesterday that they had formed an alliance to help local newspapers make the transition to the era of electronic publishing on the Internet.
The unusual cooperative effort, known as the New Century Network, will attempt to create common standards for more than 100 daily newspapers as they struggle to reach new generations of readers who are more likely to get their news from a computer screen than from the printed page.


Relevance Is Not Enough, Mr. Clinton
No troops will be marching to battle under a banner that reads "The President is relevant." Yet that is about as inspirational as President Clinton got during his televised news conference Tuesday night.
After weeks in which Congressional Republicans have dominated the political debate, and after an assertive televised address by House Speaker Newt Gingrich exulting in the accomplishments of his first 100 days, the Democrats are desperate for political leadership.
But the best Mr.
Clinton could offer was assurances that the Constitution, his record and his ideas make him relevant -- and thus someone the Republicans should work with.
There was nothing terribly wrong about the President's opening statement or his responses to reporters' questions.
It is just that there was nothing brilliantly right -- no uplifting thematic response to the Republican onslaught that would make it clear where this President and his Administration are now heading.


Kuhlman Corp.(KUH,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Digital Posts a Profit for 2d Quarter in a Row
Struggling to turn itself around after losing more than $5.8 billion over the last four years, the Digital Equipment Corporation yesterday posted its second consecutive quarterly profit, surpassing most analysts expectations by a wide margin.
The company is on course for its first profitable year since 1990.
Digital earned $74 million, or 44 cents a share, in its third quarter, which ended on April 1, compared with a loss of $183.3 million, or $1.34 a share, in the corresponding quarter last year.
The earnings were well above the average estimate of 28 cents a share predicted by 16 analysts in a survey by Zacks Investment Research.


U.S. Again Urges Turkey to Pull Out of Iraq
President Clinton urged Turkey today to withdraw its troops soon from northern Iraq, but Prime Minister Tansu Ciller said she could not yet say when that month-old operation would end.
During talks at the White House, Mrs.
Ciller would say only that "the majority of the job is done." And while Mr.
Clinton repeated his view that Turkey was justified in its cross-border crackdown on Kurdish rebels, he reflected the Administration's concern that the Turkish response to attacks by Kurdish rebels poses a threat to innocent civilians.


Lotus Loses $17.5 Million For Quarter
The Lotus Development Corporation reported an unexpectedly large $17.5 million loss for the first quarter yesterday, in contrast with earnings of $21.3 million a year earlier.
Revenue fell 18 percent, to $202 million from $247 million.
Nevertheless, analysts suggested that Lotus's communications business, particularly the popular Notes group-ware products, remained strong and continued to be well positioned to dominate that growing market.


Cummins Engine Co. (CUM,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 2


Devils' Short-Term Risk Might Pay Off in Playoffs
There are six games left in the regular season, but Devils Coach Jacques Lemaire is thinking playoffs.
That is why he risked losing Tuesday's game against Tampa Bay by playing center Jim Dowd.
"We need some games to get back his timing," Lemaire said, referring to Dowd, who had missed 35 games because of shoulder surgery.
"I told the guys that you can't just step in the playoffs and start to play. That it's going to be tough because everything is going fast and every mistake counts."


Other Bombings in America
1978-1994: A series of mail-bombings injures 10 and kills 2 in 15 separate incidents nationwide.
The F.B.I. believes the cases are connected, and that a lone bomber is responsible.
The investigation, code-named Unabom, continues.
Feb. 26, 1993: A bomb in a van in a parking garage under New York's World Trade Center kills six, injures more than 1,000 and cripples the twin 110-story towers.
Four Muslims are convicted and sentenced to 240 years in prison each.
A fifth man, the alleged mastermind, was captured in February and awaits trial.


Autopsy Fails to Settle Manila-Singapore Dispute
A joint autopsy conducted by Philippine and Singapore pathologists on a Filipino maid who was killed in Singapore in 1991 and for whose murder another Filipino was executed last month ended today with both sides reporting "irreconcilable differences" over their findings.
The joint autopsy, held under heavy guard at a private hospital in a Manila suburb, ended with experts from Singapore's Institute of Science and Forensic Medicine, accompanied by three American consultants, sticking to the findings of the first autopsy held in Singapore in 1991, which found that the victim, Delia Maga, died of asphyxiation caused by strangulation.


Earl Blackwell Memorial
A memorial service for Earl Blackwell, a society impresario and promoter of celebrities and their events, is to be held on May 3 at 3 P.M. at the Church of St.
Paul the Apostle, 415 West 59th Street, Manhattan.
Mr.
Blackwell died last month at the age of 85.
Among those to take part in the service, which is open to the public, are Arlene Dahl, Patrice Munsel, Douglas Fairbanks Jr. and Isabel Stevenson, president of the American Theater Wing.


Blacks Prone To Dismissal By the U.S.
Black Federal employees were more than twice as likely to be dismissed as their white, Hispanic or Asian counterparts, according to a report made public today by the Office of Personnel Management.
The disparity was seen regardless of occupational category, pay level, education, agency, geographic location, age, performance rating, seniority or attendance record.


Snap-On Inc.(SNA,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 1


VWR Corp.(VWRX,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Lydall Inc.(LDL,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


International Briefs; Air France Loss Narrows
Air France narrowed its net loss by 72 percent in 1994 as it reaped the benefits of lower interest payments, lower fuel costs and lower subcontracting costs.
France's state-owned airline said yesterday that the consolidated net loss for 1994 fell to 2.36 billion French francs, or about $481 million, from 8.48 billion francs in 1993, when it took a one-time charge of 1.8 billion francs for restructuring.
The airline called the figures reported yesterday "intermediary," saying it would report results for the 15-month period ending March 31 in June.


Diamond Multimedia reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Calendar: Auction, Exhibitions
Benefit Auction  Fashion Institute of Technology, 227 West 27th Street; (212) 760-7158.
The F.I.T.
Alumni Association is sponsoring a benefit reception and auction on Wednesday at 6 P.M.
The auction will feature designer fashions, accessories, jewelry and home furnishings.
Tickets, $25.


In Shock, Loathing, Denial: 'This Doesn't Happen Here'
Before the dust and the rage had a chance to settle, a chilly rain started to fall on the blasted-out wreck of what had once been an office building, and on the shoulders of the small army of police, firefighters and medical technicians that surrounded it.
They were not used to this, if anyone is.
On any other day, they would have answered calls to kitchen fires, domestic disputes, or even a cat up a tree.
Oklahoma City is still, in some ways, a small town, said the people who live here.


Cold, Tired, Lost Hikers Found Safe In a Park
They spent the night huddled together in Bear Mountain State Park, yelling for help when they heard noises and setting off the flashes on their cameras so rescuers could find them.
When the sun rose today, the six Orthodox Jewish children said their morning prayers, including a special psalm asking God for help, and hiked until they emerged near the Palisades Parkway, where they were picked up and driven to park headquarters.


Justices Allow Unsigned Political Fliers
Casting doubt on the election laws of nearly every state, the Supreme Court ruled today that the right to distribute anonymous campaign literature is protected by the constitutional guarantee of free speech.
The 7-to-2 decision clearly applied to pamphlets and leaflets of the sort that people distribute to express their own views on candidates or campaign issues.
Its application to paid campaign advertising was less certain, and the Court said it was expressing no view on disclosure requirements for radio and television advertising.
Nonetheless, the ruling appears likely to prompt a new round of challenges to the disclosure requirements contained in Federal and numerous state election laws.


Some Action, Little Talk
No one ever accused the white men who run the nation's large corporations of being social reformers.
They generally prefer less government to more, and they like the social structure that put them in power.
So as some politicians vow to abolish programs that grant preferences to women and minorities, chief executives might be expected to welcome the move.
But to hear them tell it, they want nothing of the kind.
In hiring and promotion, Corporate America seems eager to reach out to qualified women and black, Hispanic, Asian and other minorities, despite a growing white-male backlash.
Indeed, executives say they are more conscious of color and sex in their hiring and promotion decisions than they were five years ago.
They are not trying to redress past discrimination.
Rather, they describe their intentions in terms of enlightened self-interest: they want a diverse work force to help them appeal to customers beyond the suburbs and to compete better in global markets.


Undertones Of Relevance
President Clinton's paramount challenge these days is to persuade the public and a Republican Congress that he has a place in a political debate that risks passing him by.
But in his efforts to prove his relevance, he often seems reduced simply to proclaiming it.
Today, Mr.
Clinton vowed not to be "blackmailed" by Speaker Newt Gingrich's threats to attach measures he opposes to vital bills like those setting the Federal debt ceiling that could only be vetoed by grinding the Government to a halt.


Outside, Monitors Remain Neutral
BEIGE. Putty. Taupe. Dun. And, oh, yes, off-white.
These are the humdrum hues of computers, monitors, printers and just about anything that connects to them that isn't gray or black.
Color displays and color printers may be commonplace, but their exteriors have remained resolutely, forthrightly bland.


TERROR IN OKLAHOMA CITY: AROUND THE NATION  Aftershocks of Terror Spread Out Quickly After the Explosion in Oklahoma City; Ghastly Reminder Of Two Years Ago In New York City
Although more than two years had passed since that February day when lower Manhattan was plunged into smoky chaos, the memories of the World Trade Center explosion resurfaced for many New Yorkers yesterday as word spread about the bombing of a Federal office building in Oklahoma City.
Even as Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani held a news conference to announce extra security precautions and try to calm jittery New Yorkers, bomb scares forced the evacuation of public buildings in New York and New Jersey.
And many workers around the trade center and the courts and government offices of lower Manhattan expressed fears that another attack could happen there.


Arvin Industries Inc.(ARV,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 2


Showalter Not Getting Much Job Security
George Steinbrenner declined today to guarantee that Buck Showalter would manage the Yankees for the entire 1995 season, saying he would never make such a statement about a manager and that it was unnecessary because Showalter is aware of the owner's feelings toward him.
Showalter was the American League Manager of the Year in 1994 after the Yankees went 70-43 and will manage the All-Star team this season.
But he will begin the season next week in an uncertain position because he is in the final year of his contract.
Even though the Yankees have been heralded as the class of the league and serious contenders to reach the World Series, their manager has no guarantees that he will even last through October.


Corrections
A picture caption yesterday about a Pulitzer Prize-winning photograph described it and credited it incorrectly in some copies.
The picture was by Jacqueline Arzt, not Jean-Marc Bouju; it showed a Rwandan child too weak to stand in line for vaccinations (not children pleading to be allowed to cross a bridge between Rwanda and Zaire).
Ms.
Arzt, along with Mr.
Bouju, Javier Bauluz and Karsten Thielker, won the feature photography prize for The Associated Press.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-14  GAS FUMES HIT YOKOHAMA STATION
In a chilling reminder of the gas attack in the Tokyo subway, about 300 people were taken to hospitals in Yokohama after caustic fumes spread through the main railroad station and through a train.
No one claimed responsibility.
A10


Amgen (AMGN,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Michigan National Corp.(MNCO,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Alltel Corp.(AT,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Graco Inc.(GGG,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Corrections
An entry in the Addenda listing on the Media Business page on Tuesday about a campaign parodying a series of advertisements for the Milk Processors Education Program of the National Fluid Milk Processor Promotion Board referred incorrectly to comments by Charlie Decker, the program's executive director.
He said that the milk industry would drop the "low fat" designation from milk with 2 percent fat -- not that the industry would relabel 2 percent milk as "reduced fat."


Comerica Inc.(CMA,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Preparing Students For the World Of Jobs
The pressures of global competition have spawned a variety of successful experiments in rethinking how to educate the neglected majority of our high school students -- the 70 percent who will not finish four years of college.
Rethinking means new curriculums, new teaching methods, a new joining of academic skills and jobs skills and of classroom learning and work-site learning.


Earnings at MCI and ATT Rise As Long-Distance Calls Grow
MCI has won the latest skirmish in its running battle with AT&amp;T and Sprint for long-distance telephone customers, based on the company's first-quarter results.
The MCI Communications Corporation said yesterday that its volume of long-distance calls increased a robust 9.2 percent in the first quarter from the first quarter of last year.
That compares with 8.4 percent for the AT&amp;T Corporation and slightly more than 6 percent for the Sprint Corporation.


U.S. Wealth Gap Is Also a Vietnam War Legacy; North-South Fiction
To the Editor:
Your report on Robert McNamara's book on the Vietnam War (front page, April 9) relates that he now admits that "we were wrong, terribly wrong." But he still maintains that these were errors "not of values and intentions but of judgment and capabilities." Throughout your April 12 editorial and in the many letters you published April 13 and 14, this sacred cow of our "good intentions" is taken as a given.
The most important fact about the Vietnam War is still missing in action.


A Nonconformist in a League of His Own
The San Antonio Spurs can't live with Dennis Rodman, and they can't live without him.
They have colluded against him, sent an assistant coach to one of his motorcycle rallies, debriefed his confidant, and they still hear only grunts out of him.
When he chose his Harley-Davidson over the team -- and wiped out his right shoulder in an accident on loose gravel -- the Spurs tried to move on.
They won 12 consecutive games in his absence; they considered him out of sight, and out of his mind.
But when they then lost two straight, including one in which no one hit Charles Barkley back, the company line became, "If Dennis was here, we win."


From Cosmopolitan To Enquirer and Star
Tony Hoyt, vice president and publisher of Cosmopolitan magazine, has been named as senior vice president and publisher of The National Enquirer and The Star, two weekly tabloid newspapers owned by American Media in Lantana, Fla.


Motor Vehicle Workers Stay Home to Protest Plan to Privatize
Operations at 21 of New Jersey's 48 motor vehicle field offices were crippled today as workers staged a sick-out to protest Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman's plan to transfer state-run offices to private agents.
The work stoppage caught thousands of customers unaware and unable to obtain new licenses and registrations, renew old ones, or process any of the myriad pieces of paperwork needed to put cars, trucks and motorcycles legally on the road.
They found shuttered doors or skeleton supervisory staff at offices here and in Newark, Trenton, Elizabeth and Paterson and in smaller cities and suburban communities.
Many left in frustration, muttering and shaking their heads.


Inco Ltd. (N,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Wary Network Anchors Battle Dubious Scoops
The shattered building, its innards exposed to the camera; the black smoke; the confused people hastening, they hoped, away from danger; the bloodied bodies on the street; the crying babies; the agitated local reporters, and dubious scoops quickly delivered and almost as quickly withdrawn.
It was yet another set of television images, joining the disaster scenes that are coming to seem like seasonal reruns.
The viewer was reminded of past terrorist blasts, in Beirut, Buenos Aires, Tokyo, London, New York.
Hours before anyone could say whether there had even been a bomb, the smoke of implication was thick.


Mohawk Industries(MOHK,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 1


12 Victims Were Children in 2d-Floor Day-Care Center
A car bomb went off with a thunderous explosion here this morning, ripping through a Federal office building, collapsing walls and floors, and killing at least 31 people.
Many others were buried in the wreckage, and the death toll seemed certain to rise.
At least 12 children whose parents had just dropped them off at a second-floor day-care center were among those immediately known dead in the deadliest bombing in the United States in 75 years.


Gossage, at 43, Ends His 22-Year Career
GOOSE GOSSAGE, whose 95-mile-per-hour fastball intimidated hitters, has called it a career at age 43 after 22 years in the majors.
Last year, he was a setup relief pitcher with the Seattle Mariners but was not invited back.
"I'm not voluntarily retiring," he told The Colorado Springs Gazette-Telegraph on Tuesday.
"I'm just retired. It's a bittersweet feeling."


The Tools of a Terrorist: Everywhere for Anyone
The powerful bomb that ripped off the face of a Federal building in Oklahoma City yesterday was probably made of inexpensive fertilizers and chemicals that are widely available at gardening centers, chemical supply houses and gasoline stations, civilian and Federal explosives experts said.
Moreover, the ingredients can be mixed in a lethal brew by almost anyone, the experts said, guided by instructions that are published in hundreds of handbooks as well as on the Internet, and with equipment that is no more sophisticated than a kitchen blender.


Elisa Monte Troupe Presents Two Premieres
Elisa Monte Dance hurtled onto the stage on Tuesday night in the first of two programs to be presented in the troupe's two-week season at the Joyce Theater (175 Eighth Avenue, at 19th Street, Chelsea).
The choreography was gutsy and as bright as new coins.
The nine performers are uniformly impressive in looks and dance skills.
Best of all, this is a company of individuals.
The ingredients were first-rate and made for an evening of luscious, feel-good dancing.
And yet there was a slight hollowness to the program, as if an emotional thread or raison d'etre were missing in this abundance of pleasure.
An exception was "Vejle/Border Crossing," a slight but potent duet choreographed last year by Ms.
Monte and David Brown, co-directors of the company, and performed by Mr.
Brown and Christian Canciani.
Set to music by Puccini, the dance is essentially a matter of acrobatic male partnering by two humans who both need and avoid each other.
The duet is reminiscent of Ms.
Monte's signature work, "Treading," a staple of the Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater repertory, in its thorough mix of physicality and emotion.


AT LEAST 31 ARE DEAD, SCORES ARE MISSING AFTER CAR BOMB ATTACK IN OKLAHOMA CITY WRECKS 9-STORY FEDERAL OFFICE BUILDING
The authorities opened an intensive hunt today for whoever bombed a Federal office building in Oklahoma City, and proceeded on the theory that the bombing was a terrorist attack against the Government, law-enforcement officials said.
President Clinton appeared in the White House press room this afternoon and somberly promised that the Government would hunt down the "evil cowards" responsible.
"These people are killers," he said, "and must be treated like killers."


Baylor's Pact Is Extended by the Rockies
The Colorado Rockies yesterday extended the contract of Manager DON BAYLOR through the 1996 season.
Baylor, 45, signed a two-year deal with the expansion Rockies before their inaugural 1993 season.
Colorado had an option for this year. (AP)


Federal Signal Corp.(FSS,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Norwest Corp.(NOB,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


No Headline
"There are places we have to crawl over bodies to get to other people. People are crying out to us. There are areas where we can reach through and try to touch their hands. There are some areas we can't get to at all." -- JON HANSEN, of the Oklahoma Fire Department.  [ B10:1. ]


Northrop Grumman Corp.(NOC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Washington Mutual Inc.(WAMU,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


U.S. Wealth Gap Is Also a Vietnam War Legacy
To the Editor:
Your timely April 17 article on wealth inequality in the United States ("Gap in Wealth in U.S. Called Widest in West," front page), closely following publication of Robert McNamara's book "In Retrospect: The Tragedy and Lessons of Vietnam," prompts me to offer my opinion on the origin of the undesirable trend of extreme wealth inequality in the United States.


Crash Cited at a Hearing on Runway Risk
In a last transmission to the control tower at the St.
Louis airport, just before an 80-ton T.W.A. jet bore down on a twin-engine Cessna, the pilot of the small plane radioed that he was "ready to go on the right side."
But the pilot of the chartered plane did not specify runway 31 right, where he had been assigned to wait, or 30 right, where the plane actually was.
In any case, the local air-traffic controller testified at a hearing today that she never heard the pilot's radio message and that even if she had, she would have had no reason to doubt that the Cessna was on the runway to which it had been assigned.


Brazil's Chief, In U.S., Says He'll Insist on Key Reforms
In a speech that points to the growing importance of foreign investment for Brazil, President Fernando Henrique Cardoso pledged yesterday that his country would not abandon steps toward legal reform and open markets, and he predicted that initial changes in the Constitution would be approved by the Brazilian Congress in three to four months -- much sooner than expected.
"Our Congress will discuss, change as it should, but our Congress will ultimately approve the measures that our country requires," he said.
Mr.
Cardoso, who took office in January after winning 54 percent of the votes, said Congress would "reflect public opinion" in approving his initiatives.


Bowater Inc.(BOW,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


City, Bus Drivers And Firms to Talk
Representatives for the school bus drivers' union, private bus companies and city labor negotiators have agreed to meet today to try to avert a threatened bus drivers strike on Monday.
The meeting, the first one to include all three parties, comes two days after Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani accused the bus company owners of fomenting a strike in order to keep the city from changing the current way it does business with them.
Since 1979, when bus drivers staged a three-month strike, most contracts for bus service have been renewed without competitive bidding.


Beware the First Sip Of Ol' Demon Coffee
MEMOIR FROM ANTPROOF CASE  By Mark Helprin  514 pages. Harcourt Brace. $24.
"Call me Oscar Progresso" is the first line in Mark Helprin's rapturous and melancholy new novel, which, like "A Soldier of the Great War," Mr.
Helprin's last book, is a husky narrative of a singularly adventurous life.
The author, of course, is taking an affectionate poke at Melville, letting the reader know from the beginning that "Memoir From Antproof Case" is going to be a variation on what the author of "Moby Dick" might have called a mighty book.
His second sentence is: "Or, for that matter, call me anything you want, as Oscar Progresso is not my name." Mr.
Helprin's work is in the tradition of grand, cerebral, picaresque storytelling, but with a modernist edge of self-parody.


More Roving Guards for Casinos
It may be easier for people under 21 to sneak into the Trump Taj Mahal Casino, but it will be harder for them to sneak drinks or bets.
That was the experts' prediction after a decision by the State Casino Control Commission to allow the Taj to increase its use of roving security guards in place of the stationary monitors who stand on the perimeter of the gambling hall to bar minors.
The decision allows a two-month test of the new procedure.


On Ivy League Schooling
To The Home Section:
As the mother of two Ivy League graduates, I want to respond to "Heavy Angst When It's 'Ivy or Else' " (March 30).


T R Financial Corp.(ROSE,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


U S West Inc.(USW,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Bay Networks Inc.(BNET,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


AT HOME WITH: Ossie Davis and Ruby Dee; Art and Politics: Keeping It All Fresh
RUBY DEE had started to yawn when the telephone rang the other night in the Westchester County home she shares with her husband, Ossie Davis.
It was one of their three children, instructing Ms.
Dee to watch herself on television.
Ms.
Dee dutifully clicked on the tube, and there she was, narrating a special on the life of Edgar Allen Poe in her voice of smoke and silk.
The word "literary" rolled off her tongue, conjuring images of art with a capital A -- a tad exaggerated, a little campy.


Plumber Is Charged With Fraud
The way the Division of Consumer Affairs figures it, the plumbing bill should have come to $7,950.
Instead, an official said, a Byram Township woman was charged $23,082.56 by the plumber who answered her call for help when her frozen pipes burst.
Yesterday that plumber, Jeffrey Biggiani of East Hanover, was named in a 53-count complaint accusing him of violating the Consumer Fraud Act.
The lawsuit asks restitution for more than 50 customers and an injunction to keep Mr.
Biggiani from operating in New Jersey.


Florida's Carter Is Aware The Draft Is Anyone's Pick
Larry Jacobs, the agent for defensive end Kevin Carter, doesn't tell his client the latest scuttlebutt on the National Football League college draft that filters through his Jacksonville, Fla., office.
"I don't want him to get his hopes up," Jacobs said.


A Week When All Roads Lead to Milan
VISITORS attending the Salone Internazionale del Mobile, the international furniture fair, or the Eurocucina kitchen show, both of which ended last week in Milan, Italy, were caught up in a series of events.
One evening, Enzo Mari, the radical Italian architect, drew a large crowd outside the Alessi shop as he cut up plastic water bottles, recycling them into vases.
Across town, the Japanese architect Shigeru Uchida provided an oasis of serenity with new, yet traditional teahouses.


Corrections
A picture in some editions yesterday with an article about Michael Burnett, a longtime Government informer who has been charged with having a Staten Island woman killed, was published in error.
The picture, of a man with a mustache, showed an unidentified law-enforcement official who was escorting Mr.
Burnett from a courthouse in 1986; Mr.
Burnett, clean shaven, was shown correctly in other copies.


Fourth Financial (FRTH,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Corrections
A brief report in the Company News column of Business Day on Tuesday about a management agreement between the Blockbuster Entertainment Group division of Viacom Inc. and the Discovery Zone referred incorrectly in some editions to the stock action of one company on Monday.
It was shares of the Discovery Zone, not Viacom shares, that fell 46.875 cents, to $10.15625.


Giddings &amp; Lewis (GIDL,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 2


World News Briefs; Iranian Chief Adamant On Russian Atom Deal
President Hashemi Rafsenjani of Iran ended a three-day state visit to India today with a blistering attack on the United States, saying Teheran was determined to acquire nuclear power reactors from Russia despite strong objections from Washington.
But he also said relations with the United States could be improved if Washington released an estimated $17 billion in assets frozen by the United States in 1979.


Japan Arrests No. 2 Leader of Sect Linked to Tokyo Attack
The police on Wednesday arrested the chief of clandestine activities of the Aum Shinrikyo religious sect, which is under suspicion in the poison gas attack on the Tokyo subway system last month.
The arrested man, Kiyode Hayakawa, 45, is apparently also the top-ranking member of the sect after Shoko Asahara, its guru.
Mr.
Hayakawa was arrested after he appeared on a live television program from the cult's offices near Mount Fuji, Kyodo News Agency reported.


Rockland Prosecutor's Friend Assists in Investigation of Him
In a major step forward for the two-year-old Federal investigation of Kenneth Gribetz, the longtime Rockland County District Attorney, a close friend of Mr.
Gribetz's has pleaded guilty to mail fraud and has begun cooperating with prosecutors.
The friend, Murray Bauer, a 45-year-old private detective, pleaded guilty on Tuesday in Federal court here to submitting inflated bills for investigative work he did in a negligence suit.
Prosecutors charge that Mr.
Bauer inflated those bills and passed on a $30,000 share of the negligence case's legal fees to an unnamed lawyer.


Fruit of The Loom Inc.(FTL,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Commonwealth Aluminum Corp.(ALC,Nnm) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Outboard Marine Corp.(OM,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Timken Co.(TKR,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Cultures Clash, Opportunity Knocks; In Scarsdale, Entrepreneurs Cater to Bewildered Japanese
Japanese business executives who are transferred to New York for a few years find little need to leave this affluent, heavily white New York City suburb of 17,000 to meet their daily needs.
Two medical practices providing Japanese-style health care have been opened here by two of Manhattan's biggest hospitals, Beth Israel Medical Center and Mount Sinai Medical Center.
American doctors have been trained to be alert to the high rate of stomach cancer among Japanese, and female Japanese assistants have been hired to make the patients feel more at home.


On Transracial Adoptions
To The Home Section:
"Beyond 'Losing Isaiah': Truth in Shades of Gray" (Parent &amp; Child, March 23), on transracial adoptions, repeats some dangerous myths.
The concept of a "birth culture" is a contradiction in terms; culture is what is not inherited but transmitted from and to others after birth.
There is no such thing as an inherited culture any more than there is an inherited religion, language or race consciousness, despite Hitler's attempt to purvey this view.


Libyan Girds For Defiance Of the West
Muammar el-Qaddafi, who governs Libya with a love of grandiose state projects and unflinching repression, has reorganized his security forces, purged rivals from his inner circle and set Libya on a course of defiance against the West that will probably endure as long as he remains in power.
The Libyan leader, who two decades ago was the enfant terrible of the Arab world, has exhausted a variety of tactics, short of turning over the two Libyans wanted in connection with the downing of a Pan Am jetliner, as he has sought to obtain the lifting of the three-year-old sanctions against his country.


Essay; The 25% Solution
"Can we simplify the tax system," asked President Clinton at a news conference we can thank CBS for telecasting live, "without being unfair or increasing the deficit?" His rumination was in response to a question about a "flat tax," and he went on to pledge: "If we can do it, then I am open to it."
Challenge accepted.
Today we're going to save everybody a lot of time and come up with a new tax system.


First Empire State Corp.(FES,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Parker Hannifin (PH,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


OTHER NEWS
Gas Fumes Create Panic in Yokohama
In a chilling reminder of the gas attack last month in Tokyo, caustic fumes spread through Yokohama's railroad station and through a train, sending about 300 people to hospitals.
No one took responsibility for release of the gas.
Page A10.
Court Upholds Anonymity
In a decision threatening state election laws, the Supreme Court ruled the Constitution guarantees the right to distribute anonymous campaign literature.
Page A20.
Lugar Declares Candidacy
Saying he has an unblemished character, Senator Richard Lugar of Indiana announced that he would seek the Republican nomination for President in 1996.
Page A16.
Mayor Wants to End Relief
A day after touting the success of new rules for a welfare program, Mayor Giuliani said he really favors abolishing the program.
Page B3.


Allies Split on How to Deal With Serbia Curbs
Days before the Security Council must decide whether to extend a partial suspension of sanctions against Serbia, a dispute over how to deal with the Serbian President, Slobodan Milosevic, is fracturing the five-nation group guiding peace efforts in the Balkans.
Diplomats involved in informal talks on the issue say that the United States and Germany are arguing with Britain, France and Russia over the conditions under which, and for what length of time, Serbia and Montenegro -- the remains of the former Yugoslavia -- should be granted an extension.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
9.00
9.00
6.75
DISCOUNT RATE
5.25
5.25
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
5.81
5.98
3.71
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.60
5.58
3.72
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.69
5.67
4.17
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.03
7.04
7.02
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.36
7.39
7.32
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.23
8.24
8.13
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.22
6.20
6.41
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills 8


International Briefs; In Brief
The Microsoft Corporation, Redmond, Wash., will set up two or three joint ventures in China in the next six months to develop and manufacture the software it sells there domestically, a company official said.


Max H. Karl, 85, Pioneer in Mortgage Insurance
Max H. Karl, a lawyer who invented the modern form of private mortgage insurance, helping to put home ownership within reach for millions of families, died in his sleep yesterday at the Baptist Hospital in Miami.
He was 85 and had retired to Miami.
He died of complications after heart surgery, his family said.


Economic Scene; Russian obstacles: disgruntled farmers and the new cartels.
IS Russia poised for economic takeoff?
After three years of on-again, off-again reforms and with the Pyrrhic military victory in Chechnya still fresh in the news, skepticism comes easily.
But little by little, wary analysts are abandoning their caution.
"Russia is a real market economy now," says Andrei Shleifer, an economist at Harvard who has advised the Russian Government on privatization.
That doesn't mean the path to affluence is strewn with rose petals.
A big test of Moscow's political will to contain inflation looms this summer, when the 30 million Russians who still scratch a living from the soil demand a budget-busting round of subsidies to finance the harvest.
The more fundamental challenge -- one the Government will no doubt face for years to come -- is the taming of the private cartels that are replacing public monopolies.
"You can't sustain an efficient, continent-wide economy with concentrated economic power," argues Donald W. Green, managing director of Planecon, a Washington-based consulting firm.


Mary Bingham, Matriarch of a Newspaper Empire, Dies at 90
Mary Bingham, the matriarch of the Bingham newspaper empire, died suddenly in Louisville, Ky., on Tuesday evening.
She was 90 and lived in Glenview, 15 minutes outside Louisville, on the family estate.
Mrs.
Bingham, a philanthropist and civic leader and the widow of Barry Bingham Sr., was delivering a speech at a dinner in her honor when she collapsed.
She was pronounced dead of cardiac arrest at Norton Hospital.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  HOSPITAL IS ACCUSED OF STEERING PATIENTS The University Hospital of Brooklyn, a state-run teaching hospital, discriminated against some Medicaid patients by sending them to a nearby city hospital for services the hospital routinely gave to non-Medicaid patients, state health officials said.
B2.
COLD, TIRED, LOST HIKERS FOUND SAFE Six children spent the night huddled together in Bear Mountain State Park, yelling for help when they heard noises and setting off the flashes on their cameras in hope that rescuers could find them.
B3.


CHRONICLE
EDMUND G. (PAT) BROWN, the former Governor of California, turns 90 tomorrow, and The Associated Press says he will celebrate at his Beverly Hills home with three generations of one of the state's most influential political clans -- his own.
"You have to have a party when you're 90," said Mr.
Brown's wife of 65 years, Bernice.
She's expecting 26 children, grandchildren and their spouses, but drew the line at great-grandchildren.
"That would be just too much activity," she said.


Re-thinking Day Care At the Job
The large number of children killed in the bombing yesterday of a Federal office building in Oklahoma City underscored how day-care centers are increasingly being placed near work sites, leaving them exposed to the same dangers faced by workers in office buildings.
Ninety-eight child care centers are in Federal buildings around the country, and many businesses have set up similar centers near their offices to accommodate working parents.
The operators of many of those centers said yesterday that they would not be terrorized into closing.


McClatchy Newspapers Inc.(MNI,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Polaris Industries(PII,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Prices for Bonds Are Mixed As the Dollar Steadies Itself
Prices of Treasury securities were mixed yesterday as the dollar steadied.
The price of the 30-year bond rose 16/32 , to 1036/32 .
Its yield, which moves in the opposite direction from its price, fell to 7.36 percent, from 7.39 percent on Tuesday.
Prices for Treasury bills and notes were mostly lower.


Coke's Income Rose by 22% In First Quarter
Capitalizing on its global muscle as a beverage producer, and buoyed by strong gallon sales of its products, the Coca-Cola Company yesterday reported a 22 percent increase in first-quarter earnings.
Coca-Cola, the world's largest soft-drink maker, earned $638 million, or 50 cents a share, compared with $521 million, or 40 cents a share, in the comparable quarter a year earlier.
The results slightly exceeded estimates of Wall Street analysts.


AmSouth Bancorp (ASO,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


ABT Building Products Corp.(ARTC,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


USAir and AMR Report Turnarounds in First Quarter
Two airlines, American and USAir, reported dramatic turnarounds in their first-quarter results yesterday, mainly reflecting growing travel and continuing cost-cutting.
USAir Inc.'s parent, USAir Group Inc., which has been struggling with consumer safety concerns since last year's two crashes, said that its losses had narrowed in the first quarter and that it had an operating profit in March.


International Briefs; OPEC Is Seen as Likely To Keep Output Ceiling
The Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries is unlikely to change its current oil output ceiling when it meets in June, Rilwanu Lukman, the Secretary General of the group, said yesterday.
Mr.
Lukman, on a tour of the Persian Gulf, said no minister he had visited so far had suggested OPEC's current output ceiling be changed when the organization meets in Vienna.


Earnings Increase at Ford On Stronger Overseas Sales
The Ford Motor Company said today that its earnings jumped in the first quarter, as strengthening sales in Europe and South America compensated for what the company called a surprisingly weak auto market in the United States.
The earnings disappointed Wall Street analysts, who had expected a stronger performance from Ford's core North American operations.
Shares of Ford rose 62.5 cents, to $27.75, on the New York Stock Exchange today.


Downey Financial Corp.(DSL,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


California's 'Three-Strikes' Law Has Made Big Cuts in Crime
To the Editor:
"Strike One for 'Three Strikes' " (editorial, April 4) mischaracterized California's tough new repeat-offender law as "off to a shaky start." On the contrary, one year after Three Strikes was signed into law, crime is down substantially in California.
Los Angeles County Sheriff Sherman Block, an early critic, admits that Three Strikes is at least partly responsible for the 6,223 fewer major crimes in his county in the first five months of 1994 compared with 1993.


Playtex Products Inc.(PYX,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 1


General Dynamics Corp.(GD,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Community Health Systems Inc.(CYH,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Ameritech Corp.(AIT,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Sightings of Virgin Mary Reduced to Traffic Issue
The problem caused by huge crowds that descended upon Marlboro Township in the hope of seeing a vision of the Virgin Mary was officially downgraded to a traffic nuisance today.
Judge Patrick J. McGann Jr. of State Superior Court said that the visions were no longer said to occur and that Joseph Januszkiewicz, 56, who claimed to have seen the Virgin Mary each Sunday for three years, "is no longer seeing visions, and the Blessed Mother is no longer talking to him -- the case is over."


Great Western Financial Corp.(GWF,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Corrections
An article on Tuesday about the opening of a Brancusi exhibition at the Georges Pompidou Center in Paris misstated the title of Margit Rowell, who prepared it.
She is the chief curator of drawings at the Museum of Modern Art in New York City, not its chief curator of design.


Events: Shows on Parks And African Design
Across the Desert  Newark Museum, 49 Washington Street (at Central Avenue), Newark; (201) 596-6550.
"African Design: Heirs to the Trans-Sahara Trade," an exhibition of textiles, pottery, metalwork, jewelry and weapons from the late 19th- and early-20th centuries, starts today and continues through March 31, 1996.
The exhibition, which features more than 70 items, explores the motifs, design and techniques shared among the cultures in northern and sub-Saharan Africa.
Open Wednesday through Sunday, noon to 5 P.M.
No charge.


Standard Products (SPD,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Foreman Setting Sights Beyond Schulz
He is of the coffee generation.
George Foreman skips rope, chops wood, slaps a 100-pound bag and drinks two cups a day, caffeinated.
This heavyweight champion of the world is not only old enough to be his next opponent's father, but he also woke up two months ago a grandfather.
"I was in denial," he said.
"People were asking me, 'George, you're a grandfather?' and I was like, 'Nope.' "


Journal; Dole's Moral Stand
"I had never seen a whole episode of 'Murphy Brown,' " wrote Dan Quayle in his memoirs.
That minor drawback did not prevent him from turning a light-hearted TV sitcom into a cultural battleground of the '92 campaign.
Now, as the '96 campaign revs up, we have had the Easter Sunday spectacle of Bob Dole trying to make political hay by singling out the movie "Priest" on "Meet the Press" as Exhibit A of how Hollywood lacks "family values." Not only has Senator Dole not seen the movie, but he seemed so unfamiliar with its content that he referred to it as "The Priest."
"Priest" is about two priests, neither of them celibate.
It was made not in Hollywood but in England, where it was produced by the British Broadcasting Corporation.
And aside from a bone-headed initial plan by its American distributor to open the movie nationally on Good Friday -- an opening postponed until yesterday at the first sign of protest -- there is little about the film to justify the fuss.


New Proposal for Coliseum: Use It to Hold Conventions
More than a decade after the city put the New York Coliseum in mothballs, setting off an often bitter series of negotiations over selling it to Mortimer B. Zuckerman, city officials now say the best thing to do for the time being is to use it as it was originally intended: a convention center.
Although officials say they still ultimately want the site redeveloped along the lines that Mr.
Zuckerman proposed, they say the city and the Coliseum's owner, the Metropolitan Transportation Authority, could make the most money in the short term with a convention center that would draw out-of-town visitors and their money.


A Hollow Plan for the Homeless
Gov.
George Pataki wants to deny shelter to New York State's homeless unless they obey certain rules of behavior and participate in social service programs designed to help them fight drug or alcohol addiction or find housing and jobs.
The idea is not unreasonable, but Mr.
Pataki assumes a level of support programs for the homeless that does not now exist.
Until it does, his proposal will only send the homeless back onto the streets.
New York guarantees a right to shelter.
But the state is not helpless to set some rules.
At a time of fiscal austerity and widespread sacrifice, it is fair to impose some conditions on the homeless.
Yet it is important to recognize that lack of housing is often only one symptom of a homeless person's breakdown, with drug and alcohol addiction and mental illness frequent contributing factors.


Thompson Out 3 Weeks Because of Elbow Injury
Before he left Thomas J. White Stadium on Tuesday night, his flight information to New York in hand, Ryan Thompson swore that his elbow injury would not keep him out of the Mets' opening day lineup next Wednesday.
He was wrong.


More on the Ivy League
To The Home Section:
Regarding "Heavy Angst When It's 'Ivy or Else' " (March 30), I would like to relate the experience of a young woman I know who got her bachelor's degree from Hobart and William Smith and went on to graduate school at Yale, where she shared living quarters with a Yale B.A.


Garden Q.&amp; A.
A Tree Blooms in Brooklyn
Q.
I love flowering cherry trees and have heard that one actually blooms in autumn as well as spring.
Can you tell me about this plant?-- Stacy Powers, Stamford, Conn.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Dollar's Recovery Gives Blue-Chip Stocks a Lift  Blue-chip stocks surged to within a point of their highs, bolstered by a recovery in the dollar.
A surprising 24.6 percent drop in the U.S. trade deficit in February helped the dollar gain strength against the Japanese yen and the German mark.
The Dow Jones industrials rose 28.36 points, to 4.207.49.
Strong earnings also helped the blue chips. but the broader Nasdaq composite index dropped sharply.
D10.
For Chrysler, an Issue of Cash  Chrysler stands accused by some big investors -- notably Kirk Kerkorian, who wants to take it over -- of hoarding too much cash for an inevitable downturn in the car and truck markets.
Choosing sides in the fight will be largely a matter of faith for shareholders.
D2.
Profits Up at American and US Air  American Airlines and US Air reported turnarounds, , reflecting growing travel and cost cutting.
American's parent, AMR, posted a profit of $38 million, or 48 cents a share, in contrast to a loss last year; US Air narrowed its loss to $117.5 million.
D4.
Ford Results Jump on Foreign Sales  Ford said its first-quarter earnings rose 71 percent, to $1.55 billion, as strengthening sales in Europe and South America compensated for what it called a surprisingly weak market in the United States.
D2.
Coke Earnings Rise 22 Percent  Coca-Cola's earnings exceeded analysts' estimates, rising 22 percent, to $638 million, on strong gallon sales of its products.
D6.
Kodak's Profits and Stock Surge  Kodak's stock surged after it said first-quarter earnings shot up more than 80 percent to $262 million, or 77 cents a share, on the strength of its main business, photography.
D6.
Lotus Reports Loss, Vows Cuts  Lotus reported an unexpectedly large $17.5 million loss in its first quarter and said it would reduce spending by $50 million.
D6.
Digital Has Another Good Quarter  Digital Equipment posted its second consecutive quarterly profit, surpassing most analysts' expectations.
Earnings rose to $74 million, led by sales of its computers.
D8.
Profits Up for Military Contractors  Military contractors General Dynamics, Northrop Grumman and McDonnell Douglas reported higher profits in the first quarter, despite military spending cuts.
D7.
Seagram Expected to Expand MCA  Seagram is expected to expand MCA aggressively, perhaps through big acquisitions.
"I would be very surprised if this is the end of their deals," one analyst said about Seagram.
Market Place.
D10.
MTV and Polygram Team in Asia  MTV Networks and Polygram are joining forces to start two MTV channels in Asia.
They will compete with a channel started by Rupert Murdoch's News Corporation and four record companies.
D8.
Water Theme Flows Through Ads  Ads for the Jeep Grand Cherokee and the Chevrolet Tahoe, created by two separate agencies, both borrow from Norman Maclean's story "A River Runs Through It." A coincidence, the companies say.
Advertising.
D8.
Newspapers Form Internet Alliance  Eight newspaper companies have formed an alliance to provide support for affiliated daily newspapers to develop local access to news, home shopping and other services on the World Wide Web.
D8.


John E. Howard, 70, Prosecutor In Murder of Robert F. Kennedy
John E. Howard, the chief investigator and a principal prosecutor in the case against Sirhan Bishara Sirhan, the assassin of Senator Robert F. Kennedy in 1968, died on Monday at his home in Irvine, Calif.
He was 70.
The cause was cancer, the Los Angeles District Attorney's Office said.


Santa Fe Pacific Corp.(SFX,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Oh, What a Difference Whaler Trade Makes
When Hartford traded Pat Verbeek to the Rangers on March 23, it seemed as if the Whalers were conceding the season to build for the future.
They were dealing away their captain for a part-time defenseman, a minor league defenseman and a couple of draft choices.
The Whalers were in 10th place in the Eastern Conference and seemed to be fading from playoff contention.
Their new ownership and management -- fresh out of junior hockey -- were learning their business at a new level.
"Wait till next year" seemed to be the unspoken message.


McDonnell Douglas Corp.(MD,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Mayor Favors Phasing Out Home Relief
A day after touting the success of tough new eligibility rules for New York's welfare program providing benefits to childless, able-bodied adults, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani said yesterday that he actually favors abolishing the program altogether.
The Home Relief program, created in 1931 by Franklin D. Roosevelt when he was the Governor, now provides benefits to about 245,000 childless city residents who are able-bodied or whose disability does not qualify them for benefits under larger Federal programs.
The city and the state share the cost of the $1.9 billion program, which provides an average benefit of $325 a month, or $3,900 a year.


Judge Refuses to Sequester Jury In Terrorism Case in New York
The judge in the New York terrorism trial of Sheik Omar Abdel Rahman and 10 co-defendants rejected a request by some of the defense lawyers that the jurors be sequestered for at least the next several days to shield them from news of the bombing of a Federal office building in Oklahoma City.
Instead, Judge Michael B. Mukasey of Federal District Court in Manhattan told the jurors at the end of yesterday's court session to avoid news accounts of the Oklahoma City bombing "to the extent you can," and admonished them that the Oklahoma attack "is not part of this case" and should play no role in their consideration.


They Fear Only the Answer Is Worse Than the Question
Her eyes raw from crying, her hands trembling, Sharon Coyne crouched over in a chair, waiting for word that, somehow, her 14-month-old daughter, Jaci, had been found alive.
But the word would not come.


Baltimore Grapples With Idea of Legalizing Drugs
It has been eight years since Kurt L. Schmoke was a newly elected mayor with a radical idea: take the profit out of selling cocaine, marijuana and other illegal drugs by legalizing them.
Although the proposal has attracted varied supporters over the years, including conservatives like William F. Buckley Jr., the impetus for action has stalled, with the Clinton Administration opposed to any form of legalization and a Republican-controlled Congress favoring stronger, not weaker, enforcement of drug control laws.


Linear Technology Corp.(LLTC,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 2


Wheelabrator Technologies Inc.(WTI,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


For Chrysler, a Question of How Much Cash Is Enough
The Chrysler Corporation stands accused by some of its largest investors of a most remarkable transgression: hoarding too much cash.
Whether Chrysler should squirrel away cash for a downturn in car and truck sales or immediately reward investors with a special payout is one crucial issue in the proposed takeover of the No. 3 auto maker by the investor Kirk Kerkorian.


A. E. Johansen, 89; Ex-Member of House
Former Representative August E. Johansen, a Michigan Republican who was among the most conservative voices in his 10 years in Congress, died on Sunday in a nursing home in Orlando, Fla.
He was 89 and moved to Florida from Battle Creek, Mich., in the mid-1960's after leaving Congress.
Nationally, Mr.
Johansen was best known for his ardent pursuit of political subversion while a member of the House Committee on Un-American Activities.
He was defeated for re-election in 1964 after serving five terms.


Sonoco Products Co.(SON,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 2


A Brooklyn Hospital Is Accused Of Rejecting Medicaid Patients
The University Hospital of Brooklyn, a state-run teaching hospital, discriminated against some Medicaid patients by sending them to a nearby city hospital for services the hospital routinely provided to non-Medicaid patients, State Health Department officials said yesterday.
Medicaid patients needing Caesarean sections were sometimes transferred across the street to Kings County Hospital because University Hospital did not have enough attending physicians to handle those patients, said a Health Department spokeswoman, Lois Uttley.
Non-Medicaid patients were able to get services at the same time, because they had personal doctors who would be called in to handle the surgery, she said.


Advo Inc.(AD,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 25


Blue-Chip Stocks Surge; Broader Market Retreats
Blue-chip stocks surged yesterday to within a point of their all-time high, while the broader market ended lower.
Stocks and bonds were bolstered by a recovery in the dollar, which strengthened after a report showed that the United States trade deficit fell 24.6 percent in February.
The Commerce Department report, which was better than economists' expectations, helped push the dollar higher against the Japanese yen and the German mark, and the Dow Jones industrial average followed suit.
A stronger dollar makes American securities more attractive to foreign investors.


COMPANY NEWS
DEAN FOODS CO., Franklin Park, Ill., reached an agreement in principle to acquire Rio Grande Foods Inc., McAllen, Tex., a subsidiary of Flowers Industries Inc., Thomasville, Ga., for an unspecified amount of cash.


Jean Coutu Group reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


Raychem Corp.(RYC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  *
Old Kent Bank, Grand Rapids, Mich., a unit of Old Kent Financial Corp., is selling $100 million of bank notes due in 1998 through CS First Boston.
The notes are priced at 99.80 to yield 6.952 percent.
The noncallable issue is rated A1 by Moody's and A by S.&amp; P.


Phelps Dodge Corp.(PD,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Loyola Capital Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Majdal Shams Journal; When Nations Draw Lines, the Druse Find a Way
Standing on the slopes of the Golan Heights on a recent Friday, a Druse woman went through what has in the last decade become a ritual.
"Here he is!" she boomed through a loudspeaker.
Then she held the loudspeaker up to her infant son to carry his crying across the barbed wire, guard posts and minefields to the ears of eager relatives standing on the Syrian side.


Sports of The Times; Larry Doby Understands Handshakes
IN and around the Major League Baseball offices at 350 Park Avenue, people have been greeting Larry Doby with an even bigger smile than usual.
"Congratulations," those people have been saying, shaking or slapping his hand.


Reynolds Metals Co.(RLM,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Visiting 'Arcadia's' Kindly Cousin in London
It's easy to get the impression that London is a far more generous theater town than New York.
Plays that receive respectful but less than rave reviews here often go on to obtain respectable West End runs; in the brutal competition of New York they would be on twofers as soon as the theater parties had run out.
A case in point: Tom Stoppard's ruminative new comedy, "Indian Ink," which had the mixed fortune to open at the Aldwych Theater while "Arcadia," his chef d'oeuvre, continues at the Haymarket.
Though the current New York staging of "Arcadia" is imperfect, the play's London production is so elegantly performed that it makes everything around it look slightly knock-kneed.


Panhandle Eastern Corp.(PEL,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Republic New York Corp.(RNB,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Yellow Corp.(YELL,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


CHRONICLE
KATI MARTON, the former wife of the ABC anchor Peter Jennings, is to be married again, to RICHARD C. HOLBROOKE, an Assistant Secretary of State.
"The wedding will be on Memorial Day weekend at the residence of the American ambassador in Budapest," Ms.
Marton, a writer and chairwoman of the Committee to Protect Journalists, said yesterday.
" It's a place with great sentimental value."


What Must Knicks Do? Win, of Course
Three games remain.
One victory clinches the second-best record in the Eastern Conference.
The Knicks are well aware of what they need to do as their regular season nears its end.
Just hours before the Knicks boarded their charter flight for Charlotte, where they will face the Hornets on Thursday night, Coach Pat Riley was asked what he was looking for in the last three games of the regular season.


U.S. Wealth Gap Is Also a Vietnam War Legacy; Justified Cynicism
To the Editor:
The "savaging" and "denouncing" of cynics by Speaker Newt Gingrich and President Clinton (Week in Review, April 16) and Frank Rich's prediction that Robert McNamara's memoir will "compound" rather than lessen cynicism (column, April 16) overlook two related truths.


Objection to 'Priest' Isn't Creating a Hit
The conventional wisdom here is that controversy lures audiences.
And no one in the movie business has been better at controversy than Miramax, the New York-based film company whose public disputes over often provocative films have generally been good for business.
Not so with "Priest."


The ads for Jeep Cherokee and Chevrolet Tahoe appear to have something in common: imitation.
IMITATION, so it often seems, is the sincerest form of advertising.
When Orvis, the supplier of fly-fishing equipment, teamed last year with Chrysler's Jeep division to promote a plush Jeep, they hit on a natural theme.
"A Tradition Runs Through It," declared Jeep's full-color, four-page advertisement.


Malone's 45 Lead Jazz Over Rockets
Jazz 115, Rockets 96
Karl Malone scored a season-high 45 points, including 13 in the pivotal third period last night, as the Utah Jazz rolled to a 115-96 victory over the Houston Rockets, their probable first-round playoff opponent.
Malone hit 16 of 24 shots and had 17 rebounds as the Jazz evened its season series with the Rockets at 2-2 and extended their winning streak to five games.


Rebel Attack Ends a Cease-Fire in Sri Lanka
Efforts to end Sri Lanka's long ethnic war appeared to collapse today after rebel commandos infiltrated a key Government naval base and blew up two gunboats, killing 11 sailors and wounding 21 others.
The bodies of four rebels were also found.
The attack came early Wednesday morning, just after midnight, at the eastern city of Trincomalee, hours after the Tamil Tiger rebels delivered a letter to President Chandrika Bandaranaike Kumaratunga declaring their intention to end a 14-week cease-fire, the longest since the war began in 1982.


World News Briefs; Rwanda Evicts 100,000 From Refugee Camp
Rwandan soldiers evicted more than 100,000 people from the country's largest refugee camp today, ordering them to return to the homes they fled during the ethnic slaughter last year.
No violence was reported, and the dispersal "seems to be going pretty reasonably," said Margarita Amodeo, a spokeswoman for Unicef.


Savagery in Oklahoma City
The powerful explosion that crumpled a large part of the Federal building in Oklahoma City yesterday was a savage attack against the security and civil order that Americans often take for granted.
Like the World Trade Center bombing two years ago, it shakes the faith -- maybe now just the fading hope -- that Americans can be spared this kind of deranged act on their home soil.
The bomb, apparently contained in a car or van, ripped through the office building, taking the lives of at least 26 people -- probably dozens more by the time rescue workers finish digging through the rubble.
Many of the victims were children left off at the building's day-care center just minutes before the explosion.


Deposit Guaranty Corp.(DEPS,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


York Intl. Corp.(YRK,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Coliseum About-Face
More than a decade after New York City put the Coliseum in mothballs, setting off an often-bitter series of negotiations over selling it to Mortimer B. Zuckerman, city officials now say the best thing for the time being is to use it as a convention center.
Article, page B3.


Space Photos Reveal New Planetary Mystery
Something about the dynamic forces driving the thick atmosphere of Neptune has astronomers mystified.
Only last June, the Hubble Space Telescope revealed that a great dark spot in the planet's southern hemisphere, discovered by the Voyager 2 spacecraft on its flight by Neptune in 1989, had vanished without a trace.


Nets Stumble Toward the End With Fifth Straight Loss
The Nets have been eliminated from the playoffs, but they played with enough intensity tonight to please Coach Butch Beard.
Still, the result was a familiar one in this season of discontent.
They suffered a 104-99 loss to the Atlanta Hawks -- their fifth straight setback -- at Byrne Meadowlands Arena because they failed to execute in the closing minutes.


Capital One Financial Corp.(COF,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Owens-Corning Fiberglas Corp.(OCF,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


D.R. Horton Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


American Buildings Co.  (ABCO,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Corrections
A chart yesterday listing the 10 most popular network television shows in the week of April 10-16 omitted a program that was tied with "Cybill" for 10th place.
It was "60 Minutes."


Lugar Says He Will Run for President
Senator Richard G. Lugar of Indiana today announced his candidacy for the Republican Presidential nomination, trying to make a virtue of his earnest but colorless manner by quoting from the Boy Scout oath and depicting himself as a leader of unblemished character.
As the centerpiece of his campaign, Mr.
Lugar put forward his plan to dismantle the Internal Revenue Service and replace the Federal income tax with a national sales tax.
And, reflecting his foreign policy bent during his four terms in the Senate, he vowed to emphasize international affairs more than the other candidates.


About the Building
COMPLETED -- March 1977 NAMED FOR -- Judge Alfred P. Murrah, of the United States Court of Appeals for the 10th Circuit, who died in 1975 SIZE -- 9 floors: 178,208 square feet; 4-level parking garage: 219,138 square feet (600 cars) COST -- $13,278,000 STRUCTURE -- Poured in place steel-reinforced concrete CAPACITY -- 590 workers; 41 children in day care


Union Bank (UBNK,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Westamerica Bancorp (WABC,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Ruland Named Assistant Coach at Iona
JEFF RULAND, who led Iona to two National Collegiate Athletic Association tournament appearances, has returned to his alma mater as an assistant coach.
TIM WELSH, who was promoted to head coach last month after his father, JERRY, retired for medical reasons, announced Ruland's hiring yesterday.


Basque Rebel Bomb Wounds Madrid Party Chief and 11 Others
Basque separatists detonated a bomb underneath the car driving a conservative opposition leader to his office today, wounding 12 people in an attack condemned by all political parties.
The bombing, which came only weeks before nationwide municipal elections May 28, only slightly wounded Jose Maria Aznar, leader of the opposition Popular Party, because of the vehicle's armor plating.


Accounts
Glaxo Inc., Research Triangle Park, N.C., a unit of Glaxo Holdings P.L.C., to Grey Advertising, New York, as the first agency to handle direct-to-consumer advertising for Flonase, a prescription nasal spray for allergies.
The billings were estimated at more than $12 million.
Lewis &amp; Gace Bozell, Fort Lee, N.J., part of Bozell, Jacobs, Kenyon &amp; Eckhardt, continues to handle advertising for Flonase aimed at doctors.


Energy Service Co. (ESV,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Cable Price Controls Benefited Everyone
To the Editor:
"Too Fast on Communications Reform," your otherwise commendable April 12 editorial on communications policy, stated that the F.C.C. implemented the 1992 Cable Act "poorly." The correct adverb would be "wisely."


More on the Blast
THE RESCUE: When rescuers found the hundreds of cut, burned and terrified victims, it became a matter of grasping for the living while trying to ignore the dead.
Page B10
AROUND THE NATION: Shocked and fearful, government officials at Federal, state and some local levels shut down offices in at least eight cities, including New York.
Page B10.


Union Electric Co.(UEP,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


General Motors Acceptance Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Market Place; Seagram, brimming with cash, is looking to build MCA swiftly.
WHAT is the Seagram Company's next target going to be?
CBS?
A record company?
A cable company?
Television stations?
Seagram has faced plenty of criticism for buying 80 percent of MCA from the Matsushita Electric Industrial Company for $5.7 billion.
To pull off the deal, Seagram sold the reliable and very profitable interest it held in Du Pont.


Lam Research (LRCX,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Norman Takes On Messiaen And Berg
In their current Carnegie Hall appearances, Jessye Norman and Pierre Boulez are launching an enlightened conspiracy in behalf of Berg and Messiaen.
On Tuesday night, Miss Norman gave a solo recital that included some of Messiaen's "Poemes pour Mi" and Berg's Seven Early Songs.
On April 24 Miss Norman is to sing the same songs of Berg in their orchestral version, with the London Symphony under Mr.
Boulez.
On Sunday, Mr.
Boulez conducts the orchestral version of the Messiaen, this time with Maria Ewing as soloist.
Messiaen's 1936 song cycle has presumably never appeared in New York twice in one week.
Miss Norman, truth be told, sang only five of the cycle's nine songs, an abridgement unacknowledged in the program book.
But she sang them astonishingly well.
One ventures to guess that this meditation on marital bliss and anguish has never been delivered with such luster and force.
The cycle sways between rapt lyricism and piercing drama, an ambivalence thoroughly suited to this singer's gifts.
She overromanticized in places, but her technical command and breath control once again astonished; in the final song, a long melisma on the word "joie" sent the senses reeling.


Welfare: Numbers Game or Reform?
THERE is a well-recognized phenomenon in the world of welfare called churning, and it happens whenever politicians decide to shake up the welfare system.
Here is how it has worked when other cities and states have tried what Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani is doing in New York City: Government tightens the standards.
Some people are either scared away and never even apply.
Others apply and do not qualify.
The welfare rolls shrink.
But then they rise again -- though not to their original, pre-churned levels.


Haemonetics Corp.(HAE,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 1


Shawmut National Corp.(SNC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


The Gospel of Church Architecture, Revised
THE Gothic cathedral was designed to inspire awe and thoughts of transcendence.
Megachurches celebrate comfort, ease and the very idea of contemporary suburban life.
This is "I'm O.K., you're O.K." architecture: friendly and accessible, determined to banish the sense of mystery and otherworldliness that has long been at the very heart of the architecture of Christianity.
If megachurches, sprawling structures that often resemble arenas or community centers, evoke any sense of wonder, it is over the notion that they are churches at all.


New Offers Made in Lockout
The locked-out umpires and their employers, the American and National leagues, exchanged new proposals yesterday as they tried to reach agreement before the start of the season next Tuesday night.
Neither side would disclose details.
The leagues made their proposals yesterday morning, and the umpires countered late in the afternoon.
In their previous proposals, the leagues had offered a 10 percent raise and the umpires had asked for a 40 percent raise on a salary scale that in the expired agreement began at $60,000 for first-year umpires and $175,000 for umpires with 25 years in the majors.


Charter One Financial Inc.(COFI,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


IMC Global Inc.(IGL,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Chiefs Tell Lott Hello, Montana Goodbye
The Kansas City Chiefs yesterday signed the veteran safety RONNIE LOTT as an unrestricted free agent, according to The Kansas City Star.
Lott, who will turn 36 on May 8, played the last two seasons with the Jets.
The Chiefs' policy is to refrain from commenting on signings until making an announcement.
The team didn't confirm Lott's signing.
Also yesterday, one day after thousands in San Francisco saluted the retiring JOE MONTANA, Coach MARTY SCHOTTENHEIMER of the Chiefs choked back tears as he joined the rest of the Kansas City team in saying goodbye to the 38-year-old quarterback at an Arrowhead Stadium news conference.


Cadence Design Systems Inc.(CDN,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 1


CDW Computer Centers Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Gore, at U.N., Says Nuclear Powers Are Fair on Weapons Treaty
Vice President Al Gore, speaking at a conference on the future of a 25-year-old treaty barring the spread of nuclear weapons, tried to assure delegates today that the United States and other nuclear powers are not using the treaty in ways that are unfair to nations without nuclear weapons.
The United States and at least three other nuclear powers -- Britain, France and Russia -- want an indefinite and unconditional extension of the Treaty on the Nonproliferation of Nuclear Weapons, which came into force in 1970 and is known as the NPT.


Statements by the President and Attorney General
Following is President Clinton's statement in Washington yesterday on the bombing in Oklahoma City, as recorded by The New York Times, and remarks by Attorney General Janet Reno and excerpts from her answers to questions from reporters, as recorded by the Federal News Service:


IPSCO Inc.(IPSCF,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


VF Corp.(VFC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 1


Note to Readers
The Op-Ed page welcomes unsolicited manuscripts.
Because of the volume of submissions, however, we regret that we cannot acknowledge an article or return it unless it is accompanied by a self-addressed, stamped envelope.
If manuscripts are accepted for publication, authors will be notified within two weeks.


American Maize-Products Co. (AZEA,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Toll Booth Plan Is Opposed
Not in my backyard!
Mayor William J. Boehm and members of the Chamber of Commerce do not want the New Jersey Highway Authority to erect the Garden State Parkway's fourth Ocean County toll plaza here.
They are conducting a petition and telephone campaign against the authority's proposal to build the booth at Exit 74 and charge a 35-cent toll to pay for a $7 million expansion there.


Parents Can Help. It's True.
Hey, parents can be useful in their children's growing up!
That revelation comes from "Children First: Real Kids, Real Solutions," a stretched-out version of the "American Agenda" segments on ABC's "World News Tonight." At an hour in length, it's like making a meal of some good-for-you side dish, maybe kale.
The evening's reporters, Rebecca Chase, Bill Blakemore and Carole Simpson, go here and there to describe what they rate as successful experiments in child development.
If you have not seen similar programs, hailing similar efforts, you have not been watching much television news.


MTV and Polygram Starting Asian Channels
MTV Networks and Polygram N.V. are joining forces to start two MTV channels in Asia, the companies said yesterday.
MTV is owned by Viacom Inc.
This is not MTV's first endeavor in Asia.
The cable service had been on the air since 1991.
But when the controlling stake in the satellite company was bought by the News Corporation Ltd. in 1993, the relationship between the News Corporation and Viacom deteriorated and, ultimately, the companies terminated their agreement.
MTV had hoped to get space on the satellite Apstar 2, but that satellite exploded in January 1994.


New Aria Awards Presented to 3 Singers
The Aria Awards, a newly established group of prizes for singers, have been awarded to Michelle DeYoung, a mezzo-soprano, and Jorge Garza and Jon Villars, tenors.
The three singers, each of whom received a cash stipend of $15,000, were chosen by a panel of professionals and did not know they were being considered.
The awards are meant to encourage promising artists early in their careers.
Ms.
DeYoung has been in the Young Artist Development Program of the Metropolitan Opera since 1992, and has sung with the Glimmerglass Opera and the Wolf Trap Opera.
Mr.
Garza has performed with the opera companies in Santa Fe, Baltimore, Philadelphia and Los Angeles as well as at Glimmerglass.
Mr.
Villars recently sang the title role in the Juilliard Opera Center's production of Massenet's "Werther" and is to make his debut at the Calgary Opera this season.


Jets May Be Pursuing Sapp Through a Cincinnati Line
The story burning the midnight oil on the National Football League fax hot line is that the Jets are contemplating a trade with the Cincinnati Bengals in order to move up to fifth place from ninth in Saturday's draft and take the all-America defensive tackle Warren Sapp.
That is the hot rumor these days.
And it is a measure of how uncertain things are in football now that agents pay for a rumor service that compiles reports from all over, synthesizes them, and then sends them out via fax.


BIC Corp.(BIC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 2


'55 Dodgers' Series Banner Returns to Its Rightful Home
Greece may still be trying to get back the priceless sculptures Lord Elgin took from the Parthenon, but Brooklynites no longer have to yearn for the only World Series championship pennant won by the Brooklyn Dodgers.
After wanderings worthy of Odysseus and a saga of theft and exile, the banner that once fluttered above the right-centerfield wall in Ebbets Field is coming home tonight.
The 1955 flag, won in seven games against the mighty Yankees, went west when Walter O'Malley defected with his team to Los Angeles at the end of the 1957 season.
This evening, when the Brooklyn Historical Society holds its annual fund-raising benefit dinner at Borough Hall, the banner will officially return, a gift from the Dodgers' current president, Peter O'Malley, who is Walter's son.


For a Moment, Leaving a Fast Clip to Others


GS Technologies Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Dellenbaugh Chases a Miracle
What yachtsman with a yen to win wouldn't want to compete on one of the quickest, slickest, most talked-about sailboats in the world?
And what if his crew -- an eager but relatively inexperienced group of female athletes -- were in close pursuit of the most sought-after prize in yachting?
Such were his prospects a month ago today when David Dellenbaugh became the tactician on Mighty Mary.
The team was being billed as the first all-women's crew to compete in the 144-year history of the America's Cup.
But when Dellenbaugh went on board, he changed all that.


Transactions
Basketball  National Basketball Association
DETROIT PISTONS -- Waived Rafael Addison, forward.
WASHINGTON BULLETS -- Waived Brent Price, guard, and Anthony Tucker, forward.


Monthly Deficit In U.S. Trade Falls Sharply, Lifting Dollar
A sharp drop in the United States monthly trade deficit helped lift the dollar today from record lows against the Japanese yen and the German mark.
But the increase was not enough to calm foreign exchange markets or stem demands from abroad for action by the United States to bolster its battered currency.
The Commerce Department reported that the trade deficit -- the difference between what the United States buys from abroad and sells to other countries -- plunged by 24.6 percent in February.
In dollar terms, it was the sharpest drop since December 1993.


Bridge
A team from the Manhattan Club, 27 West 72d Street, is now the last undefeated squad in the Von Zedtwitz Double Knockout Team Championship, which begins in the fall and continues for almost a year.
Playing at their home club Tuesday night, Lapt Chan, Uday Ivatury, Phillip Alder, Jim Krekorian, Brad Moss and Elizabeth Reich won by 25 imps against a foursome led by Dorothy Truscott.
The losers enter the once-defeated bracket, in which eight other teams survive.
The decisive deal, shown in the diagram, occurred early in the match.
Both teams climbed to a borderline six-spade contract after both South players opened a hand on which most players would pass.
When Krekorian and Alder were North-South, they established a double fit in the major suits and then persevered with a series of cue-bids.


Whitman Corp.(WH,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Tiffany Supervisor Acquitted of 1 Theft, Convicted of Another
Scott Jackson, a security supervisor at Tiffany &amp; Company, was acquitted yesterday of being the mastermind of a daring $1.9 million jewel robbery in the luxurious Fifth Avenue store last September, but he was convicted of plotting an earlier $750,000 robbery of a store executive.
The verdict, reached in Manhattan State Supreme Court, came as a surprise because the prosecution had focused mostly on trying to get a conviction for the 1994 robbery of the store, which was the largest in Tiffany's 157-year history.
The bandits in that robbery made off with 420 necklaces, rings and other jewelry.


Imperial Oil Ltd. (IMO,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


On the Radio a Call Goes Out: Send Blankets and Body Bags
When their world caved in, Carole Lawton was on the seventh floor of the Federal building, about to start her day as a secretary.
Brian Espe was on the fifth floor, giving a slide presentation on veterinary science.
Jon Hansen, an assistant fire chief, was working in his office nearby.
Then at 9:04 A.M. today came an enormous explosion, and the sound of rushing air and shattering glass.


An All-Star Tribute to Both Jobim and a Style
The evolution of pop music in the last four decades has often seemed like an undeclared war between melody and hard rhythm -- between the yin and the yang of music -- with aggressive beats increasingly trampling over pliant melodies.
But as Brazilian pop music has shown, these basic musical elements need not be antagonistic.
An all-star tribute to Antonio Carlos Jobim on Tuesday evening at Avery Fisher Hall was more than a salute to the Brazilian composer, who died in December at the age of 67.
Using Jobim's songs as a springboard, the concert showcased a national style whose seamless union of melody and pulse has long been the envy of the pop world.
The evening, produced by the jazz guitarist Lee Ritenour, brought to the stage such luminaries of Brazilian music as Joao Gilberto, Astrud Gilberto, Milton Nascimento, Gal Costa, Caetano Veloso and Nana and Danilo Caymmi.
The American pop-jazz crooner Michael Franks, whose songs are steeped in Brazilian atmosphere, also performed, as did the pianists Herbie Hancock and Dave Grusin, and the saxophonist Michael Brecker.
At the end of show, Sting appeared to sing a decent if slightly stiff version of "How Insensitive," one of Jobim's greatest ballads.
The concert also included slides and film clips of the composer.


TERROR IN OKLAHOMA CITY: AROUND THE NATION  Aftershocks of Terror Spread Out Quickly After the Explosion in Oklahoma City; Government Buildings Close in Eight Cities As Extra Caution Becomes Order of the Day
Almost immediately after the explosion rocked Oklahoma City's downtown yesterday, government workers across the nation began to feel shock waves of anxiety and feelings of vulnerability.
Numerous Federal and local buildings, from Boston to Riverside, Calif., were evacuated because of bomb threats, though searches turned up nothing.
Federal offices were shut down in at least eight cities within hours of the explosion, and United States marshals and other security guards went on heightened alert in other places.
Many municipal and state office buildings were similarly evacuated and searched.


Nicor Inc.(GAS,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


A Good Year for Jobs
With New Jersey leading the way, the Port Authority said, 1994 was a good year for employment.
Jobs were up 67,000 in the New York-New Jersey metropolitan region, the best growth spurt since 1987, said George Marlin, executive director of the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey.
He attributed part of the growth to recent changes in tax and business regulations in New Jersey and predicted that with similar moves in the city, "New York will be rebounding just the way New Jersey is rebounding."


Pinnacle West Capital Corp.(PNW,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Rangers Find Verbeek Won't Back Down
Pat Verbeek stood up to Kjell Samuelsson on Tuesday night, which isn't easy.
Samuelsson, the Penguins' rugged defenseman, is one of hockey's biggest players at 6 feet 6 inches, 235 pounds.
Verbeek of the Rangers is one of the shortest, generously listed at 5-9 and weighing 190.
They exchanged snarls and facial bops with gloves and sticks during the Penguins' intense 6-5 victory in Pittsburgh.


72.3% of School Budgets Win Approval
New Jersey voters approved on Tuesday a sharply higher number of school budgets than they did last year, brushing aside predictions that anger over property taxes and criticism of local districts' spending by the state would cause another wave of rejections.
Local officials used the results, released yesterday, as ammunition in their skirmishes with the Whitman administration over education financing, long an issue in New Jersey.
The officials said the approval rate of 72.3 percent of the budgets, up from 51.4 percent last year, showed that they were doing their jobs well.


No Scholarships for Indonesia's Soldiers
The Clinton Administration wants to resume taxpayer-financed courses for Indonesian military officers in the United States.
It is a terrible idea.
The Administration argues that the courses expose future leaders of Indonesia's military-dominated regime to American concepts of human rights, teach officers how to use American-made weapons and strengthen security cooperation in Asia.
Those are legitimate goals.
But Congress cut off funding for training Indonesian officers under the International Military Education and Training program in 1992 to protest flagrant human rights abuses by the Indonesian military in East Timor.


Argentina Buries a Famous Son


Cobra Golf Inc.(CBRA,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Testimony Ends in Trial Of Mother In 5 Deaths
Testimony ended today in the murder trial of Waneta E. Hoyt, with the prosecutor charging that Mrs.
Hoyt had deprived her five young children of the chance to reach adulthood by suffocating them a quarter century ago, all because they would not stop crying.
"Five people, five young people, aren't here today because of her," Robert Simpson, the Tioga County District Attorney, told the jury in his closing statement.
"Today I think they would have ranged in age from 24 to 31. They would have families and do all the things you and I enjoy doing in the course of our lives."


Schneider, World Cup Star, Retires at 30
VRENI SCHNEIDER retired yesterday at the peak of her career as one of skiing's greats.
The 30-year-old Swiss won three World Cup overall titles, three world championships and three Olympic gold medals.
"I decided that now is the right moment, to stop while I'm on top," she said in Geneva.


RESULTS PLUS
HOCKEY  Bruins Topple Sabres  Cam Neely and Adam Oates each had a goal and two assists as the Boston Bruins beat the Buffalo Sabres, 4-1, last night in Boston.
Neely, returning after missing five games with an inflamed hip, scored his 22d goal of the season on a power play at 3 minutes 3 seconds of the second period.
He also assisted Oates and Ray Bourque on their 10th goals of the season.
Boston is 5-2-1 in its last eight home games.
Buffalo, battling for one of the final playoff spots, has lost five of its last seven games. (AP)
MAPLE LEAFS 3, MIGHTY DUCKS 2: At Toronto, Mike Gartner, Todd Gill and Mats Sundin scored a goal each as Toronto beat Anaheim.
The Leafs have won four of their last five games, improving their chances of holding onto fourth place in the Western Conference. (AP)


Bear, Stearns Declines to Handle Kerkorian's Chrysler Bid
One of the few legs of credibility supporting Kirk Kerkorian's $22.8 billion bid for the Chrysler Corporation was knocked out yesterday.
Bear, Stearns &amp; Company, the securities firm that had been widely expected to serve as Mr.
Kerkorian's investment banker on the deal, has decided not to represent him -- or any other bidder -- in a hostile takeover of the automobile company, Chrysler executives and others involved in the deal said yesterday.


Caterpillar Financial Services Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


General Signal Corp.(GSX,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Sumitomo Bank of Calif. reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Mead Corp.(MEA,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 2


In Possible Copycat Attack, Fumes in Yokohama Train Station Send 300 to Hospitals
In a chilling reminder of last month's poison-gas attack in the Tokyo subway, about 300 people were taken to hospitals here on Wednesday after strange-smelling fumes spread through Yokohama's main railroad station and through a train.
The police said they could not say what the fumes were, though they ruled out sarin, the nerve gas reportedly used in the subway attack last month.


People
Len Fogge was named president of Franklin Spier, New York, succeeding David M. Cathers, who resigned in January to write a book about Stickley furniture.
Mr.
Fogge was previously president of the Grey Entertainment unit of Grey Advertising, New York.
Michael Baldwin was named to the new position of senior partner and worldwide account director on the I.B.M.
Corp. account at Ogilvy &amp; Mather Worldwide, New York, a unit of the WPP Group.
He was previously a senior vice president heading the Compaq Computer account at Ammirati &amp; Puris/Lintas, New York, a unit of the Interpublic Group of Cos.


Delchamps Inc. reports earnings for 13wks to Apr 1


CHRONICLE
Talk about stress in the workplace.
On Saturday, the last day of the Metropolitan Opera season, PLACIDO DOMINGO will sing the title role in Wagner's "Parsifal," and in the evening he will conduct Puccini's "Madama Butterfly."
"It was coincidence," Mr.
Domingo said yesterday.
And when the scheduling people at the Met realized it, they offered to replace him as conductor with Samuel Cristler.
Had the order of the two operas been reversed, he might have accepted the offer.
"I couldn't conduct in the afternoon and sing in the evening because conducting takes a lot of your breathing and you need all the support for singing," the tenor said.
"This will be unique."


A. P. Manginelli, 73; Led Fraternal Order
Anthony P. Manginelli, a New York businessman who was the leader of the Loyal Order of Moose, died on April 13 at his home in Syracuse.
He was 73.
The cause was a heart attack, said a spokeswoman for the 1.2-million-member fraternal organization.


Springs Industries(SMI,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 1


Ford Motor Credit reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Louisiana Is Told to Retry a Death Row Case
The Supreme Court today ordered a new trial for a convicted murderer on Louisiana's death row, ruling 5 to 4 that the prosecution's failure to disclose important evidence made the jury's verdict unreliable.
The majority's highly detailed scrutiny of the disputed evidence, in a 37-page opinion by Justice David H. Souter, made the case unusual for a Court that has frequently declared its mission to be that of announcing broad rules of law rather than correcting lower courts' errors.


More on the Ivy League
To The Home Section:
Regarding "Heavy Angst When It's 'Ivy or Else' " (March 30), I would like to relate the experience of a young woman I know who got her bachelor's degree from Hobart and William Smith and went on to graduate school at Yale, where she shared living quarters with a Yale B.A.


UST Inc.(UST,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Ensign Resource reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Advertisers' Access To Classroom Seen
Advertisers have gained unchecked access to the classroom, Consumers Union, the nonprofit publisher of Consumer Reports, contends in a study, "Captive Kids: A Report on Commercial Pressures on Kids at Schools."
The study, released Tuesday, is a follow-up to one from 1990 on "Selling America's Kids." For the new study, Consumers Union spent 18 months in classrooms and, the organization said, found additional examples of commercialism in schools ranging from educational materials paid for by advertisers to video programming that carries commercials.


Hi-Lo Automotive Inc.(HLO,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Hughes Electronics Corp.(GMH,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


International Briefs; Daimler-Benz Unit Ties Its Fortunes to the Dollar
Daimler-Benz Aerospace A.G. warned yesterday that it would post another heavy loss this year if the dollar did not quickly rise from its current record lows.
The aerospace subsidiary of Daimler-Benz A.G. of Germany had made significant gains in cost reduction and would continue to do so this year, aided by personnel cuts, officials said.
"The extent to which we can reap the benefits of this supreme effort in 1995 now depends entirely on the dollar," the finance chief and chairman-designate, Manfred Bischoff, said at the unit's annual news conference.
He said the dollar must rise from its present level of about 1.35 marks to at least 1.60, the basis of earlier earnings forecasts, or "we will again be faced with a three-digit million-mark loss."


Owens-Illinois (OI,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Electrical Rates Rising, Again
Electrical rates are going up again, by about 45 cents a month for typical residential consumers, after a vote by the Board of Public Utilities on a request from the Public Service Electric and Gas Company.
In November, the board granted the utility an increase that raised the monthly bill of the average residential consumer about $2.40.
The latest increase, amounting to $130 million, is intended to offset fuel costs that were higher than anticipated.
Rates for nonresidential consumers will rise by 5.8 percent.
A consumer group, New Jersey Citizen Action, said it would appeal the board's decision in state court.


Rough Seas Suit Young America Just Fine
Plowing through deep seas like two whales on the run, the America's Cup defenders went racing today despite conditions that were adverse enough to keep the challengers ashore.
Young America won the match by 2 minutes 46 seconds, and that was perhaps more a tribute to its affinity for rough water than to any single error by its opponent, Mighty Mary.
"The boat has always been a good performer in heavy seas," John Kuhn, design team coordinator for Young America, said.
"Throughout the trials, the boat has done well when the waves have been large."


A Diplomatic Post for Hughes?
William J. Hughes left Congress last year after two decades, saying he wanted to spend more time with his family.
But his retirement is apparently not going to last long.
Clinton Administration officials say he is expected to be named ambassador to Panama.
If he gets that job, Mr.
Hughes, a Democrat who represented the Second District in southern New Jersey, would monitor preparations for the transition of the Panama Canal to Panamanian control on Dec. 31, 1999.
LAWRENCE VAN GELDER


JVC Jazz Festival Announces Lineup
The schedule for the 1995 JVC Jazz Festival, announced yesterday, rounds up such stellar performers as the pianist Oscar Peterson and the singers Mel Torme and Peggy Lee, along with lesser-known musicians from around the world, including Russia.
It also draws on some of the biggest stars in Afro-Cuban music, among them Celia Cruz, La India and Oscar D'Leon.
Brazil is represented by Gal Costa and Joao Bosco, and the Euro-African singing group Zap Mama is also scheduled to appear.
Echoing last year, the festival is again taking over Bryant Park for a series of six free concerts.
Mr.
Torme and Ms.
Lee, who are playing at Carnegie Hall on June 24, and Mr.
Peterson, who is playing there on June 27, aren't the only big names appearing in major halls.
The saxophonist Joe Henderson is to perform at Carnegie on June 23 in a concert that will also feature the young tenor saxophone star Joshua Redman and the singer Dee Dee Bridgewater.
Illinois Jacquet is the subject of a tribute concert at Avery Fisher Hall on June 28, featuring his own orchestra and the saxophonist Flip Phillips, the trumpeter Doc Cheatham and the pianist and JVC impresario George Wein.
And last year's Battle of the Bands, which pitted Carnegie Hall's jazz band against the Lincoln Center jazz orchestra, will be repeated at Avery Fisher Hall on June 28.


Electronic Data Systems Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


For Fans, This Is Life, Not a Film
It was, by all accounts, a must-see movie.
Monique DuPree had to see it because she remembered how angry she was at her boyfriend for recklessly driving her around in a stolen car -- the day of her baby shower.


The Pop Life
On His Own
Here are a few words of extreme modesty from a remarkable singer, guitarist and songwriter: "Good luck trying to write anything good out of what I know." That's what Alex Chilton, who is to perform tonight at the Mercury Lounge in the East Village and tomorrow night at Maxwell's in Hoboken, N.J., said in his laid-back drawl after an hourlong telephone interview from his home in New Orleans recently.


Owens &amp; Minor Inc.(OMI,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Diplomacy in Japan: 'Joan of Art' Again
AS she drove through the iron gates that guard the entrance of the American Ambassador's residence, Joan Adams Mondale gently juggled armloads of paper-clad bundles.
In each was a piece of art destined for its private quarters, the new home of Mrs.
Mondale and her husband, Walter -- the former Vice President and current Ambassador to Japan.
"I was Joan of Art before, and now I am Joan of Art again," Mrs.
Mondale said with a laugh, referring to her nickname during the Carter years, when she filled the Vice President's mansion with pottery and contemporary American art.


Alleghany Corp.(Y,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Brogna, Easy as 1-2-3, Regains Homer Touch
Earlier this week, Dallas Green told Rico Brogna to get into the batting cage and hit until his hands started bleeding.
Brogna's swing had been off, his batting average abysmal, and Green wanted his young first baseman to put in some extra work.
Today, Brogna had a red welt on his right palm, where a large blister bled, then calloused from all the extra time he has spent gripping a bat.
He also had one of his best games ever at the plate.


Hong Kong Worries Over Fate of Legal System Under Chinese Rule
As Hong Kong hurtles toward reunification with China two years from now, a central pillar of this territory's vibrancy -- its vigorous legal system and independent judiciary -- is under threat, leading business figures, lawyers and legislators here say.
At stake in the preservation of the territory's legal system and the rule of law is, in the view of many here, the very survival of Hong Kong as Asia's pre-eminent financial and business center.


'Reaffirming Spirituality,' at El Museo del Barrio
Spiritual art and political art are at heart the same thing.
In both cases, liberation is the goal, passion of thought and feeling the means.
This is one of the clear messages delivered by "Reaffirming Spirituality" at El Museo del Barrio, the last -- and best -- of three exhibitions organized by Susana Torruella Leval to celebrate the museum's 25th anniversary.
Collectively titled "Artists Talk Back: Visual Conversations With El Museo," all three shows have tackled huge themes (history and popular culture in the other two cases) at the risk of stumbling under their weight, and have shared a curatorial format.
In each case, 30 or so artists were invited to select two works for inclusion, one of their own and one from the museum's permanent collection.


Hasbro Inc.(HAS,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 2


Beverly Enterprises Inc.(BEV,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Varian Associates Inc.(VAR,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Latest Signs of a Slowdown Help to Raise Bond Prices
For the first time this week, prices of long- and short-term government securities moved in the same direction yesterday, as fresh evidence of a slowing economy combined with a rebounding dollar to help lift prices.
The price of the 30-year bond rose 6/32 , to 10312/32 .
Its yield, which moves in the opposite direction of the price, fell to 7.34 percent, from 7.36 percent on Wednesday.
Rates on both the three-month and six-month bills declined 2 basis points.
The yield on the two-year note fell 4 basis points as well, to 6.41 percent.


Warhol Judge Awards $7.2 Million to Lawyers
In a long-awaited decision, a Manhattan judge yesterday ruled that Edward W. Hayes and Francis Harvey must be paid $7.2 million for their work as lawyers for the estate of Andy Warhol.
She also awarded the two lawyers, who have carried on a bitter and extended legal dispute with the Andy Warhol Foundation for the Visual Arts, the estate's main beneficiary, an additional $250,000 to cover their legal expenses.
Mr.
Hayes and Mr.
Harvey have already been paid $4.85 million, so the decision by Surrogate Eve Preminger calls for them to receive an additional $2.35 million, plus the legal fees.


New York City Lacks Vision in Disowning Small Arts Groups
To the Editor:
Paul Goldberger's Critic's Notebook on New York City's proposal to finance large, tourist-attracting arts institutions and to stiff the smaller organizations was an alarming analysis of the immediate and ultimate cost to the city of a shortsighted view -- and a distressing lack of vision (Arts pages, April 13).


Cutting Welfare Won't Reduce Teen-Age Births
To the Editor:
An accompanying box to your "Rethinking Welfare" special report (front page, April 17) suggests that the House welfare bill denies cash benefits to unmarried mothers under 18 and their children only until the young mother reaches the age of 18.
In fact, the language of the bill is unclear on whether these children can ever receive Aid to Families With Dependent Children no matter how old they, or their mothers, are when poverty strikes.


More on the Blast
THE CHILDREN -- The day-care center was alive with children about to start a day of songs and toys and projects.
Then the room exploded in their faces.
Page A23.
THE TRAIL -- Federal agents raced to a truck-rental agency in Kansas in pursuit of suspected bombers, but the trail quickly grew faint.
Page A24.
THE MOOD -- Until yesterday, Amber Fleming had always felt a bit superior about Oklahoma City, where locking up is strictly optional.
Page A26.


In Twisted Remains of Building, Hope and Expectation vs. Death
One way or another, Dr.
Rick Nelson was determined to carry someone out from the tangled, unsteady remains of the Alfred P. Murrah Federal Building.
But by late Wednesday night, as signs of survivors faded, he stood yards away from the shattered facade, willing even to help haul out corpses who were beyond the help of his surgeon's training.
He would have one more chance.


Ruddick Corp.(RDK,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 2


INSIDE
School Bus Strike Averted
School bus drivers agreed to call off a planned strike in exchange for Mayor Giuliani's promise to delay a plan to end lifetime job security for union drivers.
Page B1.
J.
Peter Grace Dies
The outspoken former head of W. R. Grace, who was active in public service and the Roman Catholic Church, died of cancer.
Page B6.
Milovan Djilas Is Dead at 83
The Yugoslav Communist revolutionary who denounced his former comrades, and especially Stalin, died in Belgrade.
Page B7.


Corrections
An obituary on Wednesday about Arturo Frondizi, a former Argentine President, misstated his age and his birthdate in some copies.
He was 86 and was born in 1908.


Apple Earnings Rise Fourfold, But Still Below Expectations
Stung by a surprising loss in foreign-currency dealings, Apple Computer Inc. reported earnings today that fell far short of Wall Street's expectations, even though they surged nearly fourfold.
Even without the currency losses, Apple earnings were at the low end of analysts' estimates.


Oates Given 2-Week Leave
Texas Rangers Manager Johnny Oates, his wife hospitalized with exhaustion, was granted a two-week leave of absence today and will miss the start of the season.
General Manager Doug Melvin said that the third-base coach, Jerry Narron, will become acting manager and that Bucky Dent will take over Narron's coaching job.


Summing Up a Life, With Outside Help
THE DISTINGUISHED GUEST
By Sue Miller
282 pages. HarperCollins. $24.
Families are the prism through which Sue Miller refracts her characters' lives.
In each of her novels to date -- from her remarkably assured debut novel, "The Good Mother" (1986), through "Family Pictures" (1990) and "For Love" (1993) -- she has examined the emotional geometry that connects parents and children, husbands and wives, brothers and sisters.
Her latest novel, "The Distinguished Guest," is no exception, although this time the results are decidedly less gratifying: in part because Ms.
Miller has chosen to dilute her portrait of a mother and her middle-aged son with lots of extraneous talk about race relations and upper-middle-class guilt; in part because she has chosen to introduce a highly unconvincing interloper into her characters' family circle.


American Electric Power Co.  (AEP,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Anti-Terrorism Bill: Blast Turns a Snail Into a Race Horse
On Tuesday, the Omnibus Counter terrorism Act of 1995 was a proposal on a slow track in Congress and the subject of a lively debate as to whether it would violate fundamental civil liberties, including the right to confront one's accuser.
Now, after the Oklahoma City bombing, there are few surer legislative bets in Washington.
Democrats and Republicans issued a blizzard of news releases today calling for the bill's quick passage.


Trinova Corp.(TNV,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Candlelight Memorial


School Bus Walkout Is Averted After Both Sides Soften Positions
School bus drivers agreed yesterday to call off a strike planned for Monday in exchange for Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani's decision to delay seeking cheaper bus service by ending lifetime job security for union drivers, the Mayor said.
With both sides backing down from what they had said were nonnegotiable positions, the parents of 150,000 children will be able to count on bus service Monday, when the spring recess ends.


Landstar Systems Inc.(LSTR,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 1


A Day in the Very Public Life of Jersey City's Chief Executive
MAYOR Bret Schundler was running late.
First, his father had stopped by City Hall to say hello.
Second, his right foot was dragging a bit in the lace-up sandal the doctor made him wear after removing a plantar wart.
So by the time the Mayor sat his outsized self down at a folding table in the basement for his weekly three-hour open house, half a dozen people were waiting with their complaints.


Vaughn to Enter Draft
DAVID VAUGHN has decided to pass up his senior year at Memphis playing for his uncle, Coach LARRY FINCH, to enter the National Basketball Association draft.
"I've had fun playing for my uncle, and it's difficult for me to leave," Vaughn, a 6-foot-10-inch power forward, said yesterday.


Corrections
A music review on Wednesday about a farewell concert at Alice Tully Hall on Monday in honor of Charles Kaufman, the retiring dean of the Mannes College of Music, referred incompletely to a speaker, Jonathan F. Fanton.
Besides being a trustee of the New School for Social Research, he is its president.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; An unusual hybrid agency seeks to cross-pollinate campaigns on each side of the Atlantic.
A LEADING British creative team and a small American agency are joining forces for an unusual, potentially innovative venture: forming allied agencies based in London and New York to work both sides of the Atlantic.
Steve Grounds, a copywriter, and Rob Morris, an art director, who have spent 10 years together creating award-winning campaigns for advertisers like Citroen, Tambrands and the Wilson Sporting Goods Company, are teaming with Martin H. Landey, chairman and chief executive of Cox Landey &amp; Partners, a New York agency with $35 million in billings from accounts like the Eastman Kodak Company, Hartmarx and the Hearst Corporation.


High Over the Andes, In Enormous Goggles
"Wings of Courage" is a swooping, old-fashioned adventure tale that uses flashy newfangled technology.
The first fiction movie made for IMAX 3-D (the format that makes everyone wear oversized, goofy-looking goggles), this 40-minute film plays to the strengths of its 3-D technique.
It's a winning ploy.
Based on real events, it tells of daredevil aviators flying mail over the Andes in 1930, but the tale takes second place to the way it is told.
In the very first scene, a biplane seems to sail off the screen and hover over the heads of the audience.
When aviators go to a nightclub, viewers might step into the space between the table in the foreground and the couple doing a tango in the rear.
And when a plane lands, the camera seems to be attached to the rear wheels.
Tom Hulce plays the French writer and pilot Antoine de Saint-Exupery, although here he is seen not as the author of "The Little Prince" but as the head of Aeropostale, the company that moves the mail between South America and France.
He is fondly called "St. X" by his pals in the movie.
Val Kilmer has a tiny part as Jean Mermoz, a role that sets up the atmosphere of the period.
Mermoz is a hero whose picture is on matchboxes, posters and cigarette packs.
"The Andes don't give men back," he warns Henri Guillaumet, a flier set to make a run from Argentina to France.


G.M. Profit of $2.2 Billion Tops Wall St. Expectations
The General Motors Corporation reported yesterday that a long-awaited turnaround of its North American automotive operations was responsible for strong first-quarter earnings of $2.2 billion, or $2.51 a share.
The earnings exceeded the expectations of securities analysts, who had forecast, on average, $2.27 a share.
But the stock market reacted coolly to the earnings report, with G.M. shares closing at $43.875 each, down 12.5 cents, on the New York Stock Exchange.


The Top Draft Pick in Economics; A Professor-to-Be Coveted by Two Dozen Universities
She's only 24, but everybody in the world of economics already knows her.
About two dozen universities -- Berkeley, Harvard, M.I.T., Princeton, Stanford and Yale among them -- sought her as a junior member of their faculties.
They called her one of the most promising candidates in several years.
"We fought really hard to get her," said Bengt Holmstrom at M.I.T., where she ultimately accepted a job.
"I've rarely seen somebody about whom there was as much unanimity."
"This," said one of her thesis advisers at Stanford, John Roberts, "is Superwoman."


SCEcorp (SCE,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Pacific Gas &amp; Electric (PCG,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Riverwood Intl.  Corp.(RVW,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 1


CSX Corp.(CSX,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Mets May Have Bonilla Linger in Outfield Role
Although Dallas Green seems far from enamored of the idea, he did not rule out the possibility of moving Bobby Bonilla back to the outfield when he was asked today about his plans for filling his right field vacancy.
With Ryan Thompson sidelined until mid-May with a torn medial collateral ligament, the natural -- and still most likely -- choice to start in right field appears to be rookie Carl Everett, who has played well this spring and has impressed Green with his defense and his skills.


Marching In the Parade Of Animals
MAN is the crown of creation, or so the common wisdom runs.
Not everyone in history has agreed.
The ancient Egyptians didn't always think so.
Nor did the people of Africa or India.
For those cultures, animals -- from lions to falcons to tsetse flies -- not only had the power to shape human lives but also provided a mirror in which, for better or worse, humans could see themselves reflected.
Even in New York City in the 1990's, animal images are everywhere: macho camels on cigarette packs, heroic Disney beasts on subway posters, aggressive crocodiles stitched on T-shirts.
And for the next few months, entire menageries can be found ensconsed in exhibitions at the Metropolitan Museum of Art, the Pierpont Morgan Library, the Museum for African Art and -- beginning on April 30 -- the Asia Society.


Fingerhut Companies (FHT,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Ewing Limps, Harper Limps and Knicks Skip to a Victory
An injury to Patrick Ewing could not stop the Knicks.
An injury to Derek Harper could not stop them.
A 12-point fourth-quarter deficit could not stop them.
And the Charlotte Hornets, whom the Knicks had not beaten all season, could not stop New York either.
Clinching homecourt advantage through the second round of the playoffs, the Knicks (53-27) won their most emotional game of the season tonight, 91-86, at the Charlotte Coliseum.
Ewing sat out almost the entire second half because of a slightly strained left hamstring, while Harper missed the entire half because of a sore left ankle.
Both players are listed as day to day, but with homecourt advantage for the first two rounds now secure, the Knicks have the luxury of resting Ewing and Harper for the final two regular season games, giving them time to recuperate before next week's playoffs.


A Writer Discovers Challenge In Illness
Seated in his wheelchair at his computer at home this morning, Brian Dickinson began writing his weekly column for The Providence Journal-Bulletin with one of the few parts of his body he can still move -- the middle finger of his left hand.
Slowly, as his finger touched a toggle switch on his wheelchair table, words, and then sentences, appeared on the screen.
"One of the many truths about a serious illness, I've learned, is that it utterly transforms the way one regards the world," he wrote.
"Perspective is drastically, permanently altered.


Southern New England Telecommunications Corp.(SNG,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


In City After City, a Bad Case of Nerves
Workers in Government buildings were jittery, subway service in Boston was halted and even the hospital treating young victims of the Oklahoma City bombing was evacuated yesterday as officials across the country dealt with hoax after hoax, scare after scare, in the wake of the explosion.
Threats led the authorities to evacuate Government buildings in at least 15 cities, The Associated Press reported.


Bausch &amp; Lomb Inc.(BOL,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 1


On My Mind; Ending Forgiveness
From the moment the bomb went off in Oklahoma City, the message of helplessness went out across the country: We can't stop terrorism.
Maybe the Government can catch some of the killers but other terrorists will always be able to strike America when and where they wish.
The message is false.
Individuals cannot protect their countries from terrorists -- but governments can.


Corrections
An entry in the listing of new equity issues in Business Day on Monday misstated the terms and the lead underwriter for an initial public offering by Shared Technologies Cellular Inc.
The offering is for 950,000 shares, not 550,000 units.
H.
J.
Meyers &amp; Company is the lead underwriter.


Reynolds &amp; Reynolds Co.(REY,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31





Olin Corp.(OLN,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Art in Review
'Blinky Palermo'  'Editioned Works'
Brooke Alexander Editions  476 Broome Street  SoHo  Through May 6
This low-key but illuminating show amounts to a print retrospective of the German artist Blinky Palermo, who died in 1977 at the age of 34.
He was an early pupil of Joseph Beuys, though the influence is far from obvious at a glance.
In contrast to Beuys's mythic, symbol-saturated eclecticism, much of Palermo's work looks like spare geometric abstraction.


Charm on the Surface, And Stalinist Realities
Nikita Mikhalkov walked off the stage at the Academy Awards ceremony last month carrying his Oscar for best foreign-language film in one hand and the movie's star, his 8-year-old daughter, Nadia, in the other.
He knows the value of being a sentimentalist and a showman.
He is also a director of the first rank, whose films go far deeper than their seductive visual beauty.
So it makes sense that his exquisite, lyrical and tough-minded "Burnt by the Sun" combines surface charm with trenchant realism.
Mr.
Mikhalkov himself plays a retired army officer and hero of the Russian Revolution, who on one gloriously sunny summer day in 1936 discovers the reach and horror of Stalin's rule.
With its Chekhovian sense of a brutal future encroaching on an elegant, dying world, "Burnt by the Sun" matches the enduring power of Mr.
Mikhalkov's best works, "A Slave of Love" (1976) and "Dark Eyes" (a 1987 film starring Marcello Mastroianni), and is very much of a piece with them.


Whereabouts Of Teen-Ager Baffles Police
Less than two weeks ago, Robin F. Murphy, a tall, slender 17-year-old from this Putnam County town, bought candy and Easter presents for her younger brothers and sisters and hid them in her bedroom.
She never got the chance to deliver them.
Authorities said the teen-ager disappeared on April 9 from a shopping center across the street from her home and has not been seen since.
The car she was driving, her mother's red Oldsmobile station wagon, was found parked in the center's lot.
Her wallet and car keys were found on a grassy area behind the stores.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  *
CIT Group Holdings Inc., New York, is selling $200 milion of notes due in 1998 through CS First Boston Corp.
The notes are priced at 99.78 to yield 6.832 percent.
The noncallable issue is rated Aa3 by Moody's Investors Service Inc., A+ by the Standard &amp; Poor's Corp. and AA- by Duff &amp; Phelps.


Black (Box) Art of Steal-Per-View
Hey you!
You with the illegal black boxes stealing pay-per-view fights, absconding with money rightfully belonging to cable companies, boxers and promoters like Bob Arum and Don King.
You say you have no sympathy for them?
You say it's worth $300 for a black box to save those $40-a-fight fees?


It's June in April


For Survivor, the Recovery Starts
David Grossman, the sole survivor of the shootings at a Montclair post office last month, is home from the hospital.


Vietnam's Aftereffects In 'Redwood Curtain'
With Robert S. McNamara's public apologia currently rubbing salt in various Vietnam War wounds, the timing could hardly be better for the "Hallmark Hall of Fame" presentation of "Redwood Curtain," Sunday night on ABC.
Hiding behind this curtain, in the forests of Northern California, are hundreds, perhaps thousands, of shattered Vietnam veterans unable to re-adjust to the "normal" world they left behind.
In fairy-tale tradition, this forest is truly haunted.
"Redwood Curtain" has been adapted for television by Ed Namzug from the Lanford Wilson play, which had a short run on Broadway.
A young Asian woman, adopted by a wealthy California family and aiming for a career as a concert pianist, begins searching for the identity of her biological father, an American who must be living somewhere in the United States.
A carefully planted clue leads her to the redwood forest and a confrontation with a homeless veteran who supplies a crucial link to her past.


A Piece of a Rented Truck Offers a Clue to 2 Suspects
As rain fell on the wreckage of Oklahoma City's Alfred P. Murrah Federal Building late Wednesday night, Federal agents unearthed a piece of a leased truck that sent investigators racing to a truck-rental agency in Kansas and onto the trail of two suspected bombers.
But the trail grew faint almost as soon as it began.
Investigators learned that the driver's license used by the two men, who rented the truck on Monday in Junction City, Kan., 245 miles north-northeast of Oklahoma City, was fake.
A rental agent loosely described the men, but their names and whereabouts remained unknown.


Parking Rules
Because of religious holidays, alternate-side street parking regulations are suspended in New York City today and tomorrow.
Other regulations remain in effect.


Sarajevo Haggadah Barely Escaped Nazis
To the Editor:
Re "Bosnia Jews Glimpse Book and Hope" (news article, April 16), on the Sarajevo Haggadah, one of the world's most beautiful illustrated Jewish manuscripts: In 1959 it was with great pride and pleasure that my husband, the historian Cecil Roth, received an invitation from the Sarajevo Jewish community to edit the Haggadah for reproduction.


Milovan Djilas, Yugoslav Critic of Communism, Dies at 83
Milovan Djilas, the Yugoslav Communist revolutionary whose denunciation of his former comrades in 1957 as a privileged and self-serving "new class" became an early banner of dissidents and anti-Communists, died in Belgrade yesterday.
He was 83.
His son, Aleksa Djilas, a historian, said Mr.
Djilas was treated Wednesday night for a heart complaint and died at home on Thursday.
The elder Djilas had been increasingly weakened by age and heart problems in recent years, but he remained intellectually active to the end.


'Where's My Baby?' A Cry That Echoes Still
The walls of the day-care center were adorned with the creations of toddlers: works in crayon, finger paint, paste and paper.
A bulletin board listed the day's activities: songs and toys and special projects.
And there were large windows, perfect for little daydreamers to gaze out and wonder.
The children would have been eating breakfast about 9 A.M. on Wednesday, when a bomb exploded beneath them.
And in the terrifying minutes and hours that followed the explosion, a panic-stricken woman stood outside the devastated building, screaming: "Where is my baby? My baby is in there!"


Dallas Trip Turned Into 16-Hour Legal Ordeal, Student Says
Onis Siddiqi says he is a 24-year-old business student from Queens who came to Dallas with his older brother on Tuesday seeking to deal with "an immigration problem."
But within 24 hours of arriving here, he says, he was hauled into the Dallas offices of the Federal Bureau of Investigation and the Federal Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms, given a polygraph test and questioned over and over.


Ryder System Inc.(R,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Corrections
A chart on the Health page in some editions yesterday, about mortality rates and exercise intensity, referred incompletely to the energy expenditure levels shown.
The levels were expressed in kilojoules, or thousands of joules, per week. (A joule is the work done in moving a one-kilogram mass by one meter.)


Tandy Corp.(TAN,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


In Love, On to AIDS, Out of Love
Ming (B. D. Wong) is a young, assimilated Chinese-American.
He's hip, outgoing, in tune with the popular culture that bred him.
Oscar (Francis Jue), his somewhat older Chinese-born lover, also sounds completely American, but his roots are in the old traditions, not in Boston, where the two have lived together for four years.
Ming is spontaneous, saying whatever comes into his head.
Oscar is courteous in the way of people who have difficulty expressing their emotions.
"We were polite even when we were breaking up," Ming observes to the audience at the beginning of "A Language of Their Own," Chay Yew's new play, which opened last night in the Susan Stein Shiva Theater at the Joseph Papp Public Theater.


Chubb Corp.(CHB,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Sit-In at Princeton In President's Office
Demanding more representation for Asian-Americans and Hispanic people in the curriculum and on the faculty, a group of Princeton University students occupied the president's office here today.
While 17 students sat in the office of Harold Shapiro, 100 others rallied outside Nassau Hall, chanting, "Diversity we must, ethnic studies or bust!"


Experts Search for Debris To Link Bomb to a Suspect
Forensic specialists using chemistry to track down terrorists like those responsible for the bombing here face daunting technical challenges, and experts at a meeting on the topic on Wednesday expressed fear that the United States would now see more bombings.
By coincidence, the meeting of scientific experts on terrorist bombings was convened at the Research Center for Energetic Materials in Socorro, N.M., about the same time the bomb went off in Oklahoma City.
The meeting, attended by experts from the Federal Bureau of Investigation and the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firarms had been scheduled months ago so explosives experts and police forensic specialists could share insights.
But when news of the bombing reached the meeting, Federal agents hastened to Oklahoma City.
The seminar continued without them.


Crown Cork &amp; Seal Co.  (CCK,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


An Officer Dies and 2 Are Wounded in an Armed Siege
A gunman shot three police officers yesterday in a wild gun battle in this quiet Camden County suburb, killing at least one and creating a siege around his home that lasted into the night.
Dozens of officers from different agencies surrounded the house of Len Leslie Nelson, a 37-year-old man who neighbors said underwent a sex-change operation two years ago.


Times Mirror Co.(TMC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


BellSouth Corp.(BLS,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Court Awards $83 Million to 600 Investors
A California state court has awarded more than $83 million in damages to 600 investors in a series of collapsed real estate investments.
The case involved four limited partnership funds, meant to invest in real estate, that promised investors an annual return of 15 percent.
Between 1989 and 1992, $89 million was invested in the funds by 4,200 people, most of them retirees in Southern California.


William Scott, 46; Led AIDS Groups
William Arnold Scott, who founded organizations aimed at increasing awareness of gay and lesbian concerns in Houston and became a national figure on AIDS issues, died on April 4 at Park Plaza Hospital in Houston.
He was 46 and lived in Houston.
The cause was complications from AIDS, said a spokesman for the Texas Board of Health, which oversees programs and policies of the Texas Department of Health.
Mr.
Scott had been a member of the board since 1988.


Images, but No Camera
Photograms, the ghostly images made by placing objects directly on a sheet of photographic paper or film and exposing it to light, have lately been enjoying something of a revival.
In recent years, several contemporary photographers, including Joan Fontcuberta and Kunie Sugiura, have used the process to achieve surprisingly diverse effects.
Just how distinctive and engaging these cameraless images can be is demonstrated by two current shows in Manhattan.
At the Sander Gallery, Floris Neususs shows more or less traditional photograms of plants and other objects as well as technically more ambitious pieces.
At the Robert Miller Gallery, Adam Fuss is presenting photograms made with old stained-glass windows that give tradition a twist.


New York State Electric &amp; Gas Corp.(NGE,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Tyco Int'l.(TYC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Hurley's Season Over?
Sacramento Kings guard BOBBY HURLEY was placed on the injured list yesterday and is expected to be replaced by DERRICK PHELPS for the last three games of the regular season.
Hurley strained his lower back during pregame warm-ups Tuesday night.
He could return if Sacramento makes the playoffs. (AP)


Last Chance
Here is a sampling of shows and exhibitions in New York City that are to close soon: Closing This Weekend  "THE FALL GUY," Playhouse 91, 316 East 91st Street, Yorkville.
Mako directs Gary Perlman's translation and adaptation of Tsuka Kohei's comedy about a Samurai film star, his ex-girlfriend and his loyal stuntman.
Closes Sunday.
Performances: today at 8 P.M.; tomorrow at 3 and 8 P.M.; Sunday at 3 P.M.
Tickets: $30.
Reservations: (212) 307-4100.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article on April 7 about the anniversary of the start of ethnic massacres in Rwanda misidentified the leader who was honored that day by the Government in a mass reburial.
It was the former interim Prime Minister, Agathe Uwilingiyimana, not former President Juvenal Habyarimana.


Cutting Welfare Won't Reduce Teen-Age Births; Food Stamp Lobby
To the Editor:
In your otherwise excellent April 17 front-page article about cutting off welfare benefits to teen-age mothers, you create a possible misconception.
Concerning the proposal to eliminate benefits, you write that "softening the practical effects, the House bill still would allow the teen-agers to receive Medicaid and food stamps."


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-12  U.S.
DEAF ON DOLLAR  European and Japanese pleas that Washington stem the dollar's slide are falling on deaf ears: American policy makers lack the will and doubt they have the way to buck up the buck.
A weak dollar makes foreign goods more expensive, threatening recoveries abroad.
A1  U.S.-NORTH KOREA TALKS BREAK UP  The U.S. and North Korea broke off talks in Berlin without reaching agreement on how to put a crucial nuclear accord into effect, the negotiators said.
A10


On Stage, and Off
Favored Early, Ignored at the Finish
The surprise of this week's Pulitzer Prize for drama was that Terrence McNally's "Love! Valour! Compassion!" not only didn't win, but was not even one of the three finalists. (Even Horton Foote, whose "Young Man From Atlanta" did win, said he had assumed Mr. McNally would.)
Nancy Melich of The Salt Lake City Tribune, one of the Pulitzer jurors, said: "The buzz when I came to New York was: 'The Pulitzer's already been decided, and it's Terrence.' A couple of other critics told me that, and I wondered to myself: 'How could you know that? I'm on the jury and we haven't even met yet.' "


Poor See New Indignity in Welfare Fraud War
Mildred Williams sat nervously in a room with blue walls early Wednesday, waiting for her name to be called.
She had come to the welfare office at 330 Jay Street in Brooklyn seeking public assistance.
It was the second time in two months.
Ms.
Williams said she came first in mid-February, filled out an application, answered some questions and left.
The next day, she said, she went looking for work.


Tania K. Stern; Therapist and Translator, 91
Tania Kurella Stern, a physical therapist and a co-translator, with her husband, of the work of many noted German writers, died on Monday at her home in Wiltshire, England.
She was 91.
Mrs.
Stern was born in Berlin, where her father was a prominent psychiatrist.
She and the writer James Stern were married in Paris in 1935.
They fled the Nazis in 1939 and settled in New York, where Mrs.
Stern worked as a physical therapist.
The poet W. H. Auden, a client who became a close friend, described a Christmas spent with the Sterns in the poem "Thank You, Fog."


Cutting Welfare Won't Reduce Teen-Age Births; Babies So Poor
To the Editor:
"Gap in Wealth in U.S. Called Widest in West" (front page, April 17) and your editorial "The Rich Get Richer Faster" (April 18) may be the two most important pieces of journalism in our nation for 1995.
Your data and conclusions are impeccable.


Gillette Co. (G,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Two Boys in Quest of a Cure
Anyone who played in the woods as a child should relate to the scenes in "The Cure" when two 11-year-old boys, one of whom has AIDS, brew mysterious herb teas from leaves and roots they have collected outdoors.
After seeing a headline in a supermarket tabloid proclaiming that a doctor in New Orleans has found an herbal cure, Erik (Brad Renfro) tries to heal his ailing next-door neighbor, Dexter (Joseph Mazzello), with teas made from the local foliage.
All goes well until Erik accidentally poisons his friend, who is rushed to the hospital to have his stomach pumped.
Taking more drastic measures, Erik pressures Dexter into running away on an improvised raft that he intends to sail from Minnesota down the Mississippi River to New Orleans, where the miracle cure waits.
Roughly half the movie follows their trip, during which they forsake their raft to hitch a speedier ride with a scruffy young yachtsman (Nicky Katt), who is in no hurry to reach Louisiana once a couple of pretty women come on board.


Yanks! Peanuts! Crackerjack!
The Yankees yesterday joined baseball's effort to win back fans with free tickets by making available 4,500 bleacher seats for each game during the first week in May.
The seats will be available only on the day of the game for four contests with the Boston Red Sox and three with the Milwaukee Brewers from May 1-7.
Fans who present a paid ticket stub for any of those games will be able to buy one ticket and get another free ticket for any game during the rest of the season.
Those transactions must be completed in advance.


Russia Balks at a U.N. Move To Tighten Serbia Border Ban
Russia refused today to support a Security Council resolution intended to close loopholes in Serbia's borders through which Bosnian and Croatian Serbs have been obtaining weapons and other strategic supplies.
Russia thus split the five-nation "contact group" that guides policy on the former Yugoslavia.
The four other members -- the United States, Britain, France and Germany -- back the resolution, which demands monitoring of air traffic as well as land surveillance of Serbia's borders with Croatia and Bosnia and Herzegovina.


Warner-Lambert (WLA,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Kandol Journal; Cambodia's Agony Lingers, in Death and Blindness
In the shade of a sugar palm tree beside a one-room schoolhouse of palm and bamboo, Dr.
Do Seiha examined a farmer's 3-year-old son as dozens of other children watched with laughter and apprehension.
The boy's pupils were alive with fright, but it was the whites of the eyes that concerned the doctor.
They were dry and strangely wrinkled.
The father, a 40-year-old farmer named Sou En, told Dr.
Do Seiha that his son had "chicken blindness," meaning that he cannot see at night.


Ideas and Confessions Of a Quirky Cartoonist
"Crumb" was shown as part of last year's New York Film Festival.
Following are excerpts from Stephen Holden's review, which appeared in The New York Times on Sept. 27.
The film opens today at the Film Forum, 209 West Houston Street, South Village.
When the cartoonist Robert Crumb was a little boy, he reveals in Terry Zwigoff's riveting documentary portrait, he was sexually attracted to Bugs Bunny, even carrying around a picture of this buck-toothed rabbit.
Eventually it became crumpled and was all but destroyed after he had his mother iron it for him.
At 12, he developed a new fixation.
He became erotically obsessed with the television character Sheena, Queen of the Jungle.


Affirmative Action Mocks True Equality
To the Editor:
Re "The Fairest Cure We Have" (Op-Ed, April 16): Lamenting recent criticism of affirmative action policies, former Deputy Assistant Attorney General for Civil Rights James P. Turner responds to this public disgust by asking for "a little peace and quiet on the subject."


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
9.00
9.00
6.75
DISCOUNT RATE
5.25
5.25
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
5.94
5.92
3.70
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.58
5.60
3.71
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.67
5.69
4.17
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.00
7.03
6.89
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.34
7.36
7.21
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.22
8.23
8.02
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.21
6.22
6.33
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills 8


Burlington Northern Inc.(BNI,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Illinois Tool Works Inc.(ITW,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


North Korea Leaves Talks on Nuclear Pact
The United States and North Korea broke off talks in Berlin today without reaching agreement on how to put a crucial nuclear accord into effect, the negotiators said.
The two sides reached an impasse over whether South Korea would provide its old enemy, North Korea, with two modern nuclear reactors to replace an old Russian-built reactor.
The new reactors produce plutonium that is far harder to use in making nuclear weapons.


METRO DIGEST
WELFARE SCREENING PROGRAM CRITICIZED
More than 10,000 childless adults who applied for welfare in New York City in the first three months of the year were rejected under a tough new screening process instituted for the city's program for able-bodied childless adults.
Most, said Mayor Giuliani, tried to cheat the system.
But advocates for the poor criticized the way the program is being carried out and said some applicants were turned down because of inadequacies in the way investigators checked out where the applicants lived.
A1.
NEW YORK CITY


Wrong Harvard Lesson
To the Editor:
Harvard teaches the wrong lesson in revoking the admission of a student who killed her mother and served time for manslaughter.
In contrast, Temple Law School admitted a student who served time for murder.
He was an excellent candidate, paid his debt to society and was entitled to a fresh start.


Giants Aim to Pick a Very Quick Study
While free agency can be a bonanza to teams by helping them to improve rather quickly, it can also be a drain because it turns the draft into something that can no longer be used to slowly rebuild teams.
Instead, there is more urgency and teams use the draft to stop the bleeding of free agency.
No more projects.
No time to waste.


Kimberly-Clark (KMB,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


An Escaped Killer Is Caught
The killer who walked away last week from Marlboro Psychiatric Hospital was in custody in Florida yesterday, while a State Senator called for tighter security at institutions for the criminally insane.
William Jennings, 39, hospitalized after killing his parents in 1980, had been transferred earlier this year from the state's most secure hospital, Forensic Psychiatric in Trenton, to Marlboro, where he had unsupervised grounds privileges.


A Giuliani Opera Debut


Season Ended For Isles' Pilon
Rich Pilon will miss the Islanders' seven remaining games after X-rays taken Wednesday disclosed that the defenseman has a broken left wrist.


Friends Say Senator Pryor of Arkansas Will Quit
Senator David Pryor of Arkansas is expected to announce on Friday that he will not seek a fourth term, thus becoming the fifth Democratic Senator to decide not to run for re-election next year.
Friends of Mr.
Pryor, speaking on condition of anonymity, said the Senator was "simply tired" and "discouraged by the tone" of American politics in general and the Senate in particular.


White Supremacist Executed For Murdering 2 in Arkansas
Richard Wayne Snell, a white supremacist who expressed no remorse for killing a Jewish businessman and a black police officer, was put to death by lethal injection on Wednesday night, but not before delivering a threat to Gov.
Jim Guy Tucker, who declined to block his execution.
"Governor Tucker, look over your shoulder; justice is coming," Mr.
Snell was quoted as saying by witnesses to his execution.
"I wouldn't trade places with you or any of your cronies. Hell has victories; I am at peace."


Getting Even In Hollywood Can Be Fun
Several of George Huang's former bosses helped him get "Swimming With Sharks" made, even though they should have been hiding under their desks instead.
In his six years working for various movie executives, Mr.
Huang filed away trenchant observations about great big egos and helpless little assistants.
Now he gleefully brings those observations to the screen.
His witty, score-settling "Swimming With Sharks" is the perfect revenge for anyone who has ever been showered with paper clips, compared unfavorably with a bath mat or ordered to place an urgent phone call to somebody who's out white-water rafting with Tom Cruise -- right now!
No excuses!
Since it involves murder, Mr.
Huang's wicked portrait of Buddy Ackerman (Kevin Spacey) owes something to Robert Altman and "The Player," too.
"That hack!" Buddy sneers about Mr.
Altman, with typical generosity.
"He couldn't direct his way out of a paper bag."


FMC Corp.(FMC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Precisely Cultivating A Lively Garden
At 73, the painter Nell Blaine is not gone and not forgotten, but she's not exactly in the limelight, either.
Her simultaneous exhibitions on West 57th Street -- a show of recent watercolors and paintings at the Fischbach Gallery, and a small 45-year survey at the Tibor de Nagy Gallery -- give her quietly luminous achievement a moment of deserved prominence.
Ms.
Blaine is one of the least-known members of a generation of figurative artists who developed in the shadow of Abstract Expressionism, a generation that includes Larry Rivers, Jane Freilicher and Alex Katz.
She has her loyal admirers; in fact, all the works at de Nagy are from the estate of a single collector, Arthur W. Cohen, who purchased his first Blaine in 1955 and eventually owned nearly 150.


Sun Co.(SUN,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Nucor Corp.(NUE,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 1


Art in Review
Robert Birabeau  Allan Stone Gallery 113 East 90th Street Manhattan Through tomorrow
Robert Birabeau is a 46-year-old painter whose first solo show at Allan Stone was in 1980.
His largish (5 feet by 5 feet) paintings are bold, brushy abstractions, with bits of patterned cloth added as collage elements.
Paint is dripped, piled on in clumps, smeared and scraped.
Colors are strong and varied.
Does it matter that Mr.
Birabeau's works look like throwbacks to the 1950's: like Rauschenbergs, with elements of Cy Twombly and Hans Hofmann added?
What's most important is that they are vigorous pictures that convey sheer pleasure in the handling of paint.
MICHAEL KIMMELMAN


U.S. Plans to Send Officials to Hunt for American Missing in Chechnya


Shelter Fee Is Proposed For Homeless
The Pataki administration is proposing to charge homeless people rent, in effect, for staying in public shelters if the state determines that they have personal assets, jobs or other sources of income beyond basic welfare grants.
The plan is projected to save state and local governments $320,000 a year, and state officials say it is intended to encourage personal responsibility among homeless people while discouraging employed people from taking scarce shelter beds.


Albany Aides Assail Delays In Budget
As a lawn mower tended the greening grass of the Executive Mansion, 200 or so legislative workers, mostly Democrats, rallied today outside Gov.
George E. Pataki's residence, complaining that their paychecks had been held hostage to the late budget.
"George Pataki has a beautiful place to live in," said Matt Kennedy, 52, a legislative aide to a Democratic Assembly member, said outside the mansion's black iron gates.
"He has a cook. He has a chauffeur."


Weak Dollar And Its Costs
"A country which is responsible for the key currency of the world has the responsibility of maintaining reasonable stability of it," Michel Camdessus, managing director of the International Monetary Fund, complained earlier this week.
Translation: Do something -- anything -- to halt the decline of the dollar.
Mr.
Camdessus's frayed temper reflects the frustration of Japanese and European officials watching their hopes for vibrant recovery fade away.
That is because their exporters are losing competitive edge as their stronger currencies make their goods more expensive to sell in foreign markets.
But pleas for action are falling on deaf ears in Washington: American policy makers lack the will and doubt they have the way to buck up the buck.


SmithKine Beecham (SBH,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Uncovered Short Sales Slip a Bit on Big Board
Open positions of short sales on the New York Stock Exchange -- in essence, bets that stock prices will fall -- declined slightly in the latest period from the record level set a month earlier.
For the month ended April 6, with trades settled on April 13, the exchange said that short interest was 1.944 billion shares, down from 1.949 billion a month earlier, a decrease of two-tenths of 1 percent.


Improving the Improvement Districts
New York's City Council, alarmed at allegations that the Grand Central Partnership has engaged in financial wrongdoing and assaults on the homeless, has launched a broad inquiry into the operations of all 33 "business improvement districts" serving commercial and industrial areas throughout the city.
The Grand Central Partnership is perhaps the best known of these districts, which are authorized to tax property owners and use the funds to provide security guards, trash cleaners and other services beyond those furnished by the city.
Herbert Berman, chairman of the Council's Finance Committee, has asked the B.I.D.'s for information about their incomes, executive salaries and the contracts they sign to perform neighborhood services.
The Council, which authorizes B.I.D.'s to tax and provide services, has an important oversight role to play, as does the city's Department of Business Services, which has responsibility for monitoring B.I.D. operations.
The challenge is to hold B.I.D.'s to the highest performance and ethical standards without smothering an innovative movement that contributes to the city's livability and economic vitality.


At the Bar; Putting law in its place: second fiddle to Sam Cooke.
G.
David Tenenbaum doesn't know a lot about history.
Doesn't know much geography.
Doesn't know much about science books, or about the French he took.
But he does know about Sam Cooke, and he has collected it in a biography of the legendary pop singer.
Thirteen years ago, while a law student at the University of California at Los Angeles, Mr.
Tenenbaum resolved to write the life story of Cooke, whose music he had loved as a boy in Chicago, and whose death he remembers to this day: Cooke, at the age of 33, was shot in 1964 by the night clerk at a fleabag motel, an event Mr.
Tenenbaum learned of over his father's car radio.


That Certainly Was a Performance!; In the Greenroom, Where Artists Meet Audience, Diplomatic Neutrality Is Crucial
A friend or colleague has just performed. It wasn't great. What do you say?
"At Juilliard," Misha Dichter, the pianist, recalled, "we used to bat around little phrases that could be used, like 'You have no idea how that sounded out there.' "
Sardonic ambiguity is the key. Thus: "That was really something."


Knight-Ridder Inc.(KRI,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 26


Retrospective of Films From South Africa
"Apartheid Framed: South African Film, 1948-1994," a retrospective featuring more than 18 films and videos, opens today and is to run weekends through June 4 at the Brooklyn Museum, 200 Eastern Parkway, at Prospect Park.
Several premieres are included in the series, which will also feature guest speakers, among them Rob Nixon, a professor of English and literature at Columbia University, who is an organizer of the retrospective.
The features this weekend are "A Dry, White Season," a 1989 film by Euzhan Palcy, today at 7 P.M.; "The Penalty Area," a 1994-95 video by Clifford Bestall, and "My Country, My Hat" (1981), a film by David Bensusan, tomorrow at 2 P.M.; and "In Darkest Hollywood: Cinema and Apartheid," a 1992 film by Peter Davis and Daniel Riesenfeld, Sunday at 2 P.M.


Bristol-Myers Squibb Co.  (BMY,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Police Officer Convicted of Extorting Payoffs
As brutality and corruption investigations into six Bronx police precincts widen, a Bronx police officer was convicted yesterday for extorting cash payoffs from neighborhood drug dealers by threatening them with arrest if they did not pay.
Gregory Brea, a 27-year-old community police officer, was arrested in September following a six-month investigation by the police department and the Bronx District Attorney's office into police involvement in the cocaine trade in the Morris Heights and University Heights sections of the 46th Precinct.


49ers' DeBartolo Hurt In Two-Car Collision
The 49ers' owner, EDWARD DeBARTOLO JR., remained hospitalized in San Francisco yesterday after breaking his collarbone in a collision on his way to the airport Wednesday.
DeBartolo, who came to San Francisco for JOE MONTANA's farewell rally Tuesday, should be able to return to his Youngstown, Ohio, home today, CARMEN POLICY, the team president, said.


PPG Industries(PPG,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Sale of Bridgeport's Zoo On a Merry-Go-Round
For this hard-pressed city, running Connecticut's only public zoo has become a $400,000-a-year luxury that officials say they can no longer afford.
Bridgeport first came up with a plan to sell the Beardsley Park Zoo to the state in July 1992.
But when obstacles concerning the legality of the sale were raised by the deed for the park land, city officials decided to sell the zoo last year to the Connecticut Zoological Society, a nonprofit private group that has long served as the zoo's fund-raising arm.


Capital Cities/ABC Inc.(CCB,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 2


F.B.I. SEEKS 2 SUSPECTS IN OKLAHOMA BLAST; SEARCH FOR SURVIVORS, AND BODIES, IS SLOW
With the death toll at 53 and sure to rise, the Federal Bureau of Investigation said today that it had identified two suspects, described as white males, in the bombing of the Federal office building here, and had issued warrants for their arrest.
Weldon Kennedy, the F.B.I. agent in charge of the investigation here, said at an afternoon news conference that the two suspects had been linked to a truck that investigators believe held the massive bomb that exploded shortly after 9 A.M.
Wednesday on a curb at the Alfred P. Murrah Federal Building.


Transactions
Baseball  American League
BALTIMORE ORIOLES -- Optioned William Percibal, pitcher, to High Desert of the California League and returned Russell Brock, pitcher, to the Oakland Athletics.


Hospital Group Sues State
The New Jersey Hospital Association has gone to court trying to stop the Whitman administration from slashing Medicaid reimbursements by $135 million to help balance the budget.
The association, representing 100 hospitals, argues that health care for the poor will suffer if the cuts stand.
The state maintains that hospitals can absorb the cuts by operating more efficiently.
On Tuesday, arguments on the association's request for an injunction to block the cuts will be heard in Federal Court.


Hawkins, Ferry, the Pearl: An Over-50 Dream Team
You could start Connie Hawkins, Bob Love and Bob Ferry up front and Earl Monroe and Guy Rodgers in the backcourt.
When they tired, you could replace them with Paul Silas, Bailey Howell, Cazzie Russell, Cliff Hagan and Barry Clemens.
No, not a quarter-century ago in the National Basketball Association.
How about next year, when those 10 former professional standouts will form the United States Senior Dream Team in the first International Senior Games.
The team will be coached by Bob Cousy and Jack Ramsay.


Program Manager Cites F.A.A. Disorganization for Delays in Runway Radar Project
The Federal Aviation Administration has the computer and radar technology needed to warn controllers of impending runway collisions like the one that killed two people in St.
Louis last November, but, a program manager said today, the agency is too badly organized to put it in place.
In testimony before investigators from the National Transportation Safety Board, the manager, Richard Castaldo, sat in front of a 2- by 3-foot poster covered with scores of lines and boxes depicting the agency's acquisition system and said he would like to burn it.


Youths and Woman Assault Police Officer
Three male teen-agers and a 21-year-old woman beat an off-duty policeman in Queens with a bicycle wheel and a chain yesterday after the officer approached them complaining that something had been thrown at his car, the police said.
The attack left the officer in serious condition at a hospital.
The officer, who works in the 77th Precinct in Brooklyn and whose identity was not released, was driving along Seneca Avenue near the corner of Madison Street in Ridgewood just before 2 P.M. when something apparently hit his car, said Sgt.
Sean Crowley, a police spokesman.


Contractor Admits Kickback
An Essex County contractor admitted in Federal court yesterday that he accepted $250,000 from an Irvington Housing Authority official for doing no work, then kicked back $100,000.


Precautions After Oklahoma City
It is impossible to look at the grotesquely shattered remains of the Oklahoma City Federal building without wondering whether such bombings will become a brutal commonplace of American life.
Once the plague of foreign lands and the stuff of Hollywood special effects, destructive car bombs have now twice torn apart lives and workplaces in the United States.
While there is no sure way to prevent a determined bomber from attacking, the country and Government can take steps to make it harder and to limit potential damage.
Bombings of any sort, terrorist or otherwise, are still rare in America -- so rare that experts say the odds of being killed this way are less than 1 in 100 million.
But as American diplomats and marines learned so painfully in Lebanon more than a decade ago, complacency is a shortcut to disaster in dealing with the mobile, lethal threat of powerful explosives packed into a car or truck.
The Oklahoma City bomb -- packed with several thousand pounds of explosives -- was hidden in a truck parked right in front of the Federal building.


The Spoken Word
SIDNEY LUMET, Teacher's Auditorium, Tisch Film School, New York University, 721 Broadway, at Waverly Place, Greenwich Village.
The film director will read from his new book, "Making Movies." Sponsored by Posman Books.
Tonight at 6:30.
Free.
Information: (212) 533-2665.
"COUPLETS: A CELEBRATION OF LOVE IN VERSE, SCENE AND SONG," Symphony Space, 2537 Broadway, at 95th Street.
Romantic works by Shakespeare, Shaw, E. E. Cummings, Edna St.
Vincent Millay and others will be read by Victoria Wyndham and Charles Keating, actors.
Tomorrow at 8 P.M.
Tickets: $20 (performance only) and $40 (includes reception); $9 for students.
Proceeds benefit Symphony Space.
Information: (212) 864-5400.


Art in Review
Thomas Woodruff 'The Secret Charts'  P.P.O.W. 532 Broadway (at Prince Street) SoHo Through tomorrow
The two dozen paintings in this series are executed in an impressive draftsmanly style, although their images are bizarre in the extreme, with grotesque cartoon heads, heraldic parchment scrolls and schmaltzy greeting-card bluebirds set against storm-threatening skies.


Young People Who Try Suicide May Be Succeeding More Often
Suicide is an increasingly serious problem among the nation's youth, with especially big increases among all children ages 10 to 14 and among young black men, according to Federal statistics released today.
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention in Atlanta said trends in suicide among young people were alarming.


Home Video
Every so often -- and invariably after the release of a popular title like "Belle Epoque" or "Like Water for Chocolate" -- video analysts report a surge of interest in foreign films in the United States.
Specialists in foreign videos, though, say that while sales are up somewhat, the category is holding about steady.
"There's eager acceptance in a small part of the marketplace," said Don Krim, the president of Kino International, a prominent distributor of foreign videos and older classic titles.


Art in Review
'Critics as Artists'  Andre Zarre Gallery 48 Greene Street SoHo Through May 6
This exhibition serves as a reminder that making art and writing about it are not mutually exclusive but often inextricably related activities.
It includes paintings, drawings and watercolors by 19 individuals, some known primarily as artists (Mira Schor, Paul Brach and Stephen Westfall), others known nearly exclusively for their writing (Clement Greenberg, Irving Sandler and Joseph Masheck).
A few (Peter Plagens and Jeremy Gilbert-Rolfe) have managed to juggle both fairly equally.
As a result, this show comports itself as well as most gallery group exhibitions.
Of course, the most interesting part is seeing some well-known bylines on wall labels instead of in print, and matching the work with one's ideas about the writer's sensibility.
ROBERTA SMITH


Donations to Help Bomb Victims
The Federal Bureau of Investigation has set up a nationwide telephone line for people with information about the bombing in Oklahoma City.
The number is (800) 905-1514.
Here is a list of organizations accepting donations for victims of the Oklahoma City bombing.
The American Red Cross Disaster Relief Fund, P.O.
Box 37243, Washington, D.C. 20013.
Credit-card donations can be made by calling (800) HELPNOW or (800) 842-2200 (English), or (800) 257-7575 (Spanish).
The B'nai B'rith Disaster Relief Fund, 1640 Rhode Island Avenue, N.W.
Washington, D.C. 20036.
Feed the Children: (800) 741-1441.
Salvation Army, Box 12600, Oklahoma City, Okla. 73157.
Telephone: (405) 270-7800.
Must specify that money is for explosion disaster relief.
Cash donations may be dropped off at Oklahoma City-area Sonic Drive-Ins; at any area BankIV or mailed to the bank at P.O.
Box 1255, Oklahoma City, Okla. 73101.
Building materials including plastic sheeting, screw guns, screws, sheetrock, drywall tape, drywall screws and nails, and paint and glass may be dropped off at Drug Recovery Inc. at Eighth and Hudson in Oklahoma City.
Telephone: (405) 232-7215.
To check on relatives:
Red Cross: (405) 232-7121.
Those who were in the Alfred P. Murrah Federal Building at the time of the explosion are asked to call (405) 297-2612.


Schering-Plough Corp.(SGP,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


New Zealand Buries Haunting Past Failure And One Australia
New Zealand's Black Magic hasn't advanced far enough yet to lay its hands on the America's Cup.
But today it came closer than any other yachting team in Kiwi history.
And for that, even the reserved New Zealanders found cause for jubilation.
Black Magic's biggest hurdle was to surpass the 4-1 record it had going into the match today against One Australia.
The New Zealanders had reached that point once before, but failed to go the distance.
Up by 4-1 in the 1992 challengers' finals, the Kiwi team that year self-destructed: it lost the remaining matches in its five-of-nine-race series against Italy.
Nervous without saying so, New Zealand knew the same thing could start happening again today.


Philip M. Foisie, 73, an Editor At Washington Post and in Paris
Philip M. Foisie, who initiated overseas news coverage at The Washington Post as its foreign editor and later served as the executive editor of the Paris-based International Herald Tribune, died on Tuesday at a hospital.
He was 73 and lived in Alexandria, Va.
The cause was a heart attack, The Post reported.


Searching for the Psyche's Secrets Among Grids and Random Images
Beginning in the 1940's, the New York School painter Adolph Gottlieb earned a place among America's leading artists with his pictographs.
They consisted of loose grids.
Gottlieb spoke of the grids as houses, and compared their compartments to rooms, which he filled with abstract shapes, some of them derived from African masks, Pre-Columbian sculptures and American Indian objects.
Between 1941 and 1953, Gottlieb explored permutations of these shapes, shuffling them around, changing the palette of the pictures, altering the grids and sometimes eliminating traces of them until he felt he had exhausted the possibilities of the format.
"There was no rational order," he explained about the compositions of the pictographs.
"The images appeared at random, they then established themselves in a new system. That was why all those years I was able to use very similar images, but by having different juxtapositions there will always be a different significance to them."


Yanks Return to Denver Facing Flurries and Flu
The New York Yankees came back to Denver today for the second time in less than a month, facing fatigue, the flu, the flurries, an unbelievably taxing schedule and the throng that helped re-introduce Coors Field to baseball.
Buck Showalter, the Yankees manager, couldn't be happier, though, because this time Showalter came with the varsity, major leaguers favored by many to win the American League East.
That made a world of difference to the manager whose first entry into the new ball park came at the end of March and featured replacement Yankees playing replacement Rockies.


In Presidential Bout, Gaullist Rivals Take Off the Gloves
Charles de Gaulle might have been horrified by the spectacle: two members of a party founded to preserve his legacy scratching each other's eyes out over the presidency.
But the Paris Mayor, Jacques Chirac, and Prime Minister Edouard Balladur have been going at it hot and heavy by French standards as the first round of the presidential elections on Sunday approaches.


Bank of Boston Corp.(BKB,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Service Corp. Int'l.(SRV,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Arrow Electronics Inc.(ARW,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


The Blossoming of a Wallflower
Feel-good romantic comedies don't feel good when they deliver an empty, saccharine view of the world.
On the other hand, when they're as breezy and adorable as "While You Were Sleeping," it's time to fall in love.
This is a formula film, but it has the kind of good cheer and fine tuning that occasionally give slickness a good name.
The year may be young, but the first hit of the summer is here.
It's not marquee value that insures the success of "While You Were Sleeping," which stars Sandra Bullock and Bill Pullman.
It's the word-of-mouth-worthy fact that this spirited screwball romance creates a rosy glow.
Credit much of that to a smoothly workmanlike director, Jon Turteltaub, whose "Cool Runnings" was unabashed fun and who has much better material this time.
Ms.
Bullock and Mr.
Pullman also deserve credit for setting enough sparks to melt snow.


Nedved's Questionable Goal Is the Right Answer
Imagine the uproar if the shoe -- or disputed skate -- had been on the other foot.
What if the Hartford Whalers had defeated the Rangers last night at Madison Square Garden on a controversial goal like the one scored by Petr Nedved?
What would people be saying -- or shouting -- on the radio talk shows today?
Just think of the wailing and the gnashing of teeth!
How dare they do this to our Stanley Cup champion Rangers?
Are they trying to keep them out of the playoffs?


Cooper Industries (CBE,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Fear About Retaliation Among Muslim Groups
For many Arabs in the United States, and particularly in and around this city, the bombing on Wednesday and the speculation that it might have been the work of Muslim fundamentalists is a reminder that the lives they have so carefully built have not isolated them from the mistrust and fear that can surface in a crisis.
So far no conclusive evidence has emerged that Arabs played any role in the bombing.
Indeed, Federal officials have described the two known suspects as "white," a racial designation that seems to leave open their ethnic origin.
Yet the speculation of Muslim involvement continues, fed by some news reports that have not been confirmed.


Sports of The Times; Can Rangers Overcome Dave Curse?
HOW did it come to this?
The last time we looked, the Rangers were parading the Stanley Cup all over Manhattan, letting assorted and perhaps even sordid strangers drink from its sacred rim.
Now look.
Suddenly, the Rangers are scuffling just to get into the Stanley Cup playoffs, an honor just slightly less universal than receiving a telephone call at supper time from some friendly gent trying to sell you junk bonds.


Move It!
For more than 20 years the Harvard School of Public Health has followed the fates of 17,300 middle-aged men.
This week the Journal of the American Medical Association reported Harvard's findings: To live a long and healthy life it is necessary to break a sweat.
Often.
What a disappointment.
Just a short while ago the Federal Government and the American College of Sports Medicine were advising us that 30 minutes of moderate activity daily was all it took to produce significant health benefits.
No doubt that left you thinking that a walk here, a little stair-climbing there would take you to Methuselah City.
Well, you thought wrong.
It turns out what all those previous recommendations were talking about was feeling swell, emotionally and physically, during one's lifetime.
Increasing that lifetime, however, takes work.


Looking for Poetry In All the Wrong Places
The decline began with glue-sniffing and led to a labyrinth of abasement, malicious mischief and teen-age ecstasy.
It was described in neon-bright detail by an amazingly precocious Jim Carroll, who at the age of 12 began writing the journal entries that would establish him as a baby Burroughs.
Those journals are now the basis for a self-consciously bleak film tracing Mr.
Carroll's evolution from ball-playing parochial schoolboy to neo-Beat poet.
The latter pose seems particularly out of place, since the film has no poetry of its own.
Mr.
Carroll wrote this underground classic in the mid-1960's, wryly reflecting the cultural youthquake under way at the time.
By 1978, when "The Basketball Diaries" first appeared in book form, the author had also taken on a downtown punk cachet.
Yet on film, as directed by Scott Kalvert with a hollow flashiness that reflects his rock-video background, this story loses its temporal moorings and has no special voice or style.
What it does have is Leonardo DiCaprio, an actor so raw and disturbing that he's worth following even on a nonstop downhill slide.


Clinton Vows a Relentless Pursuit of Bombers and Hopes to Go to Oklahoma
President Clinton promised today to follow the trail of the bombers of Oklahoma City to the ends of the earth, and the White House said he wanted to attend a memorial service for the victims on Sunday there unless the authorities decided that his presence would impede the investigation or rescue efforts.
"There is no place to hide," Mr.
Clinton said of the attackers at a Rose Garden news conference with President Fernando Henrique Cardoso of Brazil.
"Nobody can hide anyplace in this country, nobody can hide anyplace in this world, from the terrible consequences of what has been done."


Consolidated Freightways Inc.(CNF,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Suggestions for Some Theater a la Carte
THERE was a time, the old ones say, when New Yorkers actually talked about the theater, when Manhattan dinner and cocktail conversations simmered with heated considerations of O'Neill's anger, Albee's ontology and Carol Channing's eyelashes.
That, of course, was when there was such a thing as a new musical, when major Broadway dramas had not previously appeared as major Hollywood movies and when the word "recycled" had yet to enter America's cultural vocabulary.


Lewis Group Meets
A commission that will study the circumstances surrounding a drug test administered to Reggie Lewis and others on the Northeastern basketball team met yesterday in Boston, and plans to issue a report by September.
Northeastern's president, JOHN CURRY, had announced he would form the commission last month, after reports arose that Lewis had tested positive for cocaine before the 1987 N.C.A.A. basketball tournament.
Lewis, the Celtics' captain, died in July 1993, three months after he collapsed during a Boston playoff game. (AP)


A Cornell Applicant Is Rejected Again
This time, Elizabeth L. Mikus got the thin envelope.
The 18-year-old high school senior had threatened to sue Cornell University last December after the admissions office told her that the fat envelope she construed as an early acceptance had been sent by mistake.
Now, she has been turned down again.


COMPANY BRIEFS
HAMPSHIRE GROUP LTD., Anderson, S.C., a maker of sweaters and hosiery for department stores and other retailers, agreed to acquire Winona Knitting Mills Inc., Winona, Minn., for undisclosed terms.
SOUTHWESTERN LIFE CORP., Louisville, Ky., an insurance holding company, said it would sell its unit, Bankers Life Insurance, New York, to the Indianapolis Life Insurance Company for about $35 million.


Where Nothing Ever Happens, Terrorism Did
Two days ago 21-year-old Amber Fleming wrote in her diary: "Worked from 10-6. Got my nails done. Went over to Michael's after book study and watched 'Blazing Saddles' and took my kitten home."
The next entry, on Wednesday, seems to have been written by a different person.
"A Federal building this morning was bombed," Ms.
Fleming wrote.
"Hundreds of people are dead, children included. Terrorist attack."


A New Talent
When Arthur Ashe helped inaugurate the Arthur Ashe Youth Tennis Center, he was probably hoping a TRACI GREEN would come along.
Two years after Ashe died of an AIDS-related illness, Green was named to the 1995 United States national team.
The 16-year-old Philadelphian is only the third black woman in the team's eight-year history.


Two Groups Name Finalists for Awards
Two organizations have named finalists for their annual awards.
The Outdoor Advertising Association of America has named 42 finalists to compete for the 53d annual Obie Awards for creative excellence in outdoor advertising and other out-of-home media.


CHRONICLE
When members of the Rockefeller family take on a cause, they certainly give it their all.
Consider International House, the residence hall and program center where 700 graduate students and trainees from some 100 countries live every year.
Counting the service of the late Abby Aldrich Rockefeller and John D. Rockefeller 3d, along with that of David and Peggy Rockefeller, David Rockefeller Jr. and ABBY O'NEILL, those six members of the family have put in a combined total of 100 years on the International House board of trustees.
Add in honorary and emeritus service, and the total rises to 189 years.


CHRONICLE
HUGH DOWNS, the co-anchor of ABC's "20/20," also sticks to what he does.
In 1985, he made it into "The Guinness Book of World Records" for having logged more hours on camera than anyone else on commercial network television.
"I had done 10,000 hours and Johnny Carson was second with 7,800," said Mr.
Downs, who started in the broadcast business 56 years ago as a radio announcer in Lima, Ohio.
"That is a world record that still stands." Since then, he figures he has added 500 more hours, but he's taking his achievement with something of a grain of salt.
"Isn't it a dubious distinction?" he asked.


Kiwi Will Start Bermuda Flights
The name says 'International' and now the airline is adding flights to match.
Kiwi International Airlines will inaugurate international service on May 25 with daily flights between Newark and Bermuda.
The company, which began service in 1992, was named for a flightless bird because so many of its original employees lost their wings when other airlines failed.
It now serves Atlanta, Chicago, Newark, and Orlando, Tampa and West Palm Beach in Florida.


Shelter Fee Planned for Some Homeless
The Pataki administration is proposing to charge homeless people rent, in effect, for staying in shelters if the state determines that they have personal assets, jobs or other sources of income beyond basic welfare grants.
The plan, which is projected to save state and local governments $320,000 a year, would probably affect fewer than 200 people, state officials said.
But they say it is intended to encourage personal responsibility among homeless people while discouraging employed people from taking scarce shelter beds.


Corrections
An April 18 letter from Charlayne Hunter-Gault mischaracterized The Times's April 8 review of "Rights and Wrongs: Human Rights Television" by stating, "your reviewer dismissed it as 'yet another leftish addition to already suspect public broadcasting.' " The review actually stated, "Critics see it as yet another leftish addition to already suspect public broadcasting."


Thomas to Conduct Lincoln Center Concerts
Michael Tilson Thomas is to conduct the New World Symphony Orchestra in his composition "From the Diary of Anne Frank," on April 28 at 8 P.M. at Avery Fisher Hall.
The work, composed for Audrey Hepburn and dedicated to her while she was a roving ambassador for Unicef, is to be narrated by Debra Winger.
Mahler's Symphony No. 1 will complete the program.
Tickets, at $18 to $35, are available at the Fisher Hall box office or through Center Charge (212) 721-6500.


Art in Review
'Modern Hierogylphs' 'Gestural Drawing and the European Vanguard 1900-1918'  Equitable Gallery 787 Seventh Avenue (at 52d Street) Manhattan Through May 6
Everybody knows that Rodin was a revolutionary sculptor.
But his drawings may have exerted a more significant influence on early-20th-century art.
Rodin's fluid sketches of female models dancing or simply lounging about the studio are presented here as the inspiration for drawings by Matisse, Klimt, Kokoschka, Schiele, Kirchner and others.
The rapidly executed lines record both the gesture of the model, freed from traditional academic poses, and the gesture of the artist's hand, responding to the model without aiming for literal accuracy.


Hoffenberg Confesses to Ponzi Scheme
Steven Hoffenberg, one of the brashest figures on the New York business scene, pleaded guilty yesterday to criminal conspiracy and fraud charges in connection with a $460 million scheme that was described by prosecutors as one of the largest financial swindles in history.
Mr.
Hoffenberg was ashen and hollow-cheeked -- in contrast with his robust appearance at court hearings last year -- as his lawyer, Jeffrey Hoffman, told Judge Robert Sweet of the Federal District Court in Manhattan that a confession was being offered "to spare Mr. Hoffenberg the trauma, embarrassment and expense of a trial."


FPL Group (FPL,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Black &amp; Decker Corp.(BDK,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 2


Market Place; Just What Card Will Kerkorian Play Next?
Does the man who would be emperor of the Chrysler Corporation have no clothes?
Or, does Kirk Kerkorian's sleeve conceal some yet-unseen trump card in his $22.8 billion bid for the company?
Those are the questions being asked these days on Wall Street and in Detroit, as bankers, investors and auto executives try to get a handle on what appear to be the dimming prospects for a successful takeover by Mr.
Kerkorian of the nation's No. 3 auto maker.


A Violinist Who Adds Breadth to the Details
Dmitry Sitkovetsky's violin playing has deepened considerably over the last decade.
Always an imaginative colorist with a secure technique rooted in the Russian Romantic school, Mr.
Sitkovetsky used to express his individuality more fully in the details of his phrasing than in a work's full canvas.
But in his recital on Wednesday evening at the 92d Street Y, he found a way to present a broader view without sacrificing the fine points that have long been central to his interpretive style.
Mr.
Sitkovetsky's recital was a collaboration with Boris Berezovsky, the pianist who won the Tchaikovsky Competition in 1990, and it was chamber playing at its best.
In Beethoven's Sonata No. 1 in D (Op. 12, No. 1), both players focused on the work's raw and sometimes wayward energy rather than the Haydnesque courtliness that is an appropriate alternative in early Beethoven.
Musical lines were presented in high relief, with melodic angles sharply emphasized and the playfulness of the Rondo shown as a mischievous streak.


Art in Review
Stan Douglas  David Zwirner Gallery 43 Greene Street SoHo Through April 29
Media and memory, and the influence each has on the other, are central themes in this selection of work by Stan Douglas, a Canadian artist who is also represented in the Whitney Biennial.
Included are two 16-millimeter film installations and a series of color photographs.


Union Pacific Corp.(UNP,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


J. Peter Grace, Ex-Company Chief, Dies at 81
J.
Peter Grace, the outspoken and at times controversial industrialist who headed a major American company longer than any other chief executive, died of cancer on Wednesday at St.
Vincent's Hospital in Manhattan after a long illness.
He was 81 and lived in Manhasset, L.I.
Although his company, W. R. Grace, always came first, Mr.
Grace was extraordinarily active in public and religious circles, and in his younger days was a star athlete.


Eaton Corp.(ETN,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Corporate Lawyers, Too, Turn to the Hard Sell
They are not about to send out slippers with their pictures on them or pens saying "sue someone you love," like the marital lawyer Raul Felder did last year.
Nor are they jostling for first crack at analyzing high-profile cases, as criminal lawyers are doing with the O. J. Simpson trial.
And they are certainly not turning into power television advertisers like Jacoby &amp; Myers and other personal injury lawyers.
But, finally, corporate lawyers are admitting that their aversion to advertising notwithstanding, they want their names in lights.


What Would the Old Boys Say?
The old-boy network of the 1950's and 1960's, when a professor at Harvard called his counterpart at M.I.T. to discuss whether there was a faculty job for his best student, has long since been replaced by an organized, centralized market for new Ph.D.'s, complete with rankings, flyouts, tryouts, signing bonuses and special deals.
Each economics department ranks its students by number, and the leading schools that are hiring ask for the "job paper" of the top few.
Some of them are then interviewed at the annual meeting of the American Economics Association in January.
And the most promising are flown out to make a presentation. (Susan Athey had 25 flyouts.)


For Children
Earth Day Events
Various locations  (212) 922-0048 (general information)  Recommended for all ages  Today and tomorrow
In 1970, about 20 million Americans (including you, most likely), participated in the first Earth Day; this year, "green" groups have organized nationwide celebrations and conferences.
Here are some local events organized by the nonprofit environmental group Earth Day New York.


Schlumberger Ltd.(SLB,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Subpar Race by Eltish Adds to Derby Puzzle
Eltish, the prime European candidate for the Kentucky Derby, ran third in the Feildon Stakes at Newmarket, England, yesterday, adding to the growing confusion enveloping the Run for the Roses.
But his trainer still planned to run him in the hard-to-figure Derby.


I.B.M. Profit Up Smartly; Stock Climbs
Driven by surprisingly high revenue from product sales and its service businesses, I.B.M. posted record first-quarter earnings yesterday, surpassing analysts' expectations by a wide margin.
Net income for the first quarter nearly quadrupled, to about $1.3 billion, or $2.12 a share, compared with $336 million, or 54 cents a share, for the comparable period a year earlier.
The highest estimate for the quarter by a Wall Street analyst had been $1.53 a share.


Avon Products Inc.(AVP,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Did a Man Expelled By Yale 'Belong'?
To Yale University officials, Lon Grammer is a C student from a California community college who lied his way into the Ivy League.
They say he won admission to Yale by forging his community college transcripts to give himself an A-plus average and by manufacturing letters of recommendation in his transfer application.
But in an interview today, Mr.
Grammer painted quite a different portrait of himself, saying he had earned a place at Yale as a political science major over the last two years.
He acknowledged that he had found the school challenging, but contended that he had done the work required of him, building a B-minus/ C-plus average.
"I think I got acclimated there within the first week," he said, adding, "I definitely feel I belonged."


ARCO Chemical (RCM,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Art in Review
Aaron Siskind  Robert Mann Gallery 42 East 76th Street Manhattan Through April 29
In the last series of photographs Aaron Siskind produced before his death in 1991, he adopted a simple approach.
Whereas in earlier pictures he had depicted figures found in peeling paint and torn posters on city walls, in these final works he photographed the patterns of tar laid down on rural roads, producing pictures that are formally spare but rich in associations.


Salo Can't Do It Alone
One goal has not been enough to beat the powerful Philadelphia Flyers since early February, but one goal was all the support the Islanders could manage tonight for the promising rookie goalie Tommy Salo at the Spectrum.
A glimpse of New York's future wasn't enough to overcome the Flyers' present.
With a 2-1 victory, Philadelphia officially ended a five-year playoff drought by clinching a spot.


Occidental Petroleum Corp.(OXY,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Restaurants
The first time I had dinner at I Trulli, we were the only people in the place.
The owner kept nervously throwing logs into the big glass-enclosed fireplace, and the spare, beautiful room grew warmer and warmer.
Shadows played against the white walls as the bare trees in the garden stretched to touch the windows.
We ate olives and spread tangy homemade ricotta cheese onto thick, rough slices of bread.
We drank bottles of spicy, generous wines from southern Italy, and when the waiter asked how everything was, we said it was fine.
Actually, the food was terrible.
It was November, the restaurant was barely a week old, and once we had eaten the bread and cheese and olives, we pushed salty swordfish and vinegary chicken around our plates.
I was deeply disappointed; I had loved the food at Nicola Marzovilla's first restaurant, Tempo, but found the room old-fashioned and a bit dreary.
Now he had created one of the most attractive new restaurants in New York City but did not seem able to deliver the food.


Don't Look to Hydrogen for Future Fuel
To the Editor:
Your April 16 news article on the promise of hydrogen's use as fuel, while laudably dealing with political machinations connected with a technological development, gives the incorrect impression that someday hydrogen could be an actual energy source.


Army Approves Arsenal Project
The Army is giving the green light to $10.5 million in construction projects at Picatinny Arsenal in Morris County.
Informed of the plan, Representative Rodney Frelinghuysen, whose district includes the arsenal, said, "This decision further confirms the department's commitment to the future of Picatinny." A Congressional report last week said the arsenal ranked low in military value but would be costly to close.


Legendary Detective Wages War on Word 'Unsolved'
Detective Jerry Giorgio says he must crack two particularly troublesome murder cases before he'll let himself retire from the Police Department.
And if experience is any guide, the killers will come to justice, although it might take some time.
Time and again, the detective has played St.
Jude to murder cases that would otherwise have been mothballed by sleuths with the standard ration of perseverance.
Time and again, that perseverance has paid off with arrests and convictions in cases previously thought unsolvable.


Reflecting on Devastation


Identifying Injured Loved Ones By Clues of Hair and Birthmarks
It was the birthmark on the child's tiny thigh that told Jim Denny he had finally found his son.
There was no other way to tell.
There was nothing in the bloodied and bandaged face that resembled 3-year-old Brandon, the boy Mr.
Denny had sent to the day-care center in the Alfred P. Murrah Federal Building on Wednesday morning.


Texas Utilities Co.(TXU,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Bell Atlantic Corp.(BEL,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Art in Review
Marcus Harvey  Tanya Banakdar Gallery 130 Prince Street SoHo Through April 29
There might be a mildly interesting intellectual rationale for these flesh-pot close-ups of naked women, rendered larger than life and with such thick impasto as to appear abstract at first.
Perhaps the seemingly fingerpainted surface is meant to represent the lustful nature of the male artistic gaze in unusually overt terms, hence uniting the act of painting with its traditional object of desire.
But what really seems united here is bad de Kooning with worse Photo Realism.
Taking into account the painting's subject matter, that adds up to at least two kinds of pornography.
Mr.
Harvey has talent, but he should use it to ends less synthetic and more synthesized.
ROBERTA SMITH


Landlord Held In the Deaths Of Five Men In Connecticut
The landlord of a fire-ravaged three-family home in which five men died Tuesday night was arrested today in North Carolina as evidence mounted that the slayings resulted from a vicious landlord-tenant dispute.
All five victims, authorities said today, died of gunshot wounds to the head.
Four bodies had been burned beyond recognition in the blaze, which broke out Tuesday evening around 6 and which the state police have labeled arson.


Bank Buys Inn at an Auction
For $150,000, a bank may soon own two Galloway Township retail developments, the Smithville Inn and the Historic Towne of Smithville.


Dream Comes True
ARTHUR AGEE, whose life was chronicled in the acclaimed documentary "Hoop Dreams," yesterday became the first player to sign with the Florida Sharks of the United States Basketball League.
Agee, who played at Arkansas State last season, was the first choice by the Sharks in last week's U.S.B.L. draft.
" 'Hoop Dreams' is now officially a reality," the Sharks' president, ANDY BADOLATO, said at the Sarasota, Fla. signing in front of a shark tank. (AP)


Central &amp; South West Corp.(CSR,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Tennessee Williams's Next-to-Final Finale
At the top of the second act of "Clothes for a Summer Hotel," Tennessee Williams's rueful rumination on the disillusions of life as mirrored through Zelda and F. Scott Fitzgerald, Zelda has a brief, torrid affair with a young French aviator named Edouard.
As the lovers part, Zelda postulates that the pilot will leave her arms and die in a fiery plane crash.
It doesn't happen, of course.
As the flier points out, he doesn't crash his plane.
He just grows old.
Williams suffered the same disappointment.
"Clothes for a Summer Hotel" was Williams's last, futile attempt to kindle one more dramatic blaze on Broadway.
Although he had another, final play a year later ("Something Cloudly, Something Clear, " far off Broadway, at the Bouwerie Lane Theater), the failure of "Clothes" in 1981 devastated Williams.
The York Theater Company is currently staging a revival that, while a game effort, hardly transforms a play that such talents as Jose Quintero and Geraldine Page failed to salvage.


Mending Ties, U.S. Praises Brazil Leader
President Clinton gave a warm embrace to President Fernando Henrique Cardoso of Brazil today, signaling that after years of tensions fed by military rule, corruption and hyperinflation, the United States wants to make Brazil an important partner on trade and security.
"With our two nations cooperating as never before, we stand at a moment of unparalleled opportunity," Mr.
Clinton said in a Rose Garden news conference with the new Brazilian leader.
"In the months and years ahead, I look forward to working with President Cardoso to forge an even stronger partnership between our nations and our peoples."


RESULTS PLUS
N.B.A.
Spurs Clinch Home Advantage  Sean Elliott was fouled on a layup with 0.5 seconds left, then made both free throws to lead San Antonio to a 112-111 victory over the Mavericks in Dallas last night as the Spurs clinched homecourt advantage throughout the playoffs.
The Spurs improved to a franchise-best 60-20 and locked up the National Basketball Association's best record for the season.
Dallas led by as much as 103-97 with 4 minutes 47 seconds left.
"It was a special way to win our 60th," said Spurs Coach Bob Hill.
"It guarantees us the best record in the league. Now the real season begins." (AP) SUPERSONICS 111, ROCKETS 101: Gary Payton, playing in his fourth straight game with a bothersome broken ring finger on his left hand, scored 25 points to lead Seattle over visiting Houston and a sweep of the teams' four-game season series. (AP)


Workers Get Walking Papers
Today is the final day of work for 317 Essex County employees whose jobs were eliminated by the county executive, James Treffinger, in his efforts to close a budget gap of $162 million.
"Every department is affected," said Brenda Veltri-Possumato, personnel director.


A Better Welfare Reform Plan
It is too early to make sense of Mayor Rudolph Giuliani's report that tougher screening reduced the number of new enrollees in the New York State welfare system by 60 percent for the first three months of the year.
Perhaps fraud is that rampant.
Perhaps, contrary to the city's assertions, applicants were rejected for petty reasons or discouraged by byzantine procedures.
Whatever the explanation, Albany should not use the figure, as Gov.
George Pataki has suggested, as reason to back his harsh welfare reform plan over the Democratic alternative.
Indeed, the Democratic plan is plenty harsh itself.
Six months ago, only the most adamant conservatives pushed for welfare reform that would permit fingerprinting recipients to fight fraud, force them to work, reduce payments to mothers whose children skip school and require young mothers to live with their parents.
It is a measure of how much the political ground shifted in Albany last November that New York State Assembly Democrats embraced these provisions in response to the harsh Republican plan espoused by Governor Pataki and the State Senate.


Now Batting: TV Marketing
Major league baseball will try to persuade strike-wearied fans to return to the fold with a seasonlong marketing campaign that will make its debut on ESPN's opening day game Tuesday night between the Marlins and the Dodgers.
The campaign -- "Welcome to the Show" -- will feature TV and radio commercials that will run on network and local games and print advertisements.
Corporate sponsors and licensees will also hook on to the marketing scheme.


Defense Denied Mistrial Request Over Oklahoma Blast Publicity
The judge in the New York terrorism trial of Sheik Omar Abdel Rahman and 10 other men yesterday rejected requests for a mistrial made by defense lawyers who held that their clients' right to a fair trial had been imperiled by graphic news reports about the bombing of a Federal building in Oklahoma City.
Among other things, the defendants in the Manhattan case are accused of plotting to blow up the Federal building in Lower Manhattan as part of an Islamic terror campaign.
Initial news reports have suggested that investigators in the Oklahoma City explosion were looking for Arab suspects.


McKesson Corp.(MCK,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Belanger's 3d-Period Goal Ends 2 Streaks
This was a sad night of firsts for the Devils, who saw the end of two streaks against the Florida Panthers and wound up with their lowest shot production of the season, 17.
As the Panthers entered the third period at Miami Arena tonight, they were looking to buck history.
Not only had the 2-year-old franchise never beaten New Jersey in seven games, but the Panthers had never even scored in the third period against the Devils.


The Bengals Are Willing to Trade Places
Last year, the Cincinnati Bengals were sitting in the driver's seat of the National Football League college draft with the No. 1 pick over all.
They kept the pick and selected defensive tackle Dan Wilkinson of Ohio State.
This year, the Bengals have the No. 5 pick in the first round, but they're still in a good position.


For These Women, a Heavy Right Is More Powerful Than Sisterhood
"Some people will find it evil and weird," said Leslie Howe, who fights at 135 pounds, "and some will find it a turn-on. It's a subjective reaction. There are ramifications."
In the back of the room, Lady Tyger, a hundred pounds over her fighting weight, smiled and nodded as if she were saying amen.
She was back in the temple of boxing, and happy.
"What she says is all true," she said.
"They will love you and hate you for being black, white, fat, thin, a boxer. Can't worry about what people say. I was world lightweight champion in 1979. It was the legal stuff that wore me down, but I did love the one on one. I just wanted to box, not go to court."


Chiefs Sign Lott and He Joins 2 Other Ex-Jets
The Kansas City Chiefs, who lost one future Pro Football Hall of Fame player when quarterback Joe Montana retired this week, have signed another.
Eight weeks after the Jets dropped Ronnie Lott, the Chiefs announced yesterday that they had signed the celebrated safety to a three-year contract.
He is the third member of the Jets' 1994 secondary to sign with the Chiefs, following safety Brian Washington and cornerback James Hasty.
The Chiefs need help at safety because Charles Mincy signed with the Minnesota Vikings as an unrestricted free agent, Monte Grow went to the Jacksonville Jaguars in the expansion draft and David Whitmore, their starting strong safety, was waived after a season of many injuries.


Also of Note
Critics' choices of some other Manhattan art shows: ALIGHIERO E BOETTI and RICHARD LONG, Peter Blum, 99 Wooster Street, SoHo (through tomorrow).
Perhaps the most beautiful two-artist, two-work exhibition in SoHo, this show brings together two geography-driven sensibilities: on the wall is Mr.
Boetti's emerald-green tapestry listing the 1,000 longest rivers in the world; spread before it on the floor is Mr.
Long's "Somerset Willow Line," an arrangement of sticks evoking a river bed of spare and brittle elegance (Roberta Smith).


No Headline
"Hard to believe a dad can't identify his own boy." JIM DENNY, at Presbyterian Hospital in Oklahoma City.  [ A1:1. ]


Inside Art
Mass Moca Lives!
The Massachusetts Museum of Contemporary Art is like the cat with nine lives.
Starting in 1988, attempts were made to build the world's largest contemporary-art museum.
Then, two years ago, the mission was changed: the plan was to create a multi-disciplinary cultural center on 14 acres in North Adams, Mass., in the northwestern corner of the state.
Both projects have been resurrected and abandoned many times over.
Now, finally, the future of Mass Moca (as it is called) seems assured.
On Tuesday, Lieut.
Gov.
Paul Celluci, acting on behalf of Gov.
William F. Weld, is to sign a formal agreement to certify Mass Moca as a public institution and to release $18.6 million in state money for the first phase of the construction; Mass Moca has raised $8 million in private money.


CHRONICLE
DAVID GEFFEN, the billionaire entertainment company executive, has donated $5 million to the Westwood Playhouse, part of the University of California at Los Angeles, which acquired the building in 1993 to help strengthen its performing arts program.
Gilbert Cates, director of the playhouse and dean of the U.C.L.A.
School of Theater, Film and Television, announced the gift yesterday.


Egypt Opposes Extending Pact On Spread of Nuclear Arms
Egypt announced formally today that it could not support the indefinite extension of a treaty barring the spread of nuclear weapons because of Israel's refusal to sign the pact, to support the creation of a nuclear-free Middle East or to make any other concessions to its Arab neighbors on the issue.
The United States had hoped to persuade Egypt to join in voting to make the treaty permanent.


Case Corp.(CSE,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Strain of Simpson Trial Takes Toll on One Juror
For the first time in the O. J. Simpson case, a sitting juror today asked Judge Lance A. Ito to release her from the panel, saying she "can't take it anymore."
Shortly before court resumed after a midafternoon break, Judge Ito spoke to the juror in chambers.
"You indicated to one of the deputies that you needed to talk," he said.
"What's up?"


KeyCorp (KEY,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Israeli Study Sees Higher Death Rate From '91 Scud Attacks
Accepted wisdom here is that for all their understandable anxiety at the time, Israelis emerged little scathed from the Scud missiles fired at them by Iraq during the 1991 war in the Persian Gulf.
But a newly published study by three Israeli doctors shows that the death rate soared when the missiles started to fall.
It was 58 percent above normal on the day of the first Iraqi attack, Jan. 18, 1991, even though no one was directly hit then by a Scud.


Diner's Journal
The Theme Is Fashion
"Tell your friend she has a nice bellybutton," says the bartender, leaning conspiratorially across the bar toward young woman.
The girl tosses her blond curls, giggles nervously and turns to watch a video of models slinking sexily down a runway.
Mouth half open, she watches with the sort of reverence most people reserve for church.
On one level, Fashion Cafe is just another theme-park restaurant with an animated environment and a store on the side.
In the restaurant, lights flash, movies play and cases display dresses, coats and shoes worn by its owners, Claudia Schiffer, Elle MacPherson and Naomi Campbell and by a few of their friends.
In the store, visitors can buy shirts, hats and jackets. (One leather jacket is $1,500.) As at all theme-park restaurants, there's a line.


Fuji to Be Sponsor For Sony Imax Films
Fuji Photo Film U.S.A. said yesterday that it had agreed to become the first worldwide corporate sponsor of the 3-D Imax films presented by the Sony Corporation.
Though the terms of the sponsorship package were not disclosed, it was estimated to be valued in seven figures.
"It's great high-tech image association," said Rod King, vice president for marketing at Fuji in Elmsford, N.Y.
"We think it will be quite a clutter-cutter." Beginning with "Wings of Courage," a 3-D Imax film opening today at the Sony Lincoln Square theaters in Manhattan, Fuji will receive credits in the films and in trailers for the films and participate in promotional programs such as Fuji film offers at stores selling Sony products.


Into the Crossfire Of the Bad Guys
HOW could David Caruso's television fans have been surprised at his decision to leave a hit series, "N.Y.P.D. Blue," in a less than decorous way?
That face speaks volumes, and it's the face of a grapefruit-smashing tough guy, not a gentleman.
Mr.
Caruso has a fine natural abrasiveness, his mouth twitching as if at the taste of something rotten, his voice taunting, his body coiled in a menacing stance.
In "Kiss of Death" he becomes a movie star with a vengeance, the kind of movie star he was meant to be.
"Kiss of Death" is more than a vehicle for an actor with impressive Cagneyesque potential.
It's a sleek, muscular thriller played by a terrific ensemble cast, directed by Barbet Schroeder with the somber acuity he has brought to subjects as diverse as Claus von Bulow ("Reversal of Fortune") and Gen.
Idi Amin Dada.
Discreet outlaws and interlopers are the specialties of Mr.
Schroeder, whose American credits also include "Single White Female" and "Barfly." In Richard Price, whose smart, soulful crime stories have true grit, he meets his match.


Mexican Talks With Rebels Are Delayed
More than a year after a first round of peace talks failed to end an armed uprising in the southern Mexican state of Chiapas, Government representatives delayed resuming the talks today until their safety was guaranteed by the rebels.
Surrounded by hundreds of sympathizers of the Zapatista rebels, representatives of both sides were scheduled to meet in a hastily erected building on top of the town's concrete basketball court to discuss, among other things, proposals for a permanent truce to ease tensions and end the 16-month-old rebellion.


Partners &amp; Simons Gets Puma Account
Puma USA, the marketer of athletic footwear based in Brockton, Mass., said yesterday that it had awarded its account to Partners &amp; Simons in Boston.
The billings were estimated at $4 million to $8 million.
The account, which includes advertising and direct marketing responsibilities, was previously handled by Berlin Cameron Doyle in New York, which closed on March 31.
Partners &amp; Simons was awarded the account without a review; Puma, a unit of Aritmos A.B., had considered the agency during a previous review.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Dollar Up for Second Day On Strong Buying Overseas
The dollar rose solidly for a second day, gaining strength from overseas buying and speculation that the Group of Seven finance ministers might act at their meeting next week to defend the currency.


Abroad at Home; Faith In Reason
Thirty years ago, as a reporter in Washington, I could enter almost any Government building without a security check and walk down the halls from office to office.
That now seems an almost unimaginable past.
The horror in Oklahoma City reminds us how far we have gone into the land of fear.
We live with security measures, and they will inevitably become more burdensome.


The Good Earth Looks Better
Tomorrow, on the 25th anniversary of Earth Day, I'll be smiling, and so should you.
Nearly every ecological trend in the United States is positive.
The air and water are getting cleaner and the forests are rebounding: a natural recovery of historic proportions may be at hand.
The first Earth Day, in 1970, was a time for demonstrations and expressions of rage.
Earth Day 1995 is a moment for celebration.
In fact, Americans could treat the anniversary as marking one of the leading social achievements of our age, were it not for an outbreak of retrograde anti-environmentalism in Washington.


Oates Given 2-Week Leave
Texas Rangers Manager Johnny Oates, his wife hospitalized with exhaustion, was granted a two-week leave of absence today and will miss the start of the season.
General Manager Doug Melvin said that the third-base coach, Jerry Narron, will become acting manager and that Bucky Dent will take over Narron's coaching job.


McDonald's Corp.(MCD,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


American Home Products Corp.(AHP,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Textron Inc.(TXT,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 1


Wilmington Trust Corp.(WILM,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Ipalco Enterprises Inc.(IPL,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Litia Namoura, Dancer and Teacher, 83
Litia Namoura, a dancer and teacher, died on April 11 at her home in Brooklyn.
She was 83.
The cause was heart disease, said Edward Coury, a cousin.


Imo Industries Inc.(IMD,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Western Resources (WR,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


METRO DIGEST
CHEMICAL PLANT EXPLODES IN NEW JERSEY
An old chemical plant in the heart of downtown Lodi, N.J., exploded and burned, killing four workers, injuring eight others, forcing the evacuation of nearby homes and sending a dense plume of toxic black smoke over much of western Bergen County.
The blast at Napp Technologies was described as an industrial accident, apparently tied to a malfunctioning mixing vat for chemicals.
Residents were urged to keep their windows closed and their children and pets off the street, in case smoke from the plant was dangerous.
Page 1.
NEW YORK CITY 2 ARE CONVICTED IN SHOOTING AT SALON
A Manhattan jury convicted two men of attempted murder and robbery in the shooting of a Maryland couple during a robbery last year at the elegant showrooms of the Vera Wang Bridal House in the Hotel Carlyle on the Upper East Side.
The defendants, Randy Caggiano and Sandor Sebok, both 40, were convicted in the attack on Gerald and Edith Schaeffer, who were in Manhattan with their two daughters shopping for a wedding gown for one of them.
Page 27.
FATAL BRONX FIRE CALLED SUSPICIOUS
A fatal fire in a Bronx home for foster children was called suspicious after investigators found traces of a substance they believed was used to accelerate the spread of the fire, the police said.
Three teen-age girls died in the blaze.
A detective said the police were trying to determine whether the fire had been set as the result of an argument among residents.
Page 27.
AUDITING THE IMPROVEMENT DISTRICTS
In the latest move to bring more public scrutiny to New York City's 33 business improvement districts, a City Hall auditing agency will routinely review outside audits of the districts, city officials said.
Page 27.
TRYING TO SAVE MONEY ON A BUS CONTRACT
Now that a school bus drivers strike has been averted, union leaders, city negotiators and bus company officials said they expected to spend the next few days trying to find ways to save money on new bus contracts without sacrificing workers' job security.
Page 26.
REGION A STANDOFF AND A SURRENDER
After keeping police at bay for 14 hours, Leslie Nelson emerged from her suburban home at 4:34 A.M. and told investigators that she shot and killed two law officers and critically wounded a third because she "got scared" when they came to arrest her on a gun charge, authorities said.
The Camden County prosecutor, Edward F. Borden Jr., said Ms.
Nelson, 37, used an AK-47 assault rifle to cut down the officers when they entered her house on a peaceful Haddon Heights, N.J., street to serve a warrant.
Page 28.
FRIEND OF GRIBETZ TESTIFIES TO GRAND JURY
A close associate of Kenneth Gribetz, the longtime Rockland County District Attorney, has testified to a Federal grand jury looking into allegations that Mr.
Gribetz paid no taxes on referral fees he received from private lawyers, a lawyer close to the Gribetz case said.
Page 28.
OFFICER ARRAIGNED ON RAPE CHARGE
A Suffolk County police officer was arraigned on charges that he raped and sodomized one woman at gunpoint and terrorized two others after he stopped and questioned them while on duty.
Page 28.
About New York by Michael T. Kaufman 27


Spiegel Inc.(SPGLA,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 1


Mother Guilty In the Killings Of 5 Babies
Waneta Hoyt, the 48-year-old woman accused of smothering her five infant children a quarter of a century ago, was convicted of their deaths today in Tioga County Court.
In 1972, a leading medical journal cited the deaths of two infants from rural New York, "MH" and "NH," as compelling evidence that Sudden Infant Death Syndrome ran in families.
Today, a jury found that the babies, Molly Hoyt and Noah Hoyt, were murdered by their mother, as were two brothers and a sister before them.


Jets Trade Rob Moore, Load Up For Draft
In a major convulsion to the team on the eve of the draft, the Jets last night traded Rob Moore, their only Pro Bowl player, to the Phoenix Cardinals.
In exchange for the wide receiver, the Jets got the Cardinals' first-round pick -- 16th over all -- in today's college draft and running back Ron Moore, who totaled 1,018 yards as a rookie in 1993.
The deal helped position the Jets to move up from No. 9 in the draft to acquire one of the top defensive linemen -- perhaps Kevin Carter of Florida, Warren Sapp of Miami or Mike Mamula of Boston College.
Even if the Jets could not get immediate pass-rushing help, they are certain to be able to get a quality wide receiver.


Scandal's Cost for Prudential Tops $1.4 Billion
The price tag for the costliest scandal in Wall Street's history just keeps climbing.
Prudential Securities' projected cost for the debacle involving sales of limited partnerships has grown to more than $1.4 billion, executives at the firm said yesterday, far more than the $1.1 billion the firm expected to pay as recently as July.
A large part of that growth in cost comes from the compensation fund for defrauded clients, which was established in 1993 as part of a settlement of securities fraud charges with Federal and state securities regulators.
As of last Friday, court records show, the firm had made offers to settle tens of thousands of claims to the compensation fund for almost $750 million.
Nearly 80,000 investors have already accepted offers of settlement from the fund, the records show.


Change at Johns Hopkins
Dr.
Daniel Nathans, the Nobel laureate physician and molecular biologist, has been named interim president of Johns Hopkins University.
Dr.
Nathans, 66, a member of the Hopkins faculty for 33 years, is to take office on June 1 to lead the Baltimore university during a search for a successor to William C. Richardson.
Dr.
Richardson, who became president in July 1990, is to leave in June to become president of the W. K. Kellogg Foundation.


Mourning, Then Rejoicing


Domtar Inc.(DTC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


With Bus Strike Averted, Talks Focus on Saving Jobs and Money
Now that a school bus drivers strike called for Monday has been averted, union leaders, city negotiators, and bus company officials said they expected to spend the next few days trying to find ways to save money on new bus contracts without sacrificing workers' job security.
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani wants to send bus contracts out for competitive bidding and do away with lifetime job guarantees for union workers, an arrangement that has effectively kept out cheaper service.


Bell Microproducts Inc.(BELM,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Earth Day 25: Updating a Movement
Twenty-five years ago today, hundreds of thousands of people packed Fifth Avenue to celebrate a new national observance that would become an annual teach-in, Earth Day.
That first celebration, in 1970, was conceived by Senator Gaylord Nelson of Wisconsin, with the slogan "Earth: Love It or Leave It." Rejoicing in glorious spring weather, New Yorkers crowded the avenue -- traffic-free from 59th Street to 14th Street -- to help dramatize the global environmental plight.


Bancorp Hawaii (BOH,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Orgy, Gregorian Chant and, Oh Yes, Nudity
Face the Music and Dance is an innovative series at Symphony Space that matches choreographers and musicians informally and to often unexpected result.
But a program on Thursday by Dendy Dance and Performance and the jazz duo of David Murray and John Hicks was disappointing.
The two new dances on the program, neither of them set to music by Mr.
Murray and Mr.
Hicks, looked unfinished and did not measure up to Mark Dendy's best work.
And an improvisational fling by Mr.
Murray and the dancers seemed for the most part a shotgun wedding.
"Bardo," a solo set to Tibetan ritual music by Lama Norbu Gyamtsho, was a dance of slightly stiff, often side-turned gestures and odd, rooted moves.
That and the fact that the dance was performed nude by Michael Yasenak, a dancer with a classically proportioned body, gave Mr.
Yasenak the look of a figure who had stepped out of some ancient book of the dead.
It was an intriguing quality, in a one-idea work.


Sealed Air Corp.(SEE,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


California Federal Bank (CAL,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Fieldcrest Cannon Inc.(FLD,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Bush Industries Inc.(BSH,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 1


Lesbian's Appeal for Custody of Son Rejected
The Virginia Supreme Court today rejected a lesbian's plea for custody of her 3-year-old son, ruling that "active lesbianism practiced in the home" could stigmatize the child.
The mother, Sharon L. Bottoms, a Kmart clerk who lives in a Richmond suburb, lost custody of her son in 1993 when a local judge ruled that homosexuality "renders her an unfit parent." Ms.
Bottoms's mother, P. Kay Bottoms, had sued her for custody and had kept the child, Tyler Doustou, throughout the court fight.


Firstar Corp.(FSR,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Harte-Hanks Communications Inc.(HHS,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


CLASSICAL MUSIC
Among 20th-Century Works, One With Ancient Flavorings  Parnassus Miller Theater


Aztar Corp.(AZR,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Man Charged in Beating Death
Murder charges were filed yesterday against 22-year-old Neil LaBranche, accused of beating to death his roommate, Michael Brandt, 25, who suffered from cerebral palsy.
The police said Mr.
LaBranche used a martial-arts weapon to commit the murder during an argument in an apartment the two men shared with their girlfriends.


Myth of Marketplace
To the Editor:
Suppose the Chrysler Corporation is in fact purchased for something like $23 billion.
Much of that will be borrowed, and those who bought the company will be left with significant debt that has nothing to do with real investment.


Hartco Enterprise reports earnings for Year to Jan 28


A Switch at the M.T.A.
The abrupt resignation of Peter E. Stangl as chairman of the Metropolitan Transportation Authority yesterday removes from the scene a dedicated advocate for the New York City region's subway, bus and commuter rail systems.
Mr.
Stangl has fought hard if unsuccessfully to make the city and state live up to their financing commitments to a five-year, $9.6 billion rebuilding plan enacted in 1993.
Commuters can only hope that Gov.
George Pataki's choice to succeed him as chairman, E. Virgil Conway, uses his access to demand that the state and city not gut the system.
With the onset of the worst fiscal crisis in two decades, both New York's Mayor, Rudolph Giuliani, and Governor Pataki have reduced their contributions to the authority.
With Washington's subsidies also shrinking, the cutbacks are jeopardizing transportation services and capital improvements.
Now that he has appointed a new chairman loyal to him, Mr.
Pataki should disclose his own views of how to insure that recent impressive gains in ridership and quality of service are not jeopardized.


A U.S. Fed Cup Neophyte To Open With Austria Ace
At a draw ceremony that was as understated as this women's international team competition is underrated, it was determined that this weekend's Fed Cup quarterfinal between the United States and Austria will begin with a singles match between a Fed Cup neophyte from Michigan and the 29-year-old veteran who is Austria's leading lady of tennis.
Amy Frazier, hastily inserted after sixth-ranked Lindsay Davenport withdrew because of food poisoning, will face 22d-ranked Judith Wiesner in the first of the five matches at the Turnberry Isle Resort on Saturday.
The pair have met just once before, with the experienced Wiesner prevailing.


Outback Steakhouse Inc.(OSSI,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Genetics Institute Inc.(GENIZ,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Shooting Suspect Surrenders After 2 Officers Are Killed
After keeping police at bay for 14 hours, Leslie Nelson emerged from her suburban home at 4:34 A.M. today and told investigators that she shot and killed two law officers and critically wounded a third because she "got scared" when they came to arrest her on a gun charge, authorities said.
The Camden County prosecutor, Edward F. Borden Jr., said Ms.
Nelson, 37, used an AK-47 assault rifle to cut down the officers when they entered her house on a peaceful Haddon Heights street to serve a warrant on Thursday afternoon.


Whatever It Is, It's Drawing Crowds; For a Number of Reasons, Spring Break in the City Is a Hit
Counting crowds in Manhattan is an imprecise science at best, like estimating the number of beans in a jar.
But to many New Yorkers this week, the borough was feeling unseasonably crammed.
There were foreign tourists swept in by a weak dollar, suburban adolescents set free by spring break, auto-show aficionados, flower-show enthusiasts, Christians and Jews celebrating coinciding holidays.


Beliefs
Early tomorrow morning, Frederica Mathewes-Green will break her Lenten fast.
In a red brick schoolhouse standing since 1878, the 35 families of the Holy Cross Antiochian Orthodox Mission of Catonsville, Md., where Ms.
Mathewes-Green's husband is pastor, will finish their Easter liturgy.
The congregation will then heap folding tables with "every kind of meat our little hearts can desire," Ms.
Mathewes-Green said, and "lots of gooey desserts" as well as the classic Russian Easter bread known as kulich, made with eggs and cream, a blend of soft cheeses, chopped almonds and lots of sugar.


Corrections
A headline yesterday about the deaths of five men in Redding, Conn., referred incorrectly to the charges pending against the victims' landlord.
He is charged with larceny and criminal lockout, not with the men's deaths.


MAYTAG CORP. (MYG,N)
The Maytag Corporation reported a 42 percent rise in first-quarter net earnings yesterday and cited improved sales of its premium-brand appliances in North America.
Net income rose to $39.5 million, or 37 cents a share, from $27.8 million, or 26 cents, a year earlier.
But the operating profit in the 1994 quarter was $31.0 million, or 29 cents.
The net for that period included results from the company's Hoover Australia operations, which were sold in December, and a charge of $3.2 million, or 3 cents a share, for an accounting change.
Revenue rose 3.7 percent, to $820.1 million from $790.6 million.


Chemed Corp.(CHE,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Seafirst Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Ethyl Corp.(EY,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Corrections
A chart in Business Day on Monday with the continuation of an article about growing disparities in wealth and income in the United States misstated the source of data on the concentration of wealth in industrial nations.
It was Timothy M. Smeeding of the Luxembourg Income Study Group, not Edward N. Wolff, author of "Top Heavy: A Study of Increasing Inequality of Wealth in America."


Flunking the Conservation Class
Marking the 25th anniversary of the original Earth Day, a conservation group issued its annual report cards for members of Congress.
At the head of the New Jersey class, according to the League of Conservation Voters, were three Democrats, Robert G. Torricelli, Frank Pallone Jr. and Donald M. Payne, each of whom scored a perfect 100.
At the other end was Representative Frank LoBiondo, who, like most of his freshman Republican colleagues, got a zero.
Mr.
LoBiondo, of Vineland, said the rankings reflect the group's opposition to relaxing environmental regulations that are "strangling us." JOE SHARKEY


Devils' Homestretch Is for Home Ice
Stephane Richer, who three days earlier had been so ebullient about the Devils' chances of winning the Stanley Cup, now had his face down and stared into his locker.
New Jersey had just completed an 0-2 road trip with an embarrassing 1-0 loss to Florida on Thursday night.
"I don't want to start anything," the left wing said slowly, searching for words.
"I don't want to talk too much. But some guys were not prepared for this road trip."


Clear Channel Communications Inc.(CCU,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Saab Continues Its Profit Streak
Saab Automobile A.B. of Sweden said yesterday that strong car sales gave it a pretax profit of 111 million kronor ($14.9 million) in the first quarter, continuing the progress that turned it into a profit-making company last year.
Saab had a loss of 63 million kronor in the first quarter of 1994 -- the last in a string of losses since Saab became an independent company in 1990 and the General Motors Corporation took a 50 percent stake.
The other half of Saab is held by the Swedish industrial holding company Investor A.B.


Falcon Building Products Inc.(FB,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Lillian Vernon (LVC,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 26


The Deadly Toll of Other Bombs
45 Dead -- May 18, 1927: The victims -- including 38 children -- are killed when a school district treasurer, Andrew Kehoe, lines the Bath Consolidated School near Lansing, Mich., with hundreds of pounds of dynamite, and blows it up.
Investigators say Kehoe, who also died in the blast, thought he would lose his farm because he couldn't pay property taxes used to build the school. 30 Dead -- Sept. 16, 1920: a bomb left in a parked horse-drawn wagon explodes in the Wall Street area of manhattan, killing 30 people and injuring hundreds.
Although rumors of an explosive wagon, a construction accident and a lobor dispute were widely discussed, the suspicion was that the bomb was the work of foreign terrorists.
The authorities came up with a list of suspects and even questioned the man who had recently reshod the wagon's horse. depite the offer of and $80,000 reward in 1922, no one was charged. 20 Dead -- Oct. 1, 1910: The Los Angeles Times building is dynamited during a labor dispute, killing 20 people.
Two leaders of the ironworkers union plead guilty. 11 Dead -- Dec. 29, 1975: A bomb hidden in a locker explodes at the TWA terminal at New York's LaGuardia Airport, killing 11 people and injuring 75.
No arrests are made. 11 Dead -- May 4, 1886: A bomb blast during a labor rally at Chicago's Haymarket Square kills 11 people, including seven police officers, and injures more than 100.
Eight "anarchists" are tried for inciting riot; four are hanged, one commits suicide and three win pardons after seven years in prison. 6 Dead -- Feb. 26, 1993: A bomb in a van in a parking garage under New York's World Trade Center kills six, injures more than 1,000 and cripples the twin 110-story towers.
Four Muslims are convicted and sentenced to 240 years in prison each.
A fifth man, the alleged mastermind, was captured in February and awaits trial. (Source: The Associated Press)


Lance Inc.(LNCE,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 25


Valley National Bancorp (VLY,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Continental Medical Systems Inc.(CNM,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Company Had History Of Violation Since 1988
Napp Technologies has been fined $26,400 for violating health and environmental laws over the past seven years.
All the violations were considered minor, state officials said, and the fines were reduced sharply once the company corrected the problems.
A total of seven violations were recorded by the state Department of Environmental Protection since 1988, which is as far back as the department's active files reach.
The penalties range from a $15,000 fine last Dec. 14, since reduced to $1,600, for failing to test the strength of several storage tanks, to a $200 penalty last year for procedural violations when the company changed its name from Napp Chemicals Inc. to Napp Technologies Inc.


Why Single Out Pakistan, an Ally, for Aid Ban?
To the Editor:
Senator Larry Pressler, in "Bhutto Came, She Saw, She Conquered" (Op-Ed, April 16), has not only misrepresented the facts but also attempted to mislead the American people at the expense of compromising the principles of fairness so clearly included in the Constitution.
Nuclear nonproliferation is desirable throughout the world.
We challenge Senator Pressler to request the application of his amendment -- which bans aid or military sales to Pakistan unless the President can certify that it does not have a nuclear bomb -- to the rest of the world, or give a valid explanation of why he is not willing to do so.


Authorities Hold a Man of 'Extreme Right-Wing Views'
Timothy McVeigh, his crewcut and square-jawed face looking remarkably like his composite sketch, walked out of the Noble County Courthouse this afternoon wearing handcuffs and a bright orange prison jumpsuit.
"Murderer!" shouted people in an angry crowd of several thousand milling around the village green of Perry, Okla., a faded oil town of 5,000 inhabitants 60 miles north of here, as the 26-year-old man, identified as a suspect in the murderous truck bombing of the Alfred P. Murrah Federal Building here, left the courthouse.
"Baby killer!" "Burn him!"


Foreman Weighs In at 256
He undressed, tugged his elastic boxing trunks high over his navel and weighed in at 256 pounds -- and GEORGE FOREMAN had been dieting.
"I weigh what I weigh," he said.
Even so, Foreman has a roll going -- not just of fat, but of victories.
Tonight at the MGM Grand, he defends a heavyweight title for the first time in 21 years against the little-known German AXEL SCHULZ.
Because he is older (46) and more rotund, he won't make a prediction.


Kaiser Aluminum Corp.(KLU,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Diamond Shamrock Inc.(DRM,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


RESULTS PLUS
N.B.A.
Cavs Clinch Sixth Spot John Williams's season-high 24 points and 11 rebounds powered the Cleveland Cavaliers past visiting Milwaukee, 103-82, last night, eliminating the Bucks from playoff contention.
With the victory, Cleveland clinched the sixth playoff spot in the Eastern Conference and will play the Knicks in the first round.


Allied Group Inc.(ALGR,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


BOMB SUSPECT IS HELD, ANOTHER IDENTIFIED; TOLL HITS 65 AS HOPE FOR SURVIVORS FADES
Just 48 hours after the Oklahoma City bombing, the authorities on Friday arrested a suspect whom a witness described in court papers as enraged over the Federal raid on the Branch Davidian compound near Waco, Tex., two years to the day before the blast.
Investigators also said they had identified a second suspect in the bombing, an Oklahoma man whose whereabouts are unknown and whose name they did not disclose.
And they questioned two longtime associates of the arrested man, searching a Michigan farm where the three once lived together for evidence of explosives or ties to domestic right-wing groups hostile to the Federal Government.


Promus Cos.(PRI,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


New Old Boathouse
To the Editor:
"Up in Central Park" (editorial, April 15) describes the Charles A. Dana Discovery Center as "the old boathouse." This honors us as its architects.
We designed it, a brand new building, to merge with and enhance the picturesque Harlem Meer landscape.
SAMUEL G. WHITE  Buttrick White &amp; Burtis New York, April 17, 1995


A Slow and Gruesome Search Through Unstable Wreckage
Groping through the dark, in spaces dripping with water and filled with the odor of decay, rescue teams gained ground only inch by inch today as they explored the wreckage of the bombed Alfred P. Murrah Federal Building here in a meticulous search for survivors.
Progress came one bucket at a time as rescue workers piled fragments of debris into galvanized washtubs and then passed them back to other volunteers in a somber relay race down narrow passageways.


NS Group Inc.(NSS,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 1


Clinton at Earth Day Ceremony


BUSINESS DIGEST
Strong Company Earnings Lead to Big Stock Rally
The Dow rallied 39 points in some of the heaviest trading of the year, closing at a record 4,270.09, as traders focused on the exceptionally strong earnings being reported for the first quarter.
Traders also said the frenzy of a "double witching" session might have contributed to the advance.


POP
Songs of Disenchantment, Delivered With Passion  Archers of Loaf Tramps


Giants Won't Tip Hand About First Selection
One thing is certain about today's draft: Not even the Giants know who they are going to pick with the 17th selection.
It all depends on who is available when their time approaches.
But General Manager George Young is one of the best judges of talent in the league, and the team has a good idea of what it wants to do.
All signs seem to point to the team taking an offensive lineman.
But don't bet the house on it because the Giants' fate depends on what others do.


Radio Station Was All Talk
At least the Brooklyn Bridge is real.
Mariene Bissas was sentenced to eight years in prison for defrauding a Bergen County man and an Ocean County couple into investing $89,000 in a nonexistent radio station.
Her husband, Peter, also found guilty in the scheme, will be sentenced on Tuesday.


First American (Tenn.) (FATN,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Audition Winners' Introduction
Two seasons ago, Irene Diamond, a philanthropist who supports several cultural institutions in New York City, gave Young Concert Artists a grant to present an annual concert at which it could introduce its recent audition winners in performances of concertos.
The concerts are also fund-raising events for the organization; this year's installment, on Tuesday evening at the 92d Street Y, raised $100,000.
It also offered some extraordinary playing, not only from the soloists but also from the New York Chamber Symphony, conducted by Gerard Schwarz.
Alban Gerhardt, a cellist, set the tone of the evening with a lustrous reading of Tchaikovsky's Rococo Variations.
Mr.
Gerhardt was at his best in music that demanded subtle phrasing, but his rich, variegated sound also did justice to the set's grand virtuosic gestures.


Sports of The Times; A Partisan Spin on Title IX
FOR the last two days, 200 college athletic administrators have sat in meeting rooms listening, debating, negotiating.
One side -- mostly male -- contemplated how to give, while the other side -- mostly female -- considered how to take a fair share for women in intercollegiate athletics.
This two-day symposium, the second in a series sponsored by the National Collegiate Athletic Association, was intended to educate athletic personnel about the complexities of complying with the Education Amendment Act of 1972.
Title IX of the act is devoted to "non-discrimination on the basis of sex in education programs and activities receiving Federal financial assistance."


Survivor's Wife Assails Guns
The wife of the only survivor of the March 21 post office shooting denounced the easy availability of guns yesterday.
"We must resolve as a society to stand up to the gun lobby, gun manufacturers, ammunition manufacturers and gun dealers," said Karin Abarbanel, speaking for her husband, whose jaw is still wired after being shot three times in the face during the assault, which left four others dead.


Bemis Co. (BMS,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Princeton Responds to Protesters
Hoping to end the two-day sit-in at the Princeton University president's office, the university released a letter to be published in the campus newspaper outlining plans to increase the number of Hispanic and Asian-American courses.
Princeton officials said the efforts, including the hiring of as many as four new faculty members, were already under way before 17 students took over the president's office to demand more courses in those fields.
The demonstrators, saying they were unaware of that, remained in the office last night while they reviewed their options.


Associated Banc-Corp (ASBC,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Finning Ltd. reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Callaway Golf Co. (ELY,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


F.C.C. Weighs Plan To Limit Murdoch
The Federal Communications Commission is weighing a staff recommendation that would force the Australia-based News Corporation to sharply reduce its ownership in the stations that make up the core of the Fox television network.
If enacted, the plan would jolt Rupert Murdoch's broadcasting empire, requiring the News Corporation to reduce its stake in the eight television stations it now owns and also reduce its planned ownership stake in three other stations


MCN Corp.(MCN,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Unifi Inc.(UFI,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 26


Dominion Resources Inc.(D,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


A Swiss Bank Hires Officials From Salomon
The Union Bank of Switzerland, which is trying to build up its New York investment bank rapidly, has hired five former managing directors of Salomon Brothers to set up an investment banking business serving financial companies.
The former Salomon executives, who have been hired under two-year, multimillion-dollar contracts, are Richard J. Barrett, Gerard L. Smith, Robert A. Nau, Brenda White and Alan Ginsberg, the Swiss bank said yesterday.


Standard Federal Bank (SFB,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


E-Systems Inc.(ESY,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Court Ruling Limits Rights Of Patients
A Massachusetts court ruled yesterday that a hospital and its doctors need not provide care they deem futile, even if a patient has asked for it.
The case, which went to trial in the Superior Court of Massachusetts on April 4, involved an elderly woman, Catherine F. Gilgunn, who became comatose and suffered irreversible neurological damage while a patient at Massachusetts General Hospital.
Mrs.
Gilgunn's daughter, Joan Gilgunn, of the Charlestown section of Boston, said her mother had always wanted everything medically possible to be done for her if she became incompetent.


Chairman of Transportation Agency Quits
Peter E. Stangl, who led the Metropolitan Transportation Authority through four years of modernization and rising ridership, announced yesterday that he will resign as chairman and chief executive.
Gov.
George E. Pataki quickly used the vacancy to reorder the top tier of the agency, splitting Mr.
Stangl's duties between two posts, a part-time chairman who will lead the board and a full-time chief executive who will control daily operations.
Under the new arrangement, the chief executive could be dismissed by the M.T.A. board -- most of whose members are named by the governor -- at any time.
Board members are appointed for set terms.


Tessie O'Shea, Music-Hall Star And Tony Winner, Dies at 82
Tessie O'Shea, a Tony-winning music-hall singer and actress with a bouncy stage personality that cheerfully capitalized on her girth, died yesterday at a nursing home in Leesburg, Fla.
She was 82 and lived in East Lake Weir, Fla.
The cause was congestive heart failure, said Kathleen Wampola, a friend.


A Mother-Daughter Rivalry Turns Political in Sri Lanka
In a part of the world where several women have wielded political power in recent years, Sri Lanka still stands out, with its two top positions, President and Prime Minister, held by a daughter and her mother.
But the political dynasty that the President, Chandrika Bandaranaike Kumaratunga, and the Prime Minister, Sirimavo Bandaranaike, are carrying on has now taken a new and difficult twist.


UNISYS CORP. (UIS,N)
The Unisys Corporation said yesterday that its net income fell 25.7 percent, to $44.6 million in the first quarter, although revenue rose 7.6 percent, to $1.41 billion, from $1.31 billion in the comparable period a year earlier.
The company had announced during the quarter that it would sell its military-related operations to the the Loral Corporation.
That deal, valued at $862 million, is expected to close before June 30.


Bridge
Reports that the 1995 World Championships will be rescheduled have been denied by Jose Damiani of Paris, president of the World Bridge Federation.
He says they will take place, as planned, in Beijing, beginning Oct. 8, whether or not a major sponsor is found.
The Federation's long relationship with NEC Corporation recently ended.
The arrangements for the Beijing tournament were made by Damiani two years ago when he visited the Chinese capital with Jaime Ortiz Patino, a predecessor as federation president.
At that time they played a social team game with members of the Chinese leadership, and Damiani held the South cards on the diagramed deal.


Invacare Corp.(IVCR,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


American Management Systems Inc.(AMSY,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Links in Blast: Armed 'Militia' And a Key Date
In the enormous mountain of clues and evidence being sifted by the authorities in the Oklahoma City bombing, a strange item -- the date April 19, 1993 -- has begun to stand out, and some Federal investigators said yesterday that it might contain the key to understanding the tragedy.
It was on April 19, 1993, that a siege by Federal agents at the Branch Davidian compound near Waco, Tex., came to a fiery end as the cult's leader, David Koresh, and some 80 followers perished in a blazing apocalypse -- an event enshrined by right-wing groups across the country as a symbol of Federal tyranny against American citizens.


Tandem Computers Inc.(TDM,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


J&amp;L Specialty Steel Inc.(JL,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Deluxe Corp.(DLX,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


American National Insurance Co. (ANAT,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


City Hall Agency Will Review The Audits of Business Zones
In the latest move to bring more public scrutiny to New York City's 33 business improvement districts, a City Hall auditing agency will routinely review outside audits of the districts, city officials said yesterday.
The new review process was approved Wednesday at a meeting of the agency, the Audit Committee, and was announced jointly yesterday by Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani, Comptroller Alan G. Hevesi and Public Advocate Mark Green, who all have representatives on the committee.
In the past, the committee has confined its oversight work to such large public institutions as the city's Housing Authority and the Health and Hospitals Corporation.


Danaher Corp.(DHR,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Just Before He Was to Be Freed, Prime Bombing Suspect Is Identified in Jail
One of the most hunted men in the world, wanted as "John Doe No. 1" in the bombing of the Federal office building in Oklahoma City, was right where the authorities wanted him -- in jail.
Except the F.B.I. did not know it, and his jailers almost let him go.
It was not until today -- less than an hour before the authorities in Perry, Okla., about 60 miles north of Oklahoma City, were ready to let the man go -- that a routine check of his Social Security number and the wanted poster released hours before convinced them and Federal authorities that an inmate they had arrested on Wednesday could be the suspect with the light-brown crewcut.


The Anxious Hours


Repeat Trials of Navajo In Fatal Crash Polarize New Mexico Residents
Maybe it was because the automobile accident took four lives on Christmas Eve.
Maybe it is because Melanie Cravens and her three girls who stare like blond cherubs from newspaper pages were killed on their way to go caroling with their grandmother.
Or maybe, as some people here assert, the prosecution of the driver of one car, Gordon House, has captured the attention of the news media and polarized the community because Mr.
House is a Navajo and was drunk when he caused the accident.


Nevada Power (NVP,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Man in the News; For the M.T.A., a Pataki Loyalist: E. Virgil Conway
By appointing E. Virgil Conway as chairman of the Metropolitan Transportation Authority, the Pataki administration has found a consummate loyalist who has had a long career in government and business.
Mr.
Conway, 65, has been a successful banker and lawyer.
A list of appointed jobs in government he has held includes financial adviser to Mayor Abraham D. Beame during the fiscal crisis of the mid-70's.
He has been an M.T.A. board member since 1992.


Vastar Resources Inc.(VRI,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


World Bank Plays Role In Wildlife Conservation
To the Editor:
"Of Rhinos, Elephants and Humans" (editorial, April 11) misses the mark in saying the World Bank does not recognize the economic importance of wildlife conservation and that it finances academic studies and trust funds.
The bank is also increasingly involved in financing natural resource management and environmental management activities throughout sub-Saharan Africa.


A Plant for Recycling Paper
A $250 million paper recycling plant will be built by a private company on a 23-acre site along the Hackensack River.
Hudson County is selling the parcel for $7 million to Intercontinental Recycling Corporation, which will operate the plant to remove ink from and recycle 2,000 tons of waste paper a year, mostly for export.
Work on the plant will create 500 construction jobs and could start 12 to 16 months after regulatory approval, the company said.
Once in operation, the plant is expected to have 200 permanent employees.


Ashland Coal Inc.(ACI,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Cipsco Inc.(CIP,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Greater New York Savings Bank (GRTR,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


POP
It's the Song That Counts, Rather Than the Singer  Nancy Griffit Beacon Theater


Chesapeake Corp.(CSK,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


TNT Freightways (TNTF,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 1


Enerflex Systems reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Corrections
An article on Thursday about a Federal investigation of Kenneth Gribetz, the Rockland County District Attorney, referred incorrectly to the 1992 settlement of a negligence case in which Mr.
Gribetz is suspected of having received a $30,000 referral fee.
The settlement was $3.2 million, not $800,000.
The smaller figure was the legal fee paid to Richard J. Weiner, the plaintiff's lawyer.


CHRONICLE
Another marriage with royal connections is unraveling.
After six years of marriage and four children, the EARL OF SPENCER, 30, the brother of the Princess of Wales, and his wife, VICTORIA LOCKWOOD, a former model, have separated, The Evening Standard reported yesterday.


Slovak Authorities Intercept Nuclear Material and Arrest 9
A large amount of radioactive material, suspected to be uranium, has been seized from a car in eastern Slovakia and nine people have been arrested, the Slovak Interior Ministry said today.
The police found 37.4 pounds of radioactive material in a container hidden in a car with Hungarian license plates on April 13 near Poprad in eastern Slovakia, said Peter Ondera, a ministry spokesman.


TransCanada Pipelines Ltd.(TRP,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Corrections
A report in the Pop Life column on Thursday about the singer and guitarist Alex Chilton misidentified the group that originally recorded "New Girl in School," a song on Mr.
Chilton's latest album.
The singers were Jan and Dean, not the Beach Boys.


Rayonier Inc.(RYN,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Swift Is Hurt as Key Warms Up in Florida
Funny, no one asked Yankee Manager Buck Showalter why he didn't bring Jimmy Key into the chill air of the Rocky Mountains to pitch against the Colorado Rockies today.
No one needed to, because exhibit A supporting Showalter's cautious approach to the possible physical dangers of the two-game exhibition series played in frigid Denver could be found a few yards away in the Rockies' clubhouse.
That's where Key's Colorado counterpart, Billy Swift, could be found nursing a strained left groin muscle.


Donations to Help Bomb Victims
The Federal Bureau of Investigation has set up a nationwide telephone line for people who have information about the bombing in Oklahoma City.
The number is (800) 905-1514.
Here is a list of organizations accepting donations for victims of the Oklahoma City bombing.


Mexico Talks Are Delayed A Second Day
The resumption of peace talks in Chiapas was delayed for a second day today as Government negotiators refused to meet with rebel leaders as long as hundreds of Zapatista sympathizers encircle the concrete basketball court where the talks are to be held.
Marco Antonio Bernal Gutierrez, the Government's chief representative in Chiapas, remained in San Cristobal de las Casas, about 15 miles southeast of the negotiation site.


Keane Inc.(KEA,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Treasuries Find Few Buyers; Prices Flat in Light Trading
Prices of Treasury securities were little changed yesterday as investors declined to make purchases going into the weekend without more conclusive evidence that the economy was slowing.
The 30-year bond was up 5/32 , to a price of 10317/32 for a yield of 7.33 percent, down from 7.34 percent on Thursday.
But rates on shorter-maturity bills were up a couple of basis points.
A basis point is a hundredth of a percentage point.


At This Point in Season, Any Victory Suits Nets
When Butch Beard emerged from the dressing room tonight taking a sip from a paper cup, someone asked the Nets' coach whether the beverage might be champagne.
"Not for another 48 hours," he replied.
Until then, it's Gatorade.
But when those 48 hours pass and Sunday's regular-season finale against Boston is history, don't think Beard won't do a little private celebrating that may include some bubbly.
His long, turbulent season as New Jersey's head coach will finally end, putting the franchise out of its misery, at least for the moment.


U.S. May Loosen Rules On Preference Programs
With Federal affirmative action programs under increasing attack, the Clinton Administration is considering loosening rules governing how contractors on Federal projects report how many of their employees are women or members of minorities.
Shirley J. Wilcher, head of the Office of Federal Contract Compliance, the Labor Department agency that monitors the affirmative action programs of Federal contractors, said the intention was to streamline the complex and arcane regulations on how to measure progress in hiring and promoting women and members of minorities.


Winn-Dixie Stores Inc.(WIN,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 5


U.S. Offering to Raise Level Of Talks With North Korea
In a last-ditch effort to rescue the nuclear freeze agreement with North Korea, Washington offered today to raise negotiations to a senior level.
North Korea confirmed that it had broken off talks with the United States on implementing a $4.5 billion nuclear accord and blamed the failure on the United States.


Weis Markets Inc.(WMK,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 1


A Town in Kansas Is Startled To Find Itself in the Spotlight
Shortly before 7 tonight, the police in this Kansas farm town wound yellow tape around the small blue house on South Second Street that Terry Lynn Nichols moved into a month and a half ago.
Mr.
Nichols was a few blocks away at the Herington police station, having driven there in his pickup truck and turned himself in several hours earlier for questioning.


Police Find Evidence Of Arson At a Home
A fatal fire in a Bronx home for foster children on Thursday was called suspicious after investigators found traces of a substance they believed had been used to accelerate the blaze, the police said yesterday.
Three teen-age girls died in the fire, and three firefighters were treated for smoke inhalation.
A detective said the police were trying to determine whether the blaze had been set as the result of an argument among residents of the home.
The detective, who spoke on condition of anonymity, said he did not know the nature of the argument or which residents might have been involved.
Nine foster children are reported to be assigned to the home.


Grant's Tomb Nears an Uncertain Centennial
To the Editor:
The caption with your photograph of workers renovating Grant's Tomb (April 11) implies that New York's only Presidential tomb will be restored by summer.
If only that were true, those of us who have been fighting for its restoration could rest easy.


Ralcorp Holdings Inc.(RAH,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Don't Blame Nigeria For the Drug Trade
To the Editor:
Re "The New Slavery" by Bob Herbert (column, April 8):
The analogy between black people in the drug trade and "black Africans who sold their brethren into slavery" is a poor and biased attempt to distort history, and a futile endeavor to malign Africans, especially Nigerians, to advance the cause of a group of self-appointed American "do-gooders."


Valero Energy Corp.(VLO,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


With Helicopters Above, Agents Raid Michigan Farmhouse
Dozens of government agents, some dressed in flak vests and wielding assault rifles, descended on a white, vinyl-clad farmhouse in the quiet Michigan countryside this afternoon, searching the home and an adjoining steel tool shed for evidence they say might be linked to the bombing of the Federal building in Oklahoma City.
As agents blocked off Van Dyke Avenue and helicopters circled over the freshly plowed fields surrounding the house of James Douglas Nichols, a farmer, neighbors gathered to watch a spectacle unequaled in this thinly populated farming community, they said, since President Richard M. Nixon paid a visit in 1974.


Van Slyke Takes a Pay Cut
ANDY VAN SLYKE got a job with the Baltimore Orioles, but the 34-year-old outfielder had to take a sizable pay cut.
He signed a one-year deal yesterday that calls for a base salary of $550,000 and up to $250,000 in performance incentives.


Finally, Nice Ranger Problem: No. 1 Richter or a Hot Healy?
For a change, Coach Colin Campbell faces a difficult decision that is a pleasant one.
Does he return goalie Mike Richter to first-string status when the Rangers play the Bruins in Boston on Sunday afternoon?
Or does he stay with Glenn Healy and keep Richter on the bench?
The case for Healy is compelling.
He played well in Thursday night's 3-2 victory over Hartford at Madison Square Garden, stopping 25 of 27 shots.
It was the Rangers' fourth victory in five games and it put them back into playoff position with six games left on the regular-season schedule.


U.S. Is Resisting Any Pressures For a Quick Fix To Aid Dollar
The Clinton Administration and the Federal Reserve seem determined to resist any pressure that might come next week from other major industrial powers to move promptly to shore up the dollar, arguing that a quick rescue effort could be self-defeating.
"There is nervousness and great concern about the declining dollar, but there is a sense that nothing can be done right now," an Administration official said.
"It would not be fair to say the Administration does not care; it would be fair to say we do not have any great ideas."


Central Hudson Gas &amp; Electric Corp.(CNH,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Joan Kahn Memorial
A memorial service for Joan Kahn, an editor of suspense novels, is to be held on Thursday at 11 A.M. at the Society for Ethical Culture, 2 West 64th Street, Manhattan.


People's Bank (Bridgeport, Conn.) (PBCT,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Corrections
A chart on the Health page in some editions on Wednesday, about mortality rates and exercise intensity, referred incompletely to the energy expenditure levels shown.
The levels were expressed in kilojoules, or thousands of joules, per week. (A joule is the work done in moving a one-kilogram mass by one meter.)


Corrections
An article yesterday about the decision by Senator David Pryor, Democrat of Arkansas, against seeking re-election referred imprecisely to his initial election.
It occurred a year after Senator John L. McClellan died in office, not upon Mr.
McClellan's retirement.


Pilgrim's Pride Corp.(CHX,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 1


Smith Int'l.(SII,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Falconbridge reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Stocks Stage a Sharp Rally On Quarterly Profit Reports
The stock market rallied sharply in heavy trading yesterday to record levels as traders bid up stocks reporting or expected to report strong quarterly profits.
But stock traders said the frenzy of a "double witching" session might have contributed substantially to the advance.
And traders also said they were troubled that broader indexes did not share as much in the advance.


Armor All Products Corp.(ARMR,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Paul Revere Corp.(PRL,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


U.S. Faults Saudi Arabia On Terrorist
In a sign of recurrent strains in relations with the Saudis, Secretary of State Warren Christopher charged today that Saudi Arabia had failed to cooperate with a recent American effort to seize one of the world's most wanted terrorists.
Two weeks ago, the Federal Bureau of Investigation dispatched agents overseas to arrest a Lebanese Shiite leader of the militant organization Islamic Holy War whom the United States has been hunting for a decade.


Try a Gentler Approach on Pesky Rodent
To the Editor:
Your examination (news article, April 17) of nutria in suburban Jefferson Parish, La., focused on the worst-case harm the burrowing animals might cause if left entirely unchecked, and reported only that proposed controls, such as trapping, drowning, poisoning and hanging, have been dismissed due to humane concerns (implying that animal rights activists are opposed to all lethal control methods).


Ferro Corp.(FOE,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


CHRONICLE
New York may be publishing's epicenter, but it is not the only venue for book parties.
Sixty guests gathered at the McLean, Va., home of MARIE RIDDER on Thursday to honor JANE SMILEY, the Pulitzer Prize-winning novelist.
Ms.
Smiley was in Washington to read from her new novel, "Moo" (Knopf), last night at the Folger Shakespeare Library.
Asked if she ever faced dry periods when writing, she said, "A year and half ago I bought a horse, and there has been basically a trough ever since."


No Headline
"Everything inside that place is confused. You find a body ahead of you and then a child's tennis shoe and then a Marine insignia and a pile of signed checks. There's one wall where the photographs of President Clinton and Al Gore are still intact, as though nothing happened. It's all mixed up." -- SGT.
GREG A. STEPHENS, of the Oklahoma Air National Guard.  [ 11:2. ]


Andrew (ANDW,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


NEWS SUMMARY
International 2-5  GAS INCIDENT IN JAPAN
Two dozen shoppers were taken to hospitals in the Japanese port city of Yokohama after suffering from strange fumes in a department store. 2  SRI LANKA'S FAMILY FEUD
In Sri Lanka, where a daughter and mother hold the country's two highest political jobs, relations between them have soured to the point that they barely speak. 3  SLOVAKS SEIZE NUCLEAR MATERIAL
A container with a large amount of radioactive material, suspected to be uranium, was seized from a car in eastern Slovakia and nine people have been arrested. 4  MEXICAN PEACE TALKS DELAYED
Peace talks in Mexico were delayed for a second day as Government negotiators refused to meet with rebel leaders as long as hundreds of Zapatista supporters lingered. 4  U.S.
AND SAUDI ARABIA AT ODDS
Secretary of State Warren Christopher charged that Saudi Arabia has failed to cooperate with a recent American effort to seize a suspected terrorist. 5  U.S.
OFFER TO NORTH KOREA
In a last-ditch effort to rescue the nuclear freeze agreement with North Korea, the United States offered to raise negotiations to a senior level. 5  IRAN DENOUNCES U.S.
Iran accused the United States of trying to block its access to peaceful nuclear technology while turning a blind eye to Israel's nuclear weapons program. 5  Mozdok Journal: Missionaries sowing Christianity in Caucasus. 4  National 6-11, 16  IS THE ENEMY AT HOME?
Authorities arrested a suspect and questioned two others with ties to a right-wing paramilitary group in Michigan that sees the Government as its sworn enemy.  1  LOOKING FOR A CONNECTION
Government agents descended on James Nichols's Michigan farmhouse in search of evidence to connect him to the Oklahoma City bombing.  9  SLOW PROGRESS IN RESCUE EFFORT
Rescue teams measured progress in inches as they explored the building ruins in a frantic but methodical search for survivors.  1  THE KEY TO THE MYSTERY?
As they sift through mountains of information, the authorities are beginning to attach significance to the date April 19, 1993.  1  Connecticut residents experienced three false bomb scares.  10  A SCHISM IN THE SIMPSON CASE
Testimony ground to a halt as Judge Ito spoke with jurors about his decision to replace three deputies assigned to protect them.  1  F.C.C.
WEIGHS FOX CUTBACK
The Federal Communications Commission is weighing a staff recommendation that would force Rupert Murdoch's News Corporation to slash its stake in the stations at the core of the Fox Television Network to less than 25 percent from 99 percent at present. 1  TRIAL POLARIZES COMMUNITY
A fatal accident has brought forth two pressing issues in New Mexico: drunken driving and stereotypes of American Indians.  6  RULING IN CUSTODY CASE
Virginia's Supreme Court rejected a mother's custody plea, ruling that her "active lesbianism" could stigmatize her 3-year-old son.  6  FUTILE CARE NOT REQUIRED
A Massachusetts court ruled that a hospital and its doctors need not provide care they deem futile, even if a patient has asked for it.  6  STREAMLINING AFFIRMATIVE ACTION
The Administration may loosen the rules governing how contractors report how many of their employees are women or minorities.  7  Hillary Clinton is planning a book on family and community life.  6  Beliefs: Orthodox Easter's seven-week long Lent ends tomorrow.  12  Metro Digest 25  4 DEAD IN NEW JERSEY EXPLOSION
Editorials/Op-Ed 22-23  Editorials  Earth Day's birthday.
A switch at the M.T.A.
Justice Scalia's poetic license.
The cost of police brutality.
Letters  Russell Baker: Groggy with spring.
Bob Herbert: The terrorists failed.
Mark D. W. Edington: Now for the new threat.
Barry R. Gross: How to bail out CUNY.
Barnett R. Rubin: Salvaging Afghanistan.
Chronicle 24  Bridge 18  Crossword 17


Harold Fong, 56, Judge in Center Of Dispute on Write-In Ballots
Judge Harold M. Fong of Federal District Court in Hawaii, who prompted an important constitutional ruling and became involved in the tangled legal affairs of Ferdinand E. Marcos, the longtime President of the Philippines, died on Thursday at Queen's Medical Center in Honolulu.
A lifelong resident of Honolulu, he was a few days short of his 57th birthday.
The cause was complications from heart surgery for which he was admitted on Sunday, the court said.


Umpires Trying to Block Replacements in Toronto
While talks in the umpires' labor dispute continued to go nowhere yesterday, the locked-out umpires planned to try to block the American League from using replacements for games in Toronto beginning with the Blue Jays' opener Wednesday night.
The Ontario Labor Board has scheduled a hearing for 9:30 A.M.
Wednesday on the umpires' argument that Ontario provincial law prohibits the use of replacement umpires at the Skydome.
It's the same law that would have prevented the Blue Jays from using replacement players there if the players' strike had continued.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball American League  BALTIMORE ORIOLES -- Agreed to terms with Andy Van Slyke, outfielder, on a one-year contract.
BOSTON RED SOX -- Agreed to terms with Tim Naehring, infielder, on a one-year contract.
CHICAGO WHITE SOX -- Optioned Dane Johnson, Matt Karchner and Steve Schrenk, pitchers, and Brandon Wilson, infielder, to Nashville of the American Association.
Assigned Dave Righetti, pitcher, and Dann Howitt and Jerry Wolak, outfielders, to Nashville.
CLEVELAND INDIANS -- Agreed to terms with Jason Grimsley, pitcher, on a two-year contract, and Herbert Perry, infielder; Manny Ramirez, outfielder; and Paul Shuey, Albie Lopez and Jim Lewis, pitchers, on one-year contracts.
DETROIT TIGERS -- Optioned Tony Clark, infielder, and Brian Maxcy, pitcher, to Toledo of the International League; Alvin Brown, Jose Lima and Justin Thompson, pitchers, to Lakeland of the Florida State League.
Assigned Kent Bottenfield, Dwayne Henry and Kevin Wickander, pitchers, and Kevin Baez and Alan Zinter, infielders, to Toledo.
Sent David Mysel, pitcher, outright to Lakeland.
Released Brian Barnes and Terry Leach, pithers, from their minor-league contracts.
Placed Greg Gohr, pitcher, on the disabled list, retroactive to April 19.
TEXAS RANGERS -- Agreed to terms with Jeff Frye, second baseman, and Roger Pavlik, pitcher, on one-year contracts.
Renewed the contracts of Hector Fajardo and Jerry Martin, pitchers.
Assigned Stanton Cameron, outfielder, to Oklahoma City of the American Association.
TORONTO BLUE JAYS -- Agreed to terms with Frank Viola, pitcher, on a minor-league contract.
Football National Football League  ATLANTA FALCONS -- Re-signed Alton Montgomery, safety, to a one-year contract.
BUFFALO BILLS -- Re-signed Carwell Gardner, fullback.
JACKSONVILLE JAGUARS -- Acquired Mark Brunell, quarterback, from the Green Bay Packers for third- and fifth-round 1995 draft picks.
Signed Brunell to a three-year contract.
NEW ENGLAND PATRIOTS -- Re-signed Brandon Moore, offensive tackle, and Terry Ray, safety.
SAN FRANCISCO 49ERS -- Matched the offer sheet to Derrick Deese, guard, by the St.
Louis Rams.


Stanley Works (SWK,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Carolina Power &amp; Light Co.  (CPL,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


An Associate Of Gribetz Talks Before Grand Jury
A close associate of Kenneth Gribetz, the longtime Rockland County District Attorney, has testified to a Federal grand jury looking into allegations that Mr.
Gribetz paid no taxes on referral fees he received from private lawyers, a lawyer close to the Gribetz case said today.
At the same time, lawyers for Mr.
Gribetz met this week in Manhattan with Mary Jo White, the United States Attorney for the Southern District, to forge a deal that would head off a possible indictment, another lawyer close to the case said.
Both lawyers disclosed recent developments on the condition that their identities be concealed.


Earth Day's Birthday
Earth Day celebrates its 25th birthday today, a bit frayed around the edges.
The energy of the youthful volunteers who protested the degradation of America's environment in 1970 has been replaced by an increasingly bureaucratic and sclerotic environmental establishment.
The Congress of Senators Edmund Muskie and Gaylord Nelson, which established the Environmental Protection Agency, protected endangered species and demanded cleaner air and water, is now in the hands of bean-counters and ideologues who would destroy those legislative achievements or make their enforcement impossible.


F.C.C. Weighs Plan to Shrink Murdoch Role
The Federal Communications Commission is weighing a staff recommendation that would force Rupert Murdoch's News Corporation to reduce sharply its ownership stake in the stations that make up the core of the Fox television network.
The recommendation, which if enacted could jolt Mr.
Murdoch's media empire, was prepared by the agency's mass media bureau after months of investigation into whether the stations were foreign owned.
It would require the News Corporation to reduce its stake in the eight television stations it now owns and also reduce its planned ownership stake in three other stations the company is in the process of acquiring.


FlightSafety International (FSI,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


M.T.A. Chief Quits
Peter E. Stangl, who led the Metropolitan Transportation Authority through four years of modernization and rising ridership, said he would resign as chairman and chief executive.
Gov.
George E. Pataki quickly used the vacancy to reorder the agency's top tier, splitting Mr.
Stangl's duties between two posts.
Article, page 29.


Brogna, Finally in Groove, Is Hurt
The saga of Rico Brogna took another twist today at Municipal Stadium, just as the Mets' first baseman was feeling that all his extra batting practice was finally beginning to pay off.
In his first at-bat, Brogna lined a single to help spark a three-run New York first inning that ultimately led to a 3-1 victory over the Montreal Expos, the team's seventh straight victory.


Orange &amp; Rockland Utilities Inc.(ORU,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


American Finds a Following For His Plays in London
Richard Nelson is a bicontinental playwright.
He discovered his career and his voice as an artist by becoming an American abroad.
He lives and writes in Rhinebeck, N.Y., but his plays have their premieres in London, where he is a playwright in residence at the Royal Shakespeare Company.
Though gratified by his English success, he suffers from a feeling of alienation from his native culture.
In his case, art benefits from life.
This sense of dislocation is the compelling theme of most of his plays.
He has written his last five plays on a Royal Shakespeare commission.
The first was "Some Americans Abroad," a comedy about American academics on a cultural tour of England; the play repeated its London success at Lincoln Center in 1990.
In a reverse twist, in Mr.
Nelson's latest play, "New England," all the characters are English.
The play is about some English men and women abroad in the United States.


BayBanks Inc.(BBNK,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Builders Transport Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


In a Kansas Army Town, Report of 2 Men in a Hurry
The day before he became one of the most hunted men in the world, Timothy McVeigh, or a look-alike, showed up at a hair salon here with a friend who wanted a haircut, said the salon owner, Kathy Henderson.
It was about noon Tuesday, less than 24 hours before the Alfred P. Murrah Federal Building was blown up in Oklahoma City.
One man, she said, had light hair and a crew cut.
The man who wanted a haircut had brown hair and a square jaw.


Sysco Corp.(SYY,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 1


Duriron Co. (DURI,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Sovereign Bancorp Inc.(SVRN,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Conner Closing In on Another Cup Defense
Dennis Conner, always the maestro in playing the wind shifts here, guided Stars &amp; Stripes to victory today and into a commanding position in the run for the America's Cup defender role.
Despite significant speed gains by his opponent, Mighty Mary, Stars &amp; Stripes was ahead by 1 minute 2 seconds at the finish to earn its fifth victory in six races of this final qualifying series.
A victory on Sunday against Young America would clinch for Conner another attempt to defend the cup, starting on May 6 against New Zealand's Black Magic.


Nalco Chemical Co.(NLC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Mallinckrodt Group Inc.(MKG,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Nashua Corp.(NSH,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Millipore Corp.(MIL,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Rome Prize Winners Are Announced
The winners of the annual Rome Prize Competition were announced yesterday by the American Academy in Rome, a center for independent study, advanced research and creative work in the arts and humanities.
The prizes, administered by the academy at its headquarters in New York City, include stipends, travel benefits and living and working accommodations at the academy's 11-acre Rome campus for six months to two years.
Money for the academy comes from private donations and from the National Endowment for the Arts and the National Endowment for the Humanities.
The 1995 Rome Prize Competition is sponsored in part by the Philip Morris Companies.


Uni-Marts Inc.(UNI,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 30


Russell Sprague, 79, Tambrands Chief
E.
Russell Sprague, a former chairman and chief executive of Tambrands Inc., which is based in White Plains, died on Thursday in Palmer, Mass.
He was 79 and lived in Palm City, Fla.
The cause was cancer, the family said.


Sutcliffe Goes Unsigned And So Calls It a Career
RICK SUTCLIFFE, apparently unwanted at 38, retired yesterday with a Rookie of the Year and a Cy Young award to show for 16 seasons in the major leagues.
The right-hander, whose career record was 171-139, made the announcement via fax from the office of his agent, BARRY AXELROD, in Encinitas, Calif.
Sutcliffe pitched last season for St.
Louis.
This retirement is the fourth this week of former All-Star pitchers, after JACK MORRIS and relievers RICH GOSSAGE and JEFF REARDON. (AP)


4 Killed in a Chemical Explosion
Four workers died and eight were hurt when an explosion ripped through a downtown chemical plant.
Law enforcement officials said the explosion, which forced the evacuation of 400 people, occurred in a large mixing vat that had not been working properly.
Page 1.


Union Texas Petroleum Holdings Inc.(UTH,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Public Service Co. of Colorado (PSR,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Majority of Simpson Jurors Rebel Over Ouster of Guards
In one of the strangest turns yet in the murder trial of O. J. Simpson, a clear majority of jurors staged a virtual insurrection today, sparked by Judge Lance A. Ito's decision on Thursday to replace three of the sheriff's deputies assigned to protect them.
Testimony came to a halt as Judge Ito moved quickly to keep the jury -- and the trial itself -- together.
For the first half of the day he met individually with some jurors and alternates, at least 13 of whom wore black, some from top to bottom, as if in mourning.
Conversely, three other jurors, including one who demanded on Thursday to be released, dressed conspicuously in color.


Con Ed Fined and Sentenced to Monitoring for Asbestos Cover-Up
A Federal judge sentenced Consolidated Edison yesterday to three years of probation under the supervision of a court-appointed monitor for failing to inform the Government about the release of asbestos into the air after a deadly steam pipe explosion in 1989.
The monitor is to insure that the company is complying with Federal environmental regulations.
It is unusual, though not unprecedented, for a judge to take such a step when a corporation violates environmental rules, prosecutors said.
The monitor's exact powers have not been worked out yet.


Zions Bancorp (ZION,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Why Single Out Pakistan, an Ally, for Aid Ban?; Earning Our Friendship
To the Editor:
Your editorial "Ms. Bhutto's Wish List" (April 13) is absolutely correct in arguing that Pakistan needs to take certain positive steps before the United States recognizes it as a friendly nation.


Good Guys Inc.(GGUY,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


In America; The Terrorists Failed
The communications technology is spectacular but inadequate.
No amount of gruesome live footage from network television, no amount of up-to-the-minute coverage of suspects and investigations, no amount of thoughtful, computer-crafted prose from the world of print can give us the answers we crave.
How, we want to know, can this be?


Forecast: Carter 1. Boselli 2. McNair 3?
Several themes are swirling around as the National Football League prepares to kick off its college draft at noon today at the Paramount in Madison Square Garden:
*The two expansion teams, Carolina and Jacksonville, will be participating in their first draft and both have a slew of extra picks to play with.
Carolina has the first choice in the draft and Jacksonville chooses second.
Both teams have 12 choices in the seven-round draft.


CHRONICLE
ALEXANDRA MOLTKE ISLES always knew that her father, Count Carl Adam Moltke, was in the Danish underground in World War II, but not until she began research for a documentary film about the Danish resistance did she realize the heroic role he had played.
"He used to joke about what he was doing," Ms.
Isles said the other day.
In producing and directing "The Power of Conscience," which will be shown on Channel 13 tomorrow at 5 P.M., she said she had learned that he was the liaison between the resistance and British intelligence and was involved in sabotage against the Germans.
"The key thing with Danes is modesty and self-deprecating humor," she said.


Forensic Experts Face Great Problems
Passers-by at Ninth Street and Stonewall hardly notice the gray, one-story building that houses the Oklahoma Medical Examiner's Office.
But inside, beyond the phalanx of security guards and F.B.I. agents, lies a charnel house where some of the most famous forensic experts in the world are trying to match up severed hands, jawbones and flesh with the names of possible bomb victims.


World News Briefs; Foundation Holds Hope For Aide in Chechnya
The president of the Soros Foundation, Aryeh Neier, said today that the foundation had received contradictory messages about Frederick C. Cuny, a disaster relief specialist who has disappeared in Chechnya, the secessionist republic.
"We do not despair," Mr.
Neier said today at a news conference.
"We think that it is probable that they are alive but unable to communicate." Mr.
Cuny has been assessing possible relief programs for the foundation.


DSC Communications Corp.(DIGI,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Advanta Corp.(ADVNA,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


E. P. Gallogly, 75, Rhode Island Judge
Edward P. Gallogly, a political and judicial leader in Rhode Island for more than three decades, died on Tuesday at his home in Wakefield, R.I.
He was 75.
The cause was a heart attack, said a son, Robert E. Gallogly of Chicago.


A Not-So-Fond Farewell to a Shrine
Naturally, the pieces to the world's most famous parquet floor were on the loading bins, and not over the ice, late yesterday morning at Boston Garden.
It was one final indignity to one last regular-season opponent.
"Why is the ice down when the Celtics have a game tonight?" the perceptive lady sitting to my right in one of those cramped, mustard-yellow Garden chairs asked during the 11 A.M. tour of America's oldest professional sports arena.


Two Convicted in Shootings At East Side Bridal Salon
A Manhattan jury convicted two men yesterday of attempted murder and robbery in the shooting of a Maryland couple during a robbery last year at the elegant showrooms of the Vera Wang Bridal House in the Hotel Carlyle on the Upper East Side.
The defendants, Randy Caggiano and Sandor Sebok, both 40, were convicted in the attack on Gerald and Edith Schaeffer, who were in Manhattan with their two daughters shopping for a wedding gown for one of them.


A Lot More Order in the Court
There's a lot more order in the court in Essex County, according to a new study that follows up on a 1990 report that found the court system backlog to be one of the worst in the country.
A Denver firm that conducted both studies found significant improvements from five years ago, when there were nearly 18,000 cases pending in Superior Court, 2,600 of them over a year old.
Now there are about 4,500 pending cases, 167 of them over a year old, in the state's busiest criminal court system.
Court personnel said the improvements resulted from automating records and assigning judges to more cases.


To Faure's Requiem
There can be few sweeter Requiems than that of Gabriel Faure.
Because the score, though often solemn, is always radiant, it consoles the bereaved by promising a realm beyond the grave where damnation is unknown, tears are wiped away and peace reigns eternally.
Mary Anthony, whose choreography has frequently been inspired by choral music, used a recording of this composition for "Requiem," which the Mary Anthony Dance Theater presented on Thursday night at the Merce Cunningham Studio.
Her new work began as a danced Passion play, then became a ceremony honoring all suffering humanity.


The Cost of Police Brutality
Police brutality has always scarred its victims and diminished public confidence in law enforcement.
In cash-starved New York City, police brutality is now a fiscal problem too.
The Civilian Complaint Review Board says that brutality complaints jumped by 37.4 percent between 1993 and 1994.
According to the Comptroller's office, brutality settlements and court judgments have cost the city $87 million over the last five years, with each year bringing higher costs than the one before.
Thus far this year, the city has paid out $9 million.
Lawyers for the city blame a litigious atmosphere that makes municipal government an easy target for lawsuits.
That may be a partial explanation.
But it is also true that New Yorkers who sit on juries are finding police brutality charges increasingly easy to believe.
That is particularly understandable if a juror lives in the Bronx, where there has been a deluge of brutality complaints in recent years.
Policing in the Bronx is admittedly no day at the beach; force is sometimes necessary.
But The Times's Clifford Krauss reports that as many as 40 officers and supervisors in that borough are now under scrutiny for brutality and other complaints.


Telefonica de Espana Plans for Competition
The chairman of Telefonica de Espana, Candido Velazquez-Gaztelu Ruiz, offered a five-year plan yesterday to smooth the company's transition to open competition.
At the company's annual meeting in Madrid, shareholders also approved a final dividend of 39 pesetas to bring Telefonica's total 1994 dividend to 66 pesetas (53 cents), compared with 62 pesetas for the previous year.


Suffolk County Officer Is Charged With Rape
A Suffolk County police officer was arraigned today on charges that he raped and sodomized one woman at gunpoint and terrorized two others after he stopped and questioned them while on duty.
The officer, Robert Freire, his wife standing nearby, pleaded not guilty to the charges this morning in Suffolk County Criminal Court in Riverhead before Judge Arthur Pitts.


Mueller Industries(MLI,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 1


Hannaford Bros. Co.(HRD,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 1


TNP Enterprises Inc.(TNP,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Has Brazil Earned Security Council Seat?
To the Editor:
President Fernando Henrique Cardoso of Brazil is making the case for admission to the United Nations Security Council.
Judging from your report on his United States visit (April 15), he has a list of selling points: large population, privatization program, increased trade, high economic growth and participation in U.N. peacekeeping operations.


AT&amp;T Capital Corp.(TCC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


COMPANY BRIEFS
BORG-WARNER AUTOMOTIVEINC., Chicago, has received a contract from General Motors Corp., Detroit, to design and produce a line of front-wheel- drive transmission chain systems.
Terms were not disclosed.
CARLISLE COMPANIES INC., Syracuse, said it had signed a letter of intent to acquire Trail King Industries, Mitchell, S.D., a maker of trailers used for transporting construction equipment, for undisclosed terms.


Allergan Inc.(AGN,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Summit Bancorp (N.J.) (SUBN,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


BMC Industries Inc.(BMC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Bank South Corp.(BKSO,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Cameco Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Bearings Inc.(BER,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Cleveland-Cliffs (CLF,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Government Acted to Halt Gas Attack at Disneyland
The Government recently deployed a secret emergency response team to thwart an apparent threat to release deadly nerve gas in the United States, a White House official acknowledged this morning.
The Baltimore Sun reported in its Saturday edition that the plot involved a Japanese cult's plan to release toxic sarin gas like that used in the Tokyo subway attack at Disneyland during the crowded Easter weekend.
But the official could not confirm the location or other details contained in the Sun account.


Despite Hoopla, Knicks Do the Job
The Knicks said goodbye to the Boston Garden the way they wanted to -- with a victory.
In a game that both Patrick Ewing (slightly pulled left hamstring) and Derek Harper (sore left ankle) sat out, the Knicks outlasted the Celtics, 99-92, in the final regular-season game at the storied arena.
But despite losing for the 11th consecutive time to the Knicks, the Celtics (35-46) backed into the final Eastern Conference playoff spot.
Cleveland's 103-82 victory over the Milwaukee Bucks tonight eliminated the Bucks, and insured that the Celtics would play at least one more game at the Garden before moving across the street next season to the new Fleet Center.


Chemical Plant Explosion Kills 4 in New Jersey Town
An old chemical plant in the heart of downtown Lodi exploded and burned this morning, killing four workers, injuring eight others, forcing the evacuation of nearby homes and sending a dense plume of toxic black smoke over much of western Bergen County.
The blast at Napp Technologies, which had a history of environmental violations and workplace accidents, was described as an industrial accident, apparently tied to a malfunctioning mixing vat for chemicals.
Residents were urged today to keep their windows closed, and their children and pets off the street in case smoke from the plant was dangerous.


International Shipholding Corp.(ISH,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Hemlo Gold Mines (HEM,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


INSIDE
M.T.A. Chief Resigns
Peter E. Stangl, who led the Metropolitan Transportation Authority through four years of modernization and rising ridership, announced his resignation.
Page 25.
Court Monitor for Con Ed
A Federal judge has ordered that Consolidated Edison be supervised by a court-appointed monitor to insure that it complies with environmental regulations.
Page 25.
U.S.
Chides Saudi Arabia
Secretary of State Christopher charged that Saudi Arabia failed to cooperate with an American effort to seize a terrorist.
Page 5.
A Bid to North Korea
In an effort to rescue its nuclear agreement with North Korea, the United States offered to raise negotiations to a senior level.
Page 5.
Lesbian Denied Custody
A mother failed to win back her 3-year-old when Virginia's highest court ruled that her lesbianism could "stigmatize" the child.
Page A6.


Harris Steel Group reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Observer; Groggy With Spring
A telestupor fills the room.
Hours have I been here?
Days?
Weeks?
No, no, it is this overpowering drowsiness that distorts all time.
"Time warp," people say nowadays.
"Spring fever," we used to call it.
We were younger then of course, of course, of course.
Pre-time-warp people said things like "spring fever." Didn't use vile language either when they wanted to signify they felt peppy enough to cuss right out loud.


The Back Catalogue Makes a Jam
At a sold-out concert on Thursday night at the Mercury Lounge in the East Village, Alex Chilton flipped through pop's back catalogue, performing soul, rhythm-and-blues, surf, doo-wop and rock songs, some of them bygone hits, some obscure gems and others from his own career, which stretches back to the late 1960's.
Mr.
Chilton is an artist not afraid to set his own rules.
Because of this, his style of songwriting, his productivity and the quality of his work have varied greatly.
His music ranges from his singing stint in the Box Tops (with whom he recorded the 1967 hit "The Letter") to his time in the influential 1970's guitar-pop band Big Star to his present eclectic solo career.


Mandela's Star Rising In Corporate Circles
Nearly a year after winning South Africa's first free elections, President Nelson Mandela seems to be winning over a second, more skeptical electorate -- the investors who will determine whether his country's young democracy prospers or withers.
Foreign capitalists who a few months ago dawdled at the threshold, anxious about political instability and militant unions and a Government riddled with Communists, have begun snapping up office space.


Mozdok Journal; Korean Missionaries Sow Christianity in Caucasus
Soon Yang Lee, a Korean-American missionary from Los Angeles, has come to Russia to save souls.
She recognizes that she is hardly the first to undertake this task and that much work needs to be done.
"The Russian soul is rotten," she said quietly.
"Whatever is written in the Bible, they do the opposite."


Willcox &amp; Gibbs Inc.(WG,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Arnold Johnson Memorial
A memorial service for Arnold P. Johnson, a Harlem community leader and the first black trustee of the Metropolitan Museum of Art, will be at 10 A.M. on May 1 at the First Bethel A.M.E.
Church, 60 West 132d Street, Manhattan.
Speakers will include Representative Charles B. Rangel; Percy E. Sutton and Basil A. Paterson, former political leaders, and Thomas P. G. Hoving, former director of the Met.


Meet Hillary Rodham Clinton, the Traditional First Lady
The American public is about to get a fuller look at another side of Hillary Rodham Clinton, one more in line with the traditional image of First Ladies.
It will not be the Hillary Clinton of the health care battles, or the one defending her investment practices or the one making campaign speeches for her husband.


Justice Scalia's Poetic License
"Separation of powers, a distinctively American political doctrine, profits from the advice authored by a distinctively American poet: Good fences make good neighbors." With this dictum Justice Antonin Scalia, writing for a Supreme Court majority, justified a high, rigid wall of constitutional separation of powers.
In an otherwise prosaic case he struck down an act of Congress governing the length of time available to file stock fraud suits.
The poet Robert Frost gave no such advice, though Justice Scalia is not the first to say he did.
His poem, "Mending Wall," makes the case against walls.
A character in the poem does utter the "good neighbors" sentiment.
But the poet casts him as a barbaric next-door neighbor to the poem's speaker, presumably a New England country dweller, who questions such sloganeering.


Florida Progress Corp.(FPC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Apache Corp.(APA,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Viola Gets Minor League Deal
Another former Cy Young award winner, FRANK VIOLA, who pitched in only six games last season for the Red Sox because of an elbow injury, has agreed to a minor league contract with the Toronto Blue Jays and will start the season at their extended spring-training camp in Dunedin, Fla.


Stone &amp; Webster Inc.(SW,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Lots of Classical Carnality, But It's All Talk, Talk, Talk
No one actually has sex in "Phaedra," Matthew Maguire's heavy-breathing take on the Racine classic, but, boy, everybody sure likes to talk about it.
Whether couched in nautical, horticultural, equestrian or zoological metaphors, the subject of Mr.
Maguire's deep purple dialogue is usually carnal.
Physical follow-through is another matter.
In this contemporary, rather silly revision of the story of a woman doomed by her passion for her stepson, the title character isn't the only victim of thwarted lust.
Each of the characters has designs on one, or even several, of the others that will never be consummated.
Flesh itself, as Phaedra (who is called Faye here and played by Socorro Santiago) suggests, may be only an illusion.


Mysterious Fumes in Japan Store Send 24 to Hospitals
Two dozen shoppers were hospitalized tonight in Yokohama after suffering from strange fumes in a department store.
The incident added to a nationwide sense of alarm about the possibility of poison-gas attacks in public places.
It was the second such incident in three days, and it recalled the far more serious nerve-gas attack last month on the Tokyo subway system, which killed 12 people and injured more than 5,500.


Among a City's Attractions: Smells
AS it turns out, this city doesn't smell half bad.
"There are really wonderful scents out there," said Annette Green, the president and founder of the Olfactory Research Fund, which, as its brochures explain, is "a charitable organization whose unique mission is to explore the importance of smell and human response to odors in enhancing the quality of life."


Clemens to Undergo Tests
ROGER CLEMENS, who had already been scratched from his opening-day assignment with the Red Sox, will leave spring training so he can return to Boston for tests on his sore right shoulder, he said yesterday after cutting short a warm-up session.


Northeast Federal Corp.(NSB,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


UJB Financial Corp.(UJB,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Albank Financial Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


20th Century Industries(TW,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
9.00
9.00
6.75
DISCOUNT RATE
5.25
5.25
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
5.94
5.96
3.70
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.60
5.58
3.74
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.69
5.67
4.19
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.99
7.00
6.92
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.33
7.34
7.22
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.18
8.22
8.02
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.22
6.21
6.30
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills 8


Iran Criticizes U.S. Nuclear Policy, but Declines to Block Debate on Treaty
Iran accused the United States today of trying to block its access to peaceful nuclear technology while turning a blind eye to Israel's nuclear weapons program.
Speaking to a conference that will decide the future of the 25-year-old treaty that bans the spread of nuclear weapons, the Iranian Foreign Minister, Ali Akbar Velayati, said that discrimination in nuclear matters was part of "an ever widening gap between promises and realities over the past quarter century."


Clorox Co. (CLX,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


An International Mix By the Philharmonic
Why the current program of the New York Philharmonic makes a satisfying whole is not entirely clear.
Yes, mini-themes cross paths: explorations of national musical character in Poulenc's "Suite Francaise" and Copland's "Rodeo"; evocations of home life in Dominick Argento's "Casa Guidi" and Toru Takemitsu's "Family Tree." And all four works adopt conservative (in Poulenc's case, antiquarian) 20th-century idioms.
Yet four more diverse creations could hardly be imagined.


Meridian Bancorp Inc.(MRDN,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Chase Brass Industries Inc.(CSI,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


E-L Financial reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


UMB Financial Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


CTS Corp.(CTS,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 2


West One Bancorp (WEST,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Reed May Be Reassigned
The Nets' ownership is still debating what role Willis Reed will have in the organization next season, but one thing is clear: He will remain with the franchise in some capacity.
"Willis is staying," said one of the team's seven owners, who spoke on condition of anonymity.
He refused, however, to say whether Reed will remain in his current role as the Nets' executive vice president and general manager next season.


Relaxing Together In Warmth And Blur
Little-played music has a perverse habit of showing up in flurries.
Indeed, no sooner had Colin Davis brought the Sibelius Sixth Symphony to the New York Philharmonic a few weeks ago than the same enigmatic piece showed up on Wednesday night at the first of two San Francisco Symphony programs at Carnegie Hall.
Its four movements vary in mood and level of declamation, but a certain static quality hangs over all of them.
Musical exposition does not so much begin and end as appear and disappear, often with little warning.
Dynamic gesture is tempered by soft modal whole-step resolutions.
Herbert Blomstedt's conducting probably had a lot to do with the very different character of Wednesday's performance; for where Mr.
Davis and his Philharmonic players had produced fine, clear outlines, the San Francisco players smothered Sibelius in a warm, loosely organized indeterminacy.


Hey! Wipe That Smile Off Your Face.
Break out the party hats!
As the Dow Jones industrial average continues to climb to new heights (it hit 4,270 on Friday), investors appear to have started hurling confetti in earnest.
Shares are changing hands at a rapid pace, money is flowing into mutual funds faster than at any time in the last six months, and some investors are prattling happily about Dow 5,000 -- this year.


Uninhibited, Opinionated, It Must Be Helen Mirren
ONE OF HOLLYWOOD'S MOST open secrets is that the acclaimed British actress Helen Mirren actually lives here.
Few seem to notice, however.
"People always tell me how much they love my work, but they never ask me to do anything," she said not long ago with a shrug and a laugh.
"I'm a difficult person to fit into the American film thing."
It was mid-morning and Ms.
Mirren was seated in a near-empty cafe on the edge of Hollywood, sipping cappuccino and wishing briefly that she were elsewhere.
She wanted to talk about her forthcoming Broadway stage debut, but another drama had intervened.


Even Now, There's Money to Be Made in Japan
MUTUAL fund investors would be hard pressed to find a more contrarian bet than Japan.
The Japanese economy is in serious trouble, in part because the soaring yen makes its goods so expensive in falling dollars.
But after a devastating first quarter, a number of portfolio managers and investors have started creeping back into Japanese equities.
And so far, the wager has paid off.


Margaret Falk, Stephen Steckel
Margaret Miller Falk, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Sigo Falk of Pittsburgh, was married yesterday to Stephen Colton Steckel, a son of Edwin Moore Steckel Jr. of Annapolis, Md., and Carol Colton Steckel of Naples, Fla.
The Very Rev.
George L. Werner, Dean of Trinity Cathedral in Pittsburgh, performed the ceremony there.
Mrs.
Steckel, 29, is an architectural designer in Pittsburgh.
She graduated cum laude from Yale University and received a master's degree in architecture from the University of Virginia.
Her father is the chairman of the Maurice Falk Medical Fund, a charitable foundation in Pittsburgh.
Her mother is the policy development specialist at Family Services of Western Pennsylvania, a counseling and mental health center in Pittsburgh.


Doctors Go Jobless, Patients Do Without
To the Editor:
Your April 15 front-page article featuring an unemployed eye surgeon confirms the decline in American health care.
When I was growing up in the 1940's and 50's, my family saw an eye doctor every year; so did my own children in the 70's and 80's.
Now, my family and I never see one.


Oksana Demediuk, Randy Dhaliwal
Dr.
Oksana Maria Demediuk and Dr.
Ranjit Singh Dhaliwal, both ophthalmologists, were married yesterday at the Princeton University Chapel in Princeton, N.J.
The Rev.
Paul Labinsky performed the Ukrainian Catholic ceremony.
Dr.
Demediuk, 37, is keeping her name.
She practiced until recently in Clark, N.J., and plans later this year to join the Southeast Retina Center, where her husband practices, in Augusta, Ga.
She graduated from Princeton and received her medical degree from the University of Cincinnati.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Dmytro Demediuk of Highland Park, N.J.
Her father retired as a senior group supervisor at the Davy McKee Corporation, a civil engineering concern.
Her mother, also retired, was a piano teacher.


Peninsulas Joined


'Laureate' in a Land of Zen and Microchips
IF LOUIS KAHN HAD BEEN Japanese, he would have been Tadao Ando.
But perhaps that is too easy.
Mr.
Ando, a 53-year-old former boxer, self- trained as an architect, who last week was named the 18th winner of the Pritzker Prize, could not be more different in background or temperament from Kahn, who died in 1974.
True, Mr.
Ando's brooding and powerful concrete buildings do bear some similarity to Kahn's own.
But the real reason it seems so natural to think of Louis Kahn and Tadao Ando together is that Mr.
Ando's work possesses a degree of moral authority not seen in architecture since Kahn.
The Pritzker, the international award that has often been called architecture's Nobel, has, since it was established in 1979, gone to a wide range of architects, from theorists like Aldo Rossi to commercial practitioners like Gordon Bunshaft.
With this year's award to Mr.
Ando, the Pritzker takes a strong stand in favor of commitment to the highest esthetics and craftsmanship.


Treating Malaria
To the Editor: As director of the Kuvin Center for the Study of Infectious and Tropical Diseases in Jerusalem, I read with puzzlement the medical advice given to James Heer to cure his Plasmodium vivax infection: "All I could do, the doctor said, was to take high doses of chloroquine and hope for the best" ("Shake, Shiver and Ache," March 5).
This medical advice is certainly not all he can do to avoid further illness and distress.
Mr.
Heer can avoid relapses of malaria by following the standard therapy given to cure this specific malaria infection.
The malaria parasite P. vivax differs from P. falciparum, the other common but more deadly form of the parasite, by taking refuge in the liver, and can be eradicated only if the drug Primaquine is given for 14 days after the standard course of chloroquine therapy.
What is of concern is that other patients who follow the medical advice given to Mr.
Heer may bring unnecessary suffering upon themselves.


Calls for Toms Only In the Spring Season
Dedicated New York State turkey hunters are already scouting hardwood hillsides for signs and sounds of the bearded male birds, known as gobblers or toms, that will be legal game during the month of May.
This preseason rambling is also a good way to begin conditioning yourself for the considerable hiking that such hunting entails.


Europe by Train And by Bus
HERE is a roundup of recent information about getting around Europe on the ground.
The railroads have a couple of new bargains, and there is a brand-new economy bus service.
Travel agents sell the vast majority of both European and British rail passes, partly because the options are confusing but also because travel agents can circumvent the customary clogged phone lines by using computer reservation services both to request brochures and to make reservations.


Eclectic In the East Village
BOCA CHICA ++ (212) 473-0108; 13 First Avenue, at First Street; $; American Express, Mastercard, Visa, Discover
The kitchen at this brightly decorated spot turns out a spirited eclectic mix of Latin American cuisines using bold flavors of chilies, citrus and garlic.
To begin, shrimp Ticul is addictive -- grilled and served in a spicy green poblano chili and lime sauce.
Grilled chicken wings are meaty and tender, marinated in honey and spices, and green plantain croquettes come with a spicy salsa.
Main courses include pasta tossed with shrimp and clams in a tomato sauce; corn souffle with a stew of chicken, raisins and tomato, and grilled pork chops topped with a hot and sweet salsa and served with rice and beans. ($25 and Under: 4/10/92)


Mighty Mary Beats Young America, Keeping Hope Alive
On the brink of being eliminated from its historic entry in the America's Cup, Mighty Mary's mostly women's crew rallied again today to stave off defeat in the defenders' finals.
In a race that Mighty Mary dominated from the start, the team held back a lackluster assault from Young America to win the match by 1 minute 8 seconds.
Even with its victory, Mighty Mary stands to be locked out of its attempt to win the right to defend the America's Cup by the outcome of racing Sunday.


Rockies Are Rich and the Padres Aren't Poor
COLORADO ROCKIES
It just goes to show what a team can do when seemingly everyone in the Mountain time zone of the United States goes to watch it play.
Drawing nearly 8 million fans in their first two seasons, the Rockies used $35 million of the revenue to sign one free agent to lead their pitching staff and another to lead their hitting staff.
The Rockies already had a good hitting team, and this one will be even lustier with Dante Bichette, Andres Galarraga and Larry Walker in the middle of the lineup.
Swift, on the other hand, joins a staff whose 5.15 e.r.a. was the league's worst.


On Long Island, the Bluebird Is Making a Comeback
The Eastern bluebird, which disappeared from the fields and meadows of Long Island nearly 50 years ago, is making a comeback.
Naturalists recorded the first sightings of the bird's telltale blue wings and rusty red breast three years ago in secluded corners of the eastern end of the Island.
Now, they report that the bluebird, a small member of the thrush family and the state bird of New York, is building nests in boxes and old crab apple trees as far west as the middle of Nassau County, less than 20 miles from mid-Manhattan.


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
ART AND FLOWERS
The Wadsworth Atheneum's annual spring Fine Art and Flowers show will be held for four days this year, from Wednesday through Saturday, featuring several events.
Co-sponsored by the West Hartford Garden Club, it is one of the museum's more productive fund-raisers.
More than 60 floral arrangements and garden settings will be displayed, keyed to works of art in the museum collections.
Daily admission from 11 A.M. to 5 P.M. will be $5; $4 for people 62 and older, $1 for children under 13.
Guided tours will be offered on Thursday through Saturday at 2 P.M.


Following Guidelines For Good Renovations
THE appearance of the first crocuses and daffodils does more than stir up spring fever in many homeowners.
Like a longstanding relationship where a mate's initially charming idiosyncrasies begin to grate as annoying personality quirks, the first signs of spring seem to highlight property flaws -- and the desire to do something about them.
In the first flush of enthusiasm to embark on the renovation of a kitchen, bathroom, deck or master bedroom, even the most sophisticated consumers can make mistakes in hiring the right contractor.
A mismatch between a contractor's prior experience and a consumer's expectations can transform a productive collaboration into a nightmare.
Or a homeowner's repeated requests for changes in the original plan can delay completion of a renovation and drive up the cost.


Foreman Takes a Beating, but Keeps Title
George Foreman's venture into Generation X backfired tonight.
The nation had waited for Foreman to act his age, and this evening, an unknown German turned the clock forward.
Foreman did not look 46; he seemed in his 50's.
By fight's end, the champion's left eyebrow was swollen three times its normal size, and he was bailed out only by judges who awarded him a majority decision that brought booing.
Axel Schulz, a 26-year-old native of the former East Germany, was supposed to dance away from Foreman, but instead he opened a new debate: whether Foreman should quit.


Market Timing
Today Policy makers of the I.M.F. and World Bank gather in Washington to begin their Spring meetings.
Today, the I.M.F. will release its semiannual look at the global economy.
Monday The Justice Department and Microsoft appear before the United States Court of Appeals in Washington to appeal a Federal judge's rejection of their antitrust settlement.
Analysts expect Amoco to announce earnings of 89 cents a share, Exxon to come in at $1.06, Minnesota Mining and Manufacturing at 88 cents, Texaco 85 cents and USX $1.07.
Tuesday Finance ministers and central bankers from the Group of Seven nations are meeting in Washington.
They are expected to discuss how to shore up the weakening dollar, although many analysts doubt any action will be taken.
Existing home sales for March.
Forecast: up 2.9 percent, to 3.53 million.
Consumer confidence index for April.
Forecast: 99.1, down from 101 in March.
The Major League Baseball season finally opens tonight, with the Dodgers playing the Marlins in Florida.
Chevron is expected to report earnings of 65 cents a share and Monsanto $1.90 a share.
Wednesday Durable goods order for March.
Analysts say inventories of durable goods rose sharply during the month, indicating that consumer demand has cooled.
Forecast: down 0.1 percent.
Analysts estimate that Baker Hughes should report earnings at 17 cents a share and DuPont at $1.20 a share.
Thursday Dow Chemical earnings expected at $1.71 a share; Procter &amp; Gamble at 94 cents a share.
Friday First-quarter G.D.P.
Forecast: up 2.9 percent.


Black Students Revel in Atlanta Despite Cool Welcome
A spate of minor incidents at the annual Freaknik celebration, which attracts thousands of black college students to the city for a spring break weekend, served today to fuel anger and debate over the less-than-welcoming attitude the city is showing the event this year.
Many black college students say the position of the administration of Mayor Bill Campbell is one of discouragement, the result of pressure on city officials from white residents and white business leaders in the city, which is 66 percent black.
The biggest complaint of some of the participants was that the city refused to issue permits for entertainment events as they had in the past.


S. J. Eisenstein, Jonathan Kerz
Susan Jill Eisenstein, a daughter of Joan and Howard L. Eisenstein of New York, is to be married today at the Essex House in New York to Jonathan Leo Kerz, a son of Louise Kerz of New York and the late Leo Kerz.
Rabbi Ronald B. Sobel is to officiate.


Earth Day Greenwash Hides Toxic Assault
To the Editor:
Your April 18 Science Times assessment that "an emerging public perception" sees an improving natural environment seems a classic exercise in manufacturing consent.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League  BALTIMORE ORIOLES -- Optioned Curtis Goodwin and Jim Wawruck, outfielders, to Rochester of the International League.


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
Jones Beach: Inside Story
GEORGE AND MARIANNE PETERS took a tour of Jones Beach this month and never saw the ocean.
They paid $40 a person, along with a busload of other Long Islanders, for a visit to the Water Tower, Marine Theater, bathhouses and maintenance center -- all architectural wonders, according to officials of the Society for the Preservation of Long Island Antiquities, which sponsored the tour.
The lure of the 66-year-old park may be in its buildings as much as its beach.
"We had a waiting list for those who wanted to come," Carol Traynor of the society said.


Another Shot of Little India, From a Less-Exotic Angle
To The Editor:
The interesting portrait of a special police officer "The Cop in Little India" (April 9) was diminished by misreporting about the neighborhood and its people, and by The New York Times's penchant for fawning over the exotic.


Utah's Claim to Fame: No. 1 in a Family Way
After a single year in which they gave up the No. 1 ranking, the women of Utah are back doing what they do better than women of any other state: having babies at an unmatched pace.
Shaking a 19th-century stigma for its early acceptance of polygamy, the Beehive State has become a nuclear family nirvana, of sorts.
It ranks last in unwed teen-age mothers and first in fertility rate.
One of every 10 residents is under the age of 5.


North Korea Threat Seen on Halt of Atom Talks
In what could be a threat to reactivate its nuclear program, North Korea said today that it would take a "necessary decisive measure" following the breakdown of its negotiations with the United States.
But its vaguely worded statement did not say what the action would be and seemed to leave the door open for renewed negotiations with the United States, as the Clinton Administration has proposed.


THE BOSNIAN CALCULATION
ALL TOLD, HOW MANY PEOPLE HAVE DIED IN Bosnia?
For news organizations and policy specialists, the easy answer is 200,000.
As someone who has followed the conflict closely from the beginning in a professional capacity, I'm not convinced.
Bosnia isn't the Holocaust or Rwanda; it's Lebanon.
A relatively large number of white people have been killed in gruesome fashion in the first European blowup since World War II.
In response, the United Nations has set up the first international war crimes trials since Nuremberg.
But that doesn't mean the Bosnian Serbs' often brutal treatment of Bosnian Muslims is a unique genocide, as the United Nations and the Bosnian Muslims have charged.


Bluegrass, Straight and Pure, Even if the Money's No Good
IT'S A COLD SATURDAY NIGHT here, but that isn't why the audience inside the Capitol Music Hall has the shivers.
It's the man onstage.
Del McCoury is singing in a mountain tenor so high, so blue, so lonesome that it seems he, or the audience, could swoon for lack of oxygen.
It's a midnight voice, a voice to make you hit the bottle one moment, then drop to your knees and pray the next.
"The shadows are creeping around my door," he keens as a bluegrass fiddle sobs.
"The sun will soon go down. The night birds are crying away on the mountain. I'm the bluest man in town."
In that chilling voice there's a wreck of a man creaking down a back road at 3 in the morning, there's a night train howling, a ribby dog barking.
It's a voice tempered by all the hopes and fears that make one human, as good a voice as has ever been heard in bluegrass music, maybe in all country music.
White soul.


A Dissenting Voice
To the Editor:
By entrusting to Michael Ignatieff the task of reviewing David Rieff's and Tom Gjelten's books on the war in Bosnia (Feb. 26), you have done a disservice to your readers.
Mr.
Ignatieff shares the two authors' major perceptions and explanations of the war, as well as their political commitment to one of the warring sides.
Their writings, all in the same vein, have flooded the upscale magazines, from The New Republic to The New Yorker, drowning out the very possibility of hearing a dissenting voice, if any would dare speak.
Instead of a critical analysis of the authors' major positions, readers of the Book Review got another newsletter from a mutual admiration society.


Howard Shifts Locker Rooms
Erik Howard's eight years with the Giants ended today and he merely shifted locker rooms.
He became a Jet.
The long-time nose tackle, who switched to defensive tackle last year, will also play defensive tackle on the Jets.
He will line up alongside Tony Casillas, which could give the Jets a strong surge up the middle -- especially if their first-round pick of today, Hugh Douglas, provides an outside pass rush.


Perfectly Tuned Actors Hit a High Note
WHAT DOES THEATER give us that nothing else can -- not so intensely anyway, or so pleasurably?
It gives us human beings in three dimensions: bodies that live in front of us, that move, speak, change shape, create tension or bestow peace.
Film takes us into the world as it is when we're not there, letting us watch it from angles we could never manage to find in life.
But theater insists on our presence.
We're there in the dark with the actors, breathing or trying not to breathe, laughing, then trying to control ourselves so they can go on, synchronizing our internal clocks with theirs, silently asking them to rearrange time and space for us.
Walk into the Minetta Lane Theater in Greenwich Village, where "Travels With My Aunt" is now playing, and you will see a leaf-green stage set of a world.
There are four green tables, each with three green chairs, a tea service and a folded newspaper.
The lights are blue, green and intermittently pink.
Pennants and streamers will unfurl at dramatically opportune moments.
Pots of blissfully fake geraniums frame the stage.
Everything around you is saying "Let's pretend." And when four ostentatiously English men in identical suits walk out, sit down, take tea, open their eyeglass cases and pick up their newspapers in unison, the game has begun.


Kotite's First 2 Picks: A Surprise and an Unknown
The Jets completed a remarkable 24 hours today, snaring two first-round picks (with a surprising top choice) in the National Football League college draft, trading up in the second round and then acquiring an ex-Giant in Erik Howard -- all on the day after they traded their only Pro Bowl player, receiver Rob Moore.
It was an eventful day as Rich Kotite made his first draft pick as a Jets head coach and surprised the football world, bringing boos from the draftniks at the Paramount in New York and head-scratching from observers who seemed convinced he would take a pass rusher or wide receiver.


Left Behind -- A special report.; When One Spouse Is Gay And a Marriage Unravels
For 13 years, Linda Selig felt the lack of intimacy slowly snuffing out her marriage, but whenever she brought it up her husband insisted that everything was fine, that he was happy.
"The whole time I felt there was something wrong with me: I wasn't pretty enough or smart enough," Ms.
Selig said.
Three weeks after she moved out, her husband, John R. Selig, told her and their 12-year-old son that he was gay.
Far from at last explaining her marital troubles, the revelation plunged her deeper into depression.
"All the assumptions I'd made about men, women, family had just gotten blown to hell," Ms.
Selig said.
She spent days unable to get out of bed, crying 15 hours at a stretch.


Magic: Worried, Worn or Warming Up?
The complimentary tickets were in the right envelopes.
The pen was in Shaquille O'Neal's hand.
All he had to do was fill in the mandatory blanks.
"What's today's date?" he said, without looking up.


In India, U.S. Diplomacy Is Sounding a Lot Like Economics
Just hours before Treasury Secretary Robert E. Rubin and his entourage landed amid the chaos and crushing poverty of this historic trading center, the power grid for much of the area failed, plunging the homes that have electric power into darkness.
Such failures are fairly common here.
But for Mr.
Rubin, the fourth American Cabinet member to visit India since the start of the year, the timing was exquisite.
Each official came to persuade India's leaders that it was not in their interest to allow a slowing in the broad movement to open their economy.


School-Election Close-Up: 2 Wins, 1 Loss, 1 Surprise; South River
In the middle-class Middlesex County suburb of South River, the results were nothing short of startling.
Residents approved the school budget for only the third time in 31 years.
As budgets go, it was more palatable than most, with an actual decrease in spending from last year's budget.
Taxes increased, but by just half a percentage point -- $13 for the average homeowner. (The tax burden went up because the school board applied less surplus money to this year's budget, and made up for it in part through the tax increase.) Voter turnout was light, about 11 percent, with 442 in favor of the $14,116,625 budget and 351 against it.


A Reader's Guide
A NATURAL HISTORY OF NATURE WRITING.
By Frank Stewart.
Shearwater/Island Press.
Cloth, $32.50; paper, $16.95.
In this deft celebration of nature writing from Thoreau to Edward Abbey, an essayist and poet demonstrates how profoundly the genre has influenced American literature and our national character.
ECOPSYCHOLOGY: Restoring the Earth, Healing the Mind.
Edited by Theodore Roszak, Mary E. Gomes and Allen D. Kanner.
Sierra Club.
Paper, $15 (June).
It isn't simply the scramble for profits that leads to environmental devastation, and laws alone won't alter our exploitive behavior, the psychologists and scholars in this collection say.
Their essays, ranging from the persuasive to the airily speculative, probe for the root of our often destructive attitudes toward nature.
THE PRAIRIE KEEPERS: Secrets of the Grasslands.
By Marcy Houle.
Addison-Wesley. $20.
Even a modest landscape can harbor a complex mix of species, as a wildlife biologist discovered when she set out to investigate one patch of prairie in Oregon.
This lively record of the delicate ways humans alter seemingly untouched ground is a particularly effective portrait of an ecosystem.
LET THE MOUNTAINS TALK, LET THE RIVERS RUN: Prescriptions for Our Planet.
By David Brower with Steve Chapple.
HarperCollins. $20.
Partial victories and piecemeal efforts won't work, according to the dean of American conservationists, who argues in a series of salty, often very personal monologues that nothing less than a worldwide crusade of environmental restoration can avert the collapse of modern society.
A YEAR IN THE MAINE WOODS.
By Bernd Heinrich.
William Patrick/Addison-Wesley. $22.
A writer and zoologist tells of four seasons in a cabin in a Northern forest.
These passionate observations of a place "where the subtle matters and the spectacular distracts" superbly mix memoir and science.
THE FUTURE OF THE ENVIRONMENT: Ecological Economics and Technological Change.
By Faye Duchin and Glenn-Marie Lange with Knut Thonstad and Annemarth Idenburg.
Oxford University. $29.95.
The bottom line in this application of economic principles to the environment is that present plans for recycling, fuel efficiency and pollution abatement don't do enough.
THE TRUE STATE OF THE PLANET.
Edited by Ronald Bailey.
Free Press.
Paper, $15.
In one of the few books timed for Earth Day that argue that things may not be as bad as they seem, researchers conclude that the perils of deforestation and global warming are exaggerated but the oceans are in trouble.
ECOLOGICAL IDENTITY: Becoming a Reflective Environmentalist.
By Mitchell Thomashow.
MIT. $25.
This attempt to cool hostilities between the tree huggers and the enviro-bashers explores the spiritual benefits of activism.
ECOCIDE OF NATIVE AMERICA: Environmental Destruction of Indian Lands and Peoples.
By Donald A. Grinde and Bruce E. Johansen.
Clear Light. $24.95.
A terse report on the contamination of Indian reservations by industrial waste and radiation also argues that the Indian philosophy of sustainable land use is the model for the future.
EARTH WARRIOR: Overboard With Paul Watson and the Sea Shepherd Conservation Society.
By David B. Morris.
Fulcrum.
Paper, $14.95.
This admiring chronicle of the wars of the Sea Shepherd II and its captain against Pacific drift-net fleets presents Paul Watson, a founder of Greenpeace, as "a cross between St. Francis and Rambo."
BUT IS IT TRUE?
A Citizen's Guide to Environmental Health and Safety Issues.
By Aaron Wildavsky.
Harvard University. $30 (May).
Global warming.
Acid rain.
Ozone holes.
Just how much are we really at risk?
This careful analysis of the evidence concludes that aside from ozone depletion, claims of imminent catastrophe are "mostly false, unproven or negligible."
THE NEW ECOLOGICAL ORDER.
By Luc Ferry.
Translated by Carol Volk.
University of Chicago.
Cloth, $34.95; paper, $14.95 (July).
A professor of philosophy at the Sorbonne dissects the influential theory of "deep ecology," which asserts that even trees and rocks should be granted legal rights to protect nature from humans.
He finds it irrational and antidemocratic.


The Man Who Memorized New Jersey
MIDMORNING, and the telephone is already anchored to Charles Cummings's ear.
Hunched over his desk, one of New Jersey's most distinguished historians is answering one of the less taxing questions of his career.
"It's D-U-N-E-L-L-E-N," he says in a gentle librarian's tone.
"Little town in Middlesex County."
Minutes later, a man approaches with another brain teaser: How does one get from Newark to Vineland?
Mr.
Cummings produces a crumpled map and instantly traces a route.
The man embarks on his journey, and the connoisseur of New Jersey trivia returns to his cluttered desk.
"This is the library of last resort," he says as the phone jangles again.
"The question stops here."


Highly Evolved
A new generation of men is returning to a classic style of dress set in place by the movie idols and social figures of the 1930's, 40's and 50's.
Those were years when men dressed by the rules of acceptable and appropriate taste, carefully choosing their tailor for his skill at cutting and fitting suit jackets rather than for flashy design innovations.
Men of taste have never discarded the suit styles that have proven successful in the business world -- styles based on evolution, not revolution.
This spring, many young men have adopted the look popularized by Ralph Lauren, Alan Flusser and Jeffrey Banks, based on the sartorial dress of Douglas Fairbanks Jr., the Duke of Windsor and Cary Grant.


April 16-22: Iraqi Resistence; Saddam Hussein Spurns Lighter Sanctions
A United Nations resolution that would allow Iraq to sell up to $2 billion in oil over six months for its emergency needs was on the table less than a day before Baghdad began denouncing it.
But the offer still stands, and the United States and the United Nations are trying to avoid giving the impression that they have taken "no" for an answer.
What is the self-destructive logic behind President Saddam Hussein's decision to spurn, for now, the chance to sell oil under less rigorous terms than previous plans permitted?


El Presidente's New First Lady
WHAT'S a South American president to do when he is separated from his wife but needs a woman to escort him on the campaign trail or on trips abroad?
Simple: He asks his darling daughter to come along.
North Americans might have a hard time imagining President Clinton taking his daughter Chelsea to work in quite the same way if he and his wife, Hillary, were ever to split up.


In School Bus Dispute, Focus Shifts From the Drivers to the Companies
In pressuring for savings in the $316 million the city spends each year on school bus service, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani and his aides had harsh words for bus company owners, most of whom have been able to renew their contracts with the Board of Education without fear of competition since 1979.
The Mayor described the bus companies as profiteers, combining brinkmanship with the threat of competition, as he did in showdowns last year with Legal Aid lawyers and school custodians.
His chief labor official, Randy L. Levine, accused the operators of "sucking the blood out of the Board of Education."


Dozens Die At Camps In Rwanda
Dozens were killed and hundreds were wounded today when Rwandan Government forces opened fire on a makeshift camp here where tens of thousands of ethnic Hutu have been moved in the past few days.
It was unclear how the shooting began.
But the gunfire quickly ignited panic in the hillside encampment in southwestern Rwanda, which was packed with Hutu displaced by the civil war last year.
Hutu militiamen also fired at Government forces and at United Nations troops, Australian medical officers with the United Nations force here said.


That Good Film in Town: Better Catch It Fast
To the Editor:
I agree with Joe Sharkey (Jersey column, April 16) that New Jerseyans face a dearth of the quality movies that Manhattanites take as a matter of course.
We read the reviews and our mouths water.
But this thirst, especially for foreign films, is not easily quenched, because theaters here find they do not generate enough demand to make a profit.


Mixing Innovative and Classic Seafood
THE setting is pure Poirot.
It sparkles like the sophisticated Art Deco milieu so familiar to viewers of public television's"Mystery" series.
But it is Little Neck Fish and Grill, a storefront on Northern Boulevard in Queens.
One can almost see the dapper Belgian detective at a corner table aligning the vase of red carnations with the tiny satin-glass lamp.
Above him loom posters of 1930's luxury liners.
Overhead are period chandeliers hanging from a pressed-tin ceiling.
In the air is the laid-back sound of Billie Holiday.
The congenial staff harmonizes with the captivating scene.
The crew is so friendly that diners might not immediately notice that the service is sharp.
These people are more than just smiles.


Spies &amp; Thrillers
Matthew Marshall, an industrialist worth more than $100 million, dies of a stroke at the age of 51.
A couple of months earlier, unbeknown to his wife and their three children, he added a codicil to his will.
It seems that Marshall had fathered a child in Vietnam.
He never knew if it was a son or a daughter, but he had reason to believe that the child might have come to the United States.
Half of his estate will go to this person if he or she can be located.
That's how Tom Topor's new thriller, THE CODICIL (Hyperion, $21.95), begins.
Adam Bruno, a former criminal lawyer and now a private investigator in New York, is hired by Marshall's lawyer to find the heir.
Smart, tough, laconic, Bruno tries to discover all he can about the industrialist's military career.
That means interviewing men who served with him, unearthing old records, tangling with a loony, dangerous veteran and in general stirring things up.


New School Retirees Share Film Critic's Review of Dean
To The Editor:
The Institute for Retired Professionals at the New School has had precisely the same unpleasant disagreement with Dean Elizabeth Dickey as did Richard Brown, "The People's Film Maven" (April 9).
It arose when Dean Dickey unilaterally altered the character and violated the basic principles and philosophy of the institute, which had been successful for 32 years and was the model for over 150 similar institutes at colleges and universities throughout the United States.


Following an 8,000-Year-Old Buffalo Trail
GLIDING through the cool, pine-scented air of a Mississippi spring morning, my bicycle's tires humming on the gently rolling Natchez Trace Parkway, I was Huck Finn on an asphalt river: the joy of biking crystallized in a sense of freedom and self-reliance.
I had wanted to bike on the parkway -- a 421-mile history lesson that cuts through three states and 8,000 years -- since driving on a section of it three years ago.
So in late May last year I packed bike and gear into a rented car and headed for Tupelo, Miss.
I had decided to ride parts of the parkway in Mississippi between Typelo, in the northeast corner of the state, and Natchez, in the southwest.


Thanks for Nothing
To the Editor:
Whenever I see a nonfiction book in a store, I immediately riffle through it to find out if the author has mentioned me.
I did this the other day when I saw a book by Thomas Griffith titled "Harry and Teddy" (review, April 2), the story of a friendship between Henry R. Luce and Theodore H. White.


At Columbia, a Jewish Center
Jewish enrollment at Columbia University has greatly increased over the last 20 years, but the Jewish Campus Life headquarters in the basement of the Earl Hall building has remained the 500-square-foot haven it was in a bygone era, when the number of Jewish students at Ivy League colleges was strictly limited.
But on Tuesday, ground will be broken in a former parking lot on West 115th Street between Broadway and Riverside Drive for a five-story, $10 million Jewish Center.


Pixelography
QUICK, THINK OF a photograph you know well: Yes, that's how I really looked once! . . .
Ah, just as I remember her. . . .
That captures him perfectly! . . .
The sunset is exactly as I remember it.
How real! How true! The camera doesn't lie!


Jean McFadden and Edward Layton
JEAN McFADDEN is a funny and talkative woman, the sort of person who bakes bread and wouldn't hesitate to help someone push a car out of a snow bank even if she were wearing a dress and high heels.
She is a premed student at City College, with plans to become a general practitioner in a small town one day.
On weekends, she cooks for God's Love We Deliver, the organization in New York that prepares and delivers meals to homebound people with AIDS.


April 16-22; When Good Republicans Make Bad Moves
"POLITICS is just like show business," Ronald Reagan once observed.
"You have a hell of an opening, you coast for a while, you have a hell of a closing."
Well, the curtain has gone up on eight contenders for the Republican Presidential nomination.
While their openings were hardly worthy of Hollywood (or of Ronald Reagan, for that matter), the debut announcement speeches do tell people something about the candidates.
And some moments, and some passages, stood out: Most Baffling Site Selection
At a time when the Capitol dome is a backdrop only for attack commercials, Senator Arlen Specter of Pennsylvania defied conventional wisdom (and anti-Washington sentiment) by staging his announcement smack in the middle of what one rival, former Gov.
Lamar Alexander of Tennessee, calls the "arrogant empire." He delivered his speech in the shadow of the Washington Monument, with the Lincoln Memorial right behind him.


Abandon All Dignity, Ye Who Enter Here
CALIFORNIA ANGELS
Some distinction.
Last season, the Angels had the worst record in the first baseball division to have all of its teams finish with losing records.
Maybe the division will improve this season, but will the Angels?
This is a franchise that despite its location has somehow bungled itself into a low-revenue team in need of welfare from the wealthier clubs.
That aid won't come this year, which means the Angels need a large dose of self-help -- from Tim Salmon, J. T. Snow, Chili Davis and others.


It's a Stretch


Stalking the Cash-Rich Corporation
WITH piles of cash glinting before his eyes, Kirk Kerkorian has been talking loudly about taking over the Chrysler Corporation.
And whether or not his quixotic bid succeeds, it has already altered the financial landscape: it seems everyone and his investment banker is furiously on the prowl for companies with substantial sums of cash on their books.
Cash-rich companies can make great investments.
They have little trouble attracting the notice of dividend-hungry raiders like Mr.
Kerkorian and they offer investors insurance that there are hard assets backing up the stock price.


Easing Well-to-Do Renters From Regulation's Tent
AT 215 East 68th Street, there have been 24 decontrol orders so far in high-rent apartments occupied by high-income tenants.
At 265 East 66th there have been 28.
At 800 Fifth Avenue, at 61st Street, the figure is also 28, and at 1385 York Avenue, at 73d Street, the figure is 33.
The champion recipient of decontrol orders seems to be 500 East 77th Street, which has 850 apartments.
It received 68.


Russia Unchains a Ghost: Stalin, the Wartime Hero
AS the leaders of Russia, and much of the world, prepare to celebrate here the 50th anniversary of the victory over the Nazis in World War II, a victory that cost this country 27 million lives, a vexing little problem has developed:
What about Josef Stalin, the central figure of post-revolutionary Soviet history, the transplanted Georgian who led Russia to victory in war, made it a great industrial power, defeated Hitler, and is justly considered one of the most monstrous criminals of the century?


Joanne Farinella, Brian Coltellino
Joanne Danielle Farinella, a daughter of Joseph and Lucy Farinella of Wantagh, L.I., was married on Friday to Brian James Coltellino, a son of John and Bertha Coltellino of North Massapequa, L.I.
The Rev.
Dennis J. Whelan officiated at St.
Barnabas Apostle Roman Catholic Church in Bellmore, L.I.
Mrs.
Coltellino, 25, graduated from the State University College at Farmingdale, L.I., and owns a lettering shop in Bethpage, L.I.


Prime Time Snubs Mr. Clinton for Reruns
TWO years ago, fresh from a series of appearances on "Larry King Live," President Clinton announced that he had been "liberated" by talk shows.
Now that he could go "to the American people directly," he told broadcast journalists, he planned to "stiff" them on news conferences.
Last week, the broadcast networks returned the favor.
On Tuesday, when Mr.
Clinton gave the fourth prime-time news conference of his career, ostensibly to talk about welfare reform, only CBS interrupted its schedule to cover it.
ABC and NBC decided to carry instead a repeat of "Home Improvement" ("Tim charms Jill's friends") and "Frasier" ("Frasier joins Niles and Martin on an ice-fishing trip").


Movie Palace Stars in Its Own Cliffhanger
The Loew's Oriental, a once-grand picture palace that dates back to the heyday of silent films, is facing an uncertain future.
Employees of the theater, at 86th Street and 18th Avenue, had been notified earlier this month that it would close effective April 13.
A later notice said that the theater would stay open indefinitely, but a "For Sale" sign is still on the building.


How I Got My Child Into Nursery School
ONE evening last December, I found myself sitting on the floor of the West Side Montessori School gymnasium with 50 other mothers and fathers, gathering survival tips for one of the most notorious passages of Manhattan parenthood.
We were deep into the annual nursery-school hunting season (September through March).
The school's director was offering advice on getting through the preschool admissions process with our self-respect intact.


Crime and Punishment
IT'S ALL THE RAGE Crime and Culture.
By Wendy Kaminer. 292 pp.
Reading, Mass.:  Addison-Wesley Publishing Company. $22.


Varied as the Nations, United in Dance
DANCE IS OFTEN PROCLAIMED AN international art.
So it's not surprising that the ceremonies honoring the 50th anniversary of the United Nations Charter, signed in San Francisco on June 26, 1945, will include "United We Dance: An International Festival." The celebration, sponsored by the San Francisco Ballet and to be presented at the San Francisco War Memorial Opera House from May 9 to 14, will feature premieres by representatives of ballet companies from 13 countries.
Helgi Tomasson, the San Francisco Ballet's artistic director, had firm ideas about the sort of festival he wanted to organize.
At many international galas, companies simply parade their stars in snippets from the classics.
Mr.
Tomasson will have none of this.
Instead, he wishes to stress new works -- especially, because he is a ballet director, new ballets.
The only festival participant that is not strictly balletic is the Rambert Dance Company.
This London troupe, England's most experimental ballet company of the 1930's, has emphasized modern dance since the 60's.


From the Bronx to the Budget Office
June E. O'Neill is now one of the nation's most influential economists in no small part because she stopped playing piano.
Ms.
O'Neill recently completed her first month as director of the Congressional Budget Office, the aseptic agency that crunches Federal fiscal numbers for the House and the Senate.
It is not a job she seemed destined to have.


Foreign Affairs; Beirut, Okla.
In my office at home, just behind my desk, I keep one picture to remind me of the years I spent as a reporter in Beirut and Jerusalem.
The picture is of a lovely old tree, its limbs stretched wide, perched on the banks of the Sea of Galilee.
It is a picture of biblical serenity.
But if you look at it more closely you'll notice that at the foot of the tree is a small steel drum poking out of the rocks.
Atop it is a sign that reads: "Security Hole." It is for bomb disposal.
Should you come upon a suspicious roadside package you're supposed to dump it there -- and don't forget to put the lid back on.
That was Beirut and Jerusalem -- scenes of splendor, terrific vistas, but always, off in the corner, some jagged edge, something either blowing up or threatening to blow up, so that you could never quite relax and take your shoes off.
Which brings me to Oklahoma City.


Artist Regains Works in Toronto Obscenity Case
In a test case about freedom of artistic expression in Canada, a judge has ordered the police to return the works of a Toronto artist that they removed from an art gallery's walls under Canada's tough child pornography law.
The decision by Judge David McCombs of the Ontario provincial court upheld the law, passed in June 1993, but laid down guidelines that will make it more difficult for the police to seize works that they consider offensive.


1 Card, 200 Phrases
Whoever designed a new set of foreign-language phrase cards for Langenscheidt Publishers was not very romantic: Each one packs about 200 phrases on a pocket-sized card, but the very last is "I love you."


IN SHORT: FICTION
BALLS  By Gorman Bechard. Plume, paper, $10.95.


The Frontiers of Criticism
To the Editor:
Robert Phillips's essay (" 'Are Those Real Poems, or Did You Write Them Yourself?' Adventures on the Reading Circuit," Feb. 12) misleads readers by citing a T. S. Eliot lecture as a poetry reading.


New Auction Gems: Common Folks; Venerable Houses Woo Unstuffy Buyers With Unstuffy Stuff
On most Saturdays, Judith Weisman can be found prospecting at Christie's on Park Avenue, sifting through Fine, Important, Highly Important and Magnificent objets looking for a bargain.
On one chilly afternoon recently, Mrs.
Weisman wore gold lame sandals that matched the Empire Style Ormolu Mantel Clock Surmounted by A Classically Clad Maiden Playing A Harp.
Mrs.
Weisman was surmounted herself by a fluorescent orange hairdo.


An Appreciation Of Bill Baird
I am happy to learn  [ "Indefatigable, Bill Baird for the Defense," March 26 ]  that the one man who has championed the rights of privacy and reproductive freedom for men and women for more than three decades is alive and well despite the efforts of anti-abortion zealots who would deem otherwise.


Easy Rider
THE Schwinn Cruiser is a basic bicycle that doesn't boast a lot of fancy attachments.
With wide tires, one gear and a foot brake, this bike is not meant to haul a cyclist over a mountain.
Frank Arroyo, the owner of Frank's Bike Shop on Grand Street, says the Cruiser is gaining popularity among younger people who prefer retro simplicity to expensive parts.


Slaying Inquiry in Wales Tests DNA of 150 People
Having had an occasional run-in with the law over his 30-odd years, John Jones, a resident of the St.
Mellons housing project in northeast Cardiff, is not a big fan of the police.
But he went along when the police came knocking on his door recently, saying they would like a wee bit of his blood so as to analyze his DNA.
Not that he was suspected of anything, mind you, but they wanted to rule him out in their investigation into the rape and murder of a 15-year-old girl.


Jill D. Kay, Robert Kavaler
Jill Debra Kay, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Allen S. Kay of Woodcliff Lake, N.J., was married last evening to Dr.
Robert Kavaler, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Max Kavaler of Cedarhurst, L.I.
Rabbi Burt Siegel officiated at the Plaza in New York.
Mrs.
Kavaler, 27, graduated magna cum laude from Syracuse University.
She is an associate producer at Korey, Kay &amp; Partners, a New York advertising agency.
Her father is its chairman and chief creative officer.


DANGEROUS WORLD: Problems Of Piercing
Body piercing -- noses, necks, tongues, genitalia -- is becoming more and more popular.
Piercers are showing up in force at tattoo conventions, like the one last year at the Newark Airport Hilton.
The trend raises some questions.
Is it risky?


Corrections
A report in the Guide column last Sunday about an art exhibition at the Bushnell's Promenade Gallery in Hartford gave an outdated schedule.
The show has been extended through May 19; there will not be a closing day reception next Sunday.


Nicole M. Atorino, John E. Hoops
Nicole Marie Atorino, a daughter of Edward and Diana Atorino of New Vernon, N.J., was married there yesterday to John Everett Hoops, a son of John and Evelyn Hoops of Montville, N.J.
The Rev.
John F. Corr performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at the Church of Christ the King.
Mrs.
Hoops, 25, graduated from the Catholic Univeristy of America.
She is a marketing coordinator in the wallcoverings division of F. Schulmacher &amp; Company in New York.
Her father is a senior vice president and securities analyst at Dillon Read &amp; Company, the New York investment bank.
Her mother is a sales representative at Douglas Elliman, real estate brokers, in Bernardsville, N.J.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, a review of "It's All the Rage" on page 33 of The Times Book Review today misattributes a quotation, "The Supreme Court has been downright delusional on the subject of capital punishment." The sentence is from the book, by Wendy Kaminer.
It is her interpretation of views expressed by Associate Justice Harry A. Blackmun in a dissenting opinion last year; the words are not Justice Blackmun's own.


Final Chapter Of the Series
This series about Steve McNair, the quarterback for Alcorn State in Mississippi, began on Aug. 28 and chronicled the progress of his senior year.
Subsequent articles told of McNair's family and small-town roots in Mount Olive, Miss., his final homecoming, his academic pursuits and his on-field performances in the Senior Bowl and before pro coaches.


Editorial Notebook; Wine, Roses, Then and Now
When a couple hundred veterans of New York City's last fiscal crisis gathered last week to honor former Gov.
Hugh Carey, they were eager to trade war stories about the heroic effort to keep the city out of bankruptcy.
There were not many emissaries from Mayor Rudolph Giuliani and Gov.
George Pataki, perhaps because they felt they had little to learn from such ancient history.
But the lessons for today were clear.
First was the need for cooperation and shared sacrifice across ideological and even class lines.
For example, there was Mr.
Carey, the combative Democrat from Brooklyn, embracing Warren Anderson, a Republican from Binghamton, N.Y., who as the State Senate majority leader was his indispensable partner for saving the city.
There were Victor Gotbaum, then the city's most powerful labor leader, and Walter Wriston, then chairman of Citicorp, the city's most powerful bank, another set of onetime enemies who found common purpose in avoiding municipal bankruptcy.


Las Vegas Upgrading Dowdy Fremont Street
In contrast to the new generation of mega-hotels along Las Vegas's southern strip -- notably the Mirage, the Luxor and the MGM Grand -- Fremont Street, the five-block stretch of downtown and the historic birthplace of gambling in the city, has become decidedly dowdy.
Its silver and gold-sequined casinos with their wall-to-wall cigarette smoke, X-rated "grind" joints and neon palm trees, are not only considered a bit archaic these days, but also increasingly unprofitable.
Once high-rollers are dazzled and pampered into profligacy by the hulking newer structures on the strip, with their sumptuous suites and upscale dining, many find it hard to return to the shabby streets surrounding the Golden Nugget, Horseshoe and other older casinos.


Light and Delicate, Stewed or Braised, Rabbit Is Gaining Favor
RABBIT has been showing up more and more on restaurant menus and in butcher shops recently.
Chefs like it because it is light and delicate but has a more pronounced flavor than chicken and lends itself to a wide variety of seasonings.
It is also low in fat.
Rabbit is delicious stewed in white wine with herbs or braised in a mustard sauce and served on a bed of noodles.
It is also good rolled in bread crumbs and baked in the oven, which gives it a crisp coating and keeps it moist inside.


Asparagus Rising
In western Massachusetts, there is a certain field where, after a deep freeze and a slow thaw, after a warmish rain and a gentle sun, wild asparagus rises like a gangly corps.
Even if the tips have a lavender blush, it takes an acute eye to discern them, as they are nearly indistinguishable from the wildflowers and the grasses that have preceded them.
For a member of the lily family -- and hence a type of grass -- this is only fitting.
Asparagus has a flavor that when found in wine, is often referred to as "grassy" or "herbaceous."
An Elizabethan writer once observed that the shape of the spear "manifestly provoketh Venus." Like any spring drama, that of sprouting asparagus is progenitive.
I know a man who would lie on his stomach and remain that way for hours, watching the asparagus push through the damp earth.
There is something brave and willful about this thrusting skyward.


First Nighters


THE EMASCULATION OF SPORTS
That the famous White House "enemies list" was kept not by football fan Richard Nixon, as Robert Lipsyte suggested, but by his accuser, John Dean, ought to have been abundantly clear from Joe Namath's being listed incorrectly as a Giant.
If the President had laid eyes on the list even once, can anyone imagine that error surviving?
JOHN H. TAYLOR  Director, the Richard Nixon Library  Yorba Linda, Calif.


For Richer, for Poorer: Leyland and Alou Are Keeping the Faith
You cannot blame Jim Leyland and Felipe Alou these days if they feel like straight men in an Abbott and Costello routine gone wrong.
Not only do these two managers stand a good chance of having to ask who's on first and what's on second when their respective teams -- the Pirates and Expos -- open each new season.
They also know there is one other question they always have to ask about their players: Can we afford to keep them?


Shanghai's Fields of Green
WE wanted a day in the country.
No problem, our guide said.
Everyone in Shanghai knows the same two English phrases: "joint venture" and "no problem."
We had been there a week and had overdosed on the city.
Reflecting an entrepreneurial zeal possibly unmatched anywhere on earth, Shanghai today almost out-New Yorks New York: There is that kind of energy in the streets.
The suits are glued to cellular telephones.
The city is one big construction site -- bamboo scaffoldings rising like defoliated forests all over town, and whatever isn't a new shopping plaza elbowing all the mom-and-pops off the block is a high-rise bank or office building or glitzy hotel, and in these hotels the joint venturists sit, genially talking billions over breakfast.


When Republicans Don Democratic Masks
To the Editor:
Your April 14 front-page picture of Representative Robert K. Dornan and the caption "The Happy Warrior" (some editions) typifies Republican exploitation of heroic 20th-century Democratic statesmen.
From Newt Gingrich's claiming bipartisanship in the name of Franklin D. Roosevelt to Senator Jesse Helms's using Hubert H. Humphrey's name to promote his civil rights restoration bill, which would abolish opportunities for thousands of minorities and women, these flawed comparisons have demeaned these leaders and their causes.


CAROLINE BLACKWOOD
In his article "Caroline Blackwood, Titled Bohemian" (April 2), Michael Kimmelman comments that Blackwood's account of Suzanne Blum, the lawyer to the Duchess of Windsor, "is so bizarre it sounds like fiction." It reads like fiction because it is fiction.
Blum, who was my great-aunt, was one of the best-known and best-respected trial lawyers in France.
The portrayal of Blum is so obviously the product of Blackwood's own obsessive fantasies that one can well understand why, as Blackwood herself admits, she waited to publish her rantings until Blum's death -- when she was in her early 90's, after several years of blindness and extreme infirmity -- had removed the possibility of a libel action.


Judith Lilleston And Paul White
Judith Anne Lilleston, a technical writer in New York, and Paul Richard White, a principal in Herbert Kunstadt Associates Inc., consulting engineers in New York, were married last evening.
Judge Laura Safer-Espinoza of New York City Criminal Court in the Bronx performed the ceremony at the Loeb Boathouse in Central Park.
The bride, 46, will be known as Judith Lilleston-White.
She graduated from City College and received a Ph.D. in sociology from the CUNY Graduate Center.
The bride is also an adjunct professor of sociology at John Jay College in New York.
She is the daughter of the late Horace and Grace Lilleston.
The bride's previous marriage ended in divorce.


Robert Barrett 3d, Catherine Tankoos
Catherine Moore Tankoos of New York and Robert J. Barrett 3d of Palm Beach, Fla., were married in Palm Beach yesterday.
The Rev.
Walter B. Arnold 3d, a Presbyterian minister, performed the ceremony at the Everglades Club.
Mrs.
Barrett graduated from Brilliantmont in Lausanne, Switzerland; from Le Fleuron, in Florence, and from the University of Florence.
She was formerly a fashion model and designer, a fashion editor at Town and Country magazine and a television producer for 20th Century Fox and Home Box Office.
She is the daughter of the late Mr. and Mrs.
Charles Atwell Moore.
Her father was a partner in Price Waterhouse in Philadelphia.


Light and Delicate, Stewed or Braised, Rabbit Is Gaining Favor
RABBIT has been showing up more and more on restaurant menus and in butcher shops recently.
Chefs like it because it is light and delicate but has a more pronounced flavor than chicken and lends itself to a wide variety of seasonings.
It is also low in fat.
Rabbit is delicious stewed in white wine with herbs or braised in a mustard sauce and served on a bed of noodles.
It is also good rolled in bread crumbs and baked in the oven, which gives it a crisp coating and keeps it moist inside.


Officer is Convicted
A housing police officer has been convicted in the shooting death of a Brooklyn man.
The officer, Jonas Bright, was found guilty of criminally negligent homicide late Friday in the slaying of Douglas Orfaly, who the officer approached to question in lower Manhattan in March 1992.
Article, page 39.


Another Hot Mezzo


CITY OF ORPHANS
I will forever be haunted by Laurent Van Der Stockt's photos of the Kabul orphans that accompanied John F. Burns's "City of Orphans" (April 2).
When will the war-saturated Afghans decide that enough is enough?
Who would have dreamed that instead of working together to rebuild their ravaged country, after routing their common enemy, the Soviets, they would turn against each other and convert their homeland into a wasteland of rubble, robbing their children of youth in the process?
VERA JENSEN Falls Church, Va.


Ms. McCarthy And Mr. Mullane
Catherine Patricia McCarthy, a daughter of Donal and Maureen McCarthy of Manhasset, L.I., was married there yesterday to Hugh Gerard Mullane, a son of John and Madeline Mullane of Port Jefferson, L.I.
The Rev.
John Coughlin performed the ceremony at the Roman Catholic Church of St.
Mary.
Ms.
McCarthy, 27, is keeping her name.
She is a graduate of Yale University and received a law degree from Georgetown University, as did her husband.
She is an associate in the Washington office of the law firm of LeBoeuf, Lamb, Greene &amp; MacRae.
Her father retired as a senior lawyer at Con Edison in New York.
Her mother is a broker with Blaich Real Estate in Manhasset.


A By-the-Book Officer, 'Suspicious by Nature,' Spots Trouble and Acts Fast
Drivers have lots of names for highway patrolmen like Charlie Hanger.
But after his by-the-book philosophy netted a suspect in the Oklahoma City bombing, friends in his hometown were using words like "unyielding" and "firm."
"He'd arrest his own mother for a traffic violation," said Bill Gengler, a longtime friend in this town of 6,000.
Seated next to Mr.
Gengler at the Kumback Cafe, and nodding, was Dave Hubble, who said his buddy the state trooper had once stopped him for doing 57 miles per hour in a 55-m.p.h. zone.


Part Poetry, Part Jai Alai
TOOTH IMPRINTS ON A CORN DOG  By Mark Leyner. 216 pp.
New York: Harmony Books/ Crown. $19.


Livingston: Nice to Come Home to (in About 10 Years or So)
Livingston is a quiet, upper-middle- class township of 26,000 people in Essex County.
It is best known, perhaps, for two things: its highly regarded schools and the Livingston Mall.
We visited the mall recently and chatted with Chi-Chi Brown, a 17-year-old junior at Livingston High School.
Q: What is it like to live here?


If Only There Was a Warren Buffett for Mutual Funds
YOU need more than $22,000 to buy a single share of Berkshire Hathaway, run by Warren Buffett, the billionaire investor.
But a mere $1,000 will buy a stake in a copycat fund managed by one of Mr.
Buffett's biggest fans.
Robert G. Hagstrom Jr., author of the best-seller "The Warren Buffet Way" (Wiley, 1994), plans to duplicate Mr.
Buffett's investment strategy in Focus Trust, a mutual fund that came to market on Monday.


After 25 Years, a Religious Retreat Retains a Special Resonance
EVERY year for the last 25 a group of women has boarded a bus in southern Nassau County and headed off for a weekend in Ronkonkoma.
"This year the trip went so quickly," Betsy Becker of Lynbrook said.
"It was our first year in the H.O.V. lane."
The pilgrimage started when the women were young mothers.
Now their daughters are mothers and often travel with them.
For some, the bus seats have grown harder as the bones have grown more brittle.
But the resolve remains the same.


BEST SELLERS: April 23, 1995
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
1
60
THE CELESTINE PROPHECY, by James Redfield. (Warner, $17.95.) An ancient manuscript, found in Peru, provides insights into achieving a fulfilling life.
2
2
44
POLITICALLY CORRECT BEDTIME STORIES, by James Finn Garner. (Macmillan, $8.95.) Classic tales respun to avoid offending current sensibilities.
3
3
9
BORDER MUSIC, by Robert James Waller. (Warner, $17.95.) A Texas rancher, trying to erase his Vietnam trauma, takes to the road with an exotic dancer.
4
4
6
OUR GAME, by John le Carre. (Knopf, $24.) Espionage, larceny and murder in Eastern and Western Europe in the post-cold-war era.
5
5
3
A DOG'S LIFE, by Peter Mayle. (Knopf, $20.) The memoirs of Boy, a shaggy canine in Provence; with drawings by Edward Koren.
6
15
3
MOO, by Jane Smiley. (Knopf, $24.) Intrigues and machinations on the campus of a Midwestern state university.
7
6
7
THE GLASS LAKE, by Maeve Binchy. (Delacorte, $23.95.) The unspoken ties that bind a woman and her mother in a small Irish town.
8
8
141
THE BRIDGES OF MADISON COUNTY, by Robert James Waller. (Warner, $16.95.) A photographer and a farmer's lonely wife in Iowa.
9
10
11
ORIGINAL SIN, by P.D.
James. (Knopf, $24.) Adam Dalgliesh probes a case involving intrigue, malice and murder in a prestigious London publishing house.
10
14
4
SILENT TREATMENT, by Michael Palmer. (Bantam, $21.95.) A physician is the prime suspect when his estranged wife dies mysteriously in a hospital.
11
13
27
MUTANT MESSAGE DOWN UNDER, by Marlo Morgan. (HarperCollins, $18.) In Australia's outback, an American woman learns about aboriginal philosophy.
12
9
10
DAISY-HEAD MAYZIE, by Dr.
Seuss. (Random House, $15.) In words and pictures, the story of a girl whose head unexpectedly sprouts a daisy.
13
7
5
PHENOMENAL WOMAN, by Maya Angelou. (Random House, $10.) Four poems celebrating women.
14*
11
2
THE FOURTH PROCEDURE, by Stanley Pottinger. (Ballantine, $23.95.) A Congressman's romances, the abortion wars and medical mayhem played out in Washington.
15
12
6
THE JUROR, by George Dawes Green. (Warner, $21.95.) A woman's life takes a fearful turn when she is chosen as a juror for a mob trial.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Nonfiction
1
2
28
THE HOT ZONE, by Richard Preston. (Random House, $23.) The discovery of a lethal virus, more infectious than H.I.V., and the efforts to keep it from spreading.
2
3
10
THE DEATH OF COMMON SENSE, by Philip K. Howard. (Random House, $18.) How governmental rules and regulations are fettering the lives of all Americans.
3
1
6
BREAKING THE SURFACE, by Greg Louganis with Eric Marcus. (Random House, $23.) The memoirs of the former Olympic diving champion.
4
4
17
SISTERS, by Carol Saline.
Photographs by Sharon J. Wohlmuth. (Running Press, $27.50.) The relationships of 36 sets of sisters, reported in words and pictures.
5
5
59
MIDNIGHT IN THE GARDEN OF GOOD AND EVIL, by John Berendt. (Random House, $23.) The mysterious death of a young man in Savannah, Ga.
6
1
QUIVERS, by Robin Quivers. (Regan Books/HarperCollins, $22.) The memoirs of Howard Stern's sidekick.
7
8
4
THE DIARY OF A YOUNG GIRL, by Anne Frank.
Edited by Otto H. Frank and Mirjam Pressler. (Doubleday, $25.) The "definitive edition."
8
6
33
COUPLEHOOD, by Paul Reiser. (Bantam, $19.95.) Essays on the ups and downs of marriage by the television star and stand-up comedian.
9
7
6
AN ANTHROPOLOGIST ON MARS, by Oliver Sacks. (Knopf, $24.) Seven tales about people who compensated for their neurological afflictions by constructing worlds of their own.
10
9
9
THE DISCIPLINE OF MARKET LEADERS, by Michael Treacy and Fred Wiersema. (Addison-Wesley, $25.) A discussion of competitive business strategies.
11
11
70
THE BOOK OF VIRTUES, by William J. Bennett. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $30.) Moral stories adapted from the Greeks, the Bible, folklore and elsewhere.
12
1
FROM BEGINNING TO END, by Robert Fulghum. (Villard, $20.) The rituals we practice and the spiritual journeys we take, from childhood to old age.
13
12
6
BEING DIGITAL, by Nicholas Negroponte. (Knopf, $23.) How computers will alter our lives in the future.
14
1
IN SEARCH OF STONES, by M. Scott Peck. (Hyperion, $22.95.) A search for ancient monuments in Britain becomes an odyssey in quest of faith and reason.
15
13
21
THE WARREN BUFFETT WAY, by Robert G. Hagstrom Jr. (Wiley, $24.95.) An account of the career of the man said to be the world's most successful investor.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous
1
1
100
MEN ARE FROM MARS, WOMEN ARE FROM VENUS, by John Gray. (HarperCollins, $23.) Communicating.
2
4
2
MARS AND VENUS IN THE BEDROOM, by John Gray. (HarperCollins, $22.) Ways to maintain a long-term, passionate monogamous relationship.
3
3
10
THE BEARDSTOWN LADIES' COMMON-SENSE INVESTMENT GUIDE. (Godin/Hyperion, $19.95.) Tips.
4
5
THE SEVEN SPIRITUAL LAWS OF SUCCESS, by Deepak Chopra. (Amber-Allen/New World Library, $12.95.) How to "generate wealth in all its forms."
Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending April 8, at 3,050 bookstores plus wholesalers serving 28,000 other retailers (gift shops, department stores, newsstands, supermarkets), statistically weighted to represent sales in all such outlets nationwide.
An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
And Bear in Mind (Editor's Choices of other recent books of particular interest) CLOSEST COMPANION: The Unknown Story of the Intimate Friendship Between Franklin Roosevelt and Margaret Suckley, edited by Geoffrey C. Ward. (Houghton Mifflin, $24.95.) Margaret Suckley's diary shows F.D.R. finding comfort in a distant cousin who could relax, however worshipfully, in his presence.
GENIUS IN DISGUISE: Harold Ross of The New Yorker, by Thomas Kunkel. (Random House, $25.) This first full-scale biography of the creator of The New Yorker tries to account for the formidable editorial instincts, integrity and self-knowledge that underlay his success.
IN RETROSPECT: The Tragedy and Lessons of Vietnam, by Robert S. McNamara with Brian VanDeMark. (Times Books/Random House, $27.50.) The former Secretary of Defense explains, regretfully, how he and his can-do colleagues got stuck fast in the Vietnam War.
KATHARINE HEPBURN, by Barbara Leaming. (Crown, $27.50.) An experienced film biographer's penetrating look behind the career into the family and social forces that formed one of the most charismatic of actresses.
THE LAST GREAT FRENCHMAN: A Life of General de Gaulle, by Charles Williams. (Wiley, $30.) The career of the much-taller-than-life soldier whose political victories were based on a loathing for politicians and a willingness to chuck his allies.
THE LOVES OF FAUSTYNA, by Nina FitzPatrick. (Penguin, paper, $9.95.) At a sign from heaven, the Polish heroine of this frolicky picaresque novel abandons her virginity; when martial law arrives in 1981, she opens serious negotiations with the powers of political darkness.
MEMOIR FROM ANTPROOF CASE, by Mark Helprin. (Harcourt Brace, $24.) The slowly unfolding self-revelation of Oscar Progresso, the thoughtful, aged eccentric who narrates this novel while planning a fantastical crime.
NANO.
The Emerging Science of Nanotechnology: Remaking the World -- Molecule by Molecule, by Ed Regis. (Little, Brown, $23.95.) Crisp science journalism about a possible world of endless bounty, produced by incredibly tiny machines.
NEW YORK 1960: Architecture and Urbanism Between the Second World War and the Bicentennial, by Robert A.M.
Stern, Thomas Mellins and David Fishman. (Monacelli/Penguin, $125.) A huge book that takes account of the city's development as the world capital of finance and art; with extensive local descriptions.
THE TRIAL OF ELIZABETH CREE: A Novel of the Limehouse Murders, by Peter Ackroyd. (Nan A. Talese/Doubleday, $22.) A claustrophobic, agitated novel of London in 1880; everyone (including a clutch of famous contemporary reformers) is connected to everyone else.
A VOID, by Georges Perec. (Harvill/HarperCollins, $24.) The letter E never occurs in this 1969 French novel or in its translation by Gilbert Adair; what does occur is a wild feast of puzzles, mind games and broken rules.


Flat Tax Proposal Gives Middle Class a Break
To the Editor:
"Debate on Flat Tax Revives Simplicity vs. Fairness Issue" (front page, April 18) includes several errors in the discussion of my flat tax proposal.


Smorgasbord for Children's Art
LASAGNA, jambalaya, African creole gumbo, tofu vegetable roast, dunk-a-slice rum cake and chocolate banana bread pudding will be among the dishes on the menu -- all prepared by men -- during an all-you-can-eat benefit for the Children's Art Carnival.
Crystal Britton, the coordinator of the event, said 200 gourmets have been invited to prepare their specialties as part of the 16th annual benefit for the not-for-profit art institution in Harlem.
"We picked all of our favorite men that we know can cook and asked them to make their favorite dishes," Ms.
Britton said.
"It breaks my heart some of these men can cook better than most women I know." Past participants have included celebrities like Ed Bradley, Lionel Hampton and Ossie Davis.


'Ugliest Artifacts' Capture Spirit of Upper Westsiders
To The Editor:
"Finally, a Plan. But Is It Moot?" (April 9), about Community Board 7's decision to endorse a plan to relieve overcrowding in the subway station at Broadway and West 72d Street, captured forever the essence of the Upper West Side.
A board member was quoted as opposing the plan because she thought it would block views of local landmarks, including the street-level brick shed so dear to the hearts of the petit-bourgeois landmarkers.


Lodi Lives With Its Dangers
Older residents can remember a time -- back before the chemical factories set up shop on the riverbank, before the wells were contaminated and before recurrent explosions sent bitter fumes across town -- when the Saddle River ran clear and bright and cold.
The river ran green today.
Not the frothy, laughing green that Vincent C. Paladino, now 67, dove into from the warm sand as a child, but a sickly, fluorescent green.
It was the runoff from the smoldering ruins of Napp Technologies, where an explosion on Friday gave the quiet town of 23,000 a deadly reminder of dangers many had all but forgotten.


Sports of The Times; Good News: Baseball, Everybody, Baseball
LET'S look at this season as a bonus.
That's my theory.
Rather than rail against the shortened schedule or flinch at the lack of a settlement in the labor troubles, I'm just waiting for a game.
That's right, games.
Starting Wednesday, there will be major league baseball all over North America.
The count resumes for Ripken.
Griffey starts swinging again.
The arms in Atlanta start firing strikes again.


That's Italian
Masterpieces at an exhibition, April 19.


John Biggers's Art Exhibited in Houston
The career of the artist John Biggers and his impact on African-American art are examined in a retrospective of his work at the Museum of Fine Arts, Houston, through Sept. 3.
"The Art of John Biggers: View From the Upper Room" traces the development of the painter's work through 50 years, from his earlier pieces based on life in the southern United States in the 1930's, to later creations influenced by his travels through West Africa.


April 16-22; The Scent of Terror
Japan's peace of mind was shattered anew by two incidents that evoked painful memories of last month's nerve gas attack in the Tokyo subway.
On Wednesday, more than 500 people went to hospitals with sore throats, coughs and other symptoms after strange-smelling fumes spread through the main railroad station of the port city of Yokohama and through a train.
On Friday, about 25 people were taken to the hospital with similar symptoms after smelling something nasty in a Yokohama department store.


POSTINGS: Spring Offers a Plethora of Neighborhood House Tours; If This Is Sunday, It Must Be Clinton Hill
It's just about time in Brooklyn to take a closer look at the "Painted Ladies" of Victorian Flatbush or see that a pre-war co-op in Clinton Hill really means turn-of-the-century; to venture beyond the neo-Federalist facades of the Upper East Side or traipse in and out of the brownstones of Mount Morris Park in Harlem, or sit around a parlor for a cultural soiree in Hamilton Heights.
Here is a lineup of spring house and garden tours:
MOUNT MORRIS PARK: Next Saturday at 9:30 A.M., an-hour-and-a-half walking tour is to be led by Anthony Q. Crusor, an architect.
It will be immediately followed by a workshop, "Considering a Brownstone? Consider Harlem!" Tickets are $25; $30 at the door.
On June 11, a self-guided tour, from 11 A.M. to 4 P.M., takes in a dozen brownstones and apartments.
Tickets are $10; $15 that day.
Information: (212) 289-7051.


Not Yet Goodnight for Gracie
The breathless headline called it an "exclusive" news report, and indeed it was.
Our Town, an East Side weekly, reported that Gracie Mansion, the Mayor's official residence, "will likely be sold to a developer who will tear down the landmark 1789 mansion and build luxury waterfront condos."


E-Mail
The Week in Review's electronic mail address is review@nytimes.com.


Kristen Paull, Guy Shafto
Kristen McCarthy Paull, the daughter of Mrs.
James D. Gath of Englewood, N.J., and Morgan Paull of Lake Arrowhead, Calif., was married on Thursday to Guy Robert Shafto, a son of Mrs.
Richard Peel of Herefordshire, England, and Peter Shafto of London.
The Rev.
James Steele performed the ceremony at the First Presbyterian Church in Englewood.
Mrs.
Shafto, 25, graduated from Pepperdine University and is studying for a master's degree in psychology there.
Her father is a former film actor and talent agent.


Lisa C. Wilson and Robert Edwards Jr.
Lisa Carol Wilson, an appellate lawyer in the civil rights division of the Justice Department in Washington, was married yesterday at St.
Columba's Episcopal Church in Washington to Robert Harold Edwards Jr., an associate in Washington of the New York law firm of Willkie, Farr &amp; Gallagher.
The Rev.
Louise J. Lusignan officiated, and the Rev.
James M. Jones, a Baptist minister, took part in the ceremony.
Mrs.
Edwards, 32, graduated from the University of Virginia and also received her law degree there.
She is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
William J. Wilson Jr. of Silver Spring, Md.
The bride's father is the assistant treasurer of Howard University in Washington.
Her mother, Dorothy M. Batts Wilson, retired as a teacher at Shaed Elementary School in Washington.


N.A.A.C.P. Chapters See More Work Ahead
AS national leaders of the N.A.A.C.P. strive to heal divisions within the organization and address the major issues facing black people in America today, chapter presidents in Westchester struggle too.
Like their counterparts on the national level, leaders of the civil rights organization in the county say their work is far from done.
"It's surprising to still find so many walls, especially this far north of the Mason-Dixon line," said Doris J. Bailey, chapter president for the Rye-Port Chester branch.
"But prejudice comes in many forms, and locally it is often covert, making the job of the N.A.A.C.P. in this area very difficult."


No Headline
"It's O.K. to be frightened by something as bad as this." -- PRESIDENT CLINTON, to America's children.  [ 35:5. ]


Where's the State Going? Listen to the Cities
To the Editor:
As one of those quoted in the lead article of your inaugural issue ("New Jersey, Dateline America," April 2), I was disappointed in the one-sidedness of its conclusion that New Jersey would lead the national trend toward ever greater suburbanization at the cities' expense.
The state's extreme population density, the advanced age of its cities and the "white flight" that followed the 1968 race riots certainly explain the westward and southward expansion of New Jersey's population.
But the article ignores the strategic importance of cities as places of commerce, entertainment and affordable housing.


Dr. Fredrickson, Dr. Itzkowitz
Dr.
Lauralyn Gates Fredrickson, a psychiatrist, and Dr.
Sheldon H. Itzkowitz, a psychologist, were married last evening.
Rabbi David Posner performed the ceremony at the Manhattan Penthouse in New York.
Dr.
Fredrickson, 33, is keeping her name professionally.
She is a graduate of Trinity College in Hartford and received her medical degree from New York Medical College.
She is the assistant director of the Inpatient Psychiatric Unit at St.
Luke's-Roosevelt Hospital Center and is a clinical instructor in psychiatry at Columbia University College of Physicians and Surgeons, both in New York.


IN SHORT: FICTION
AFTER LYDIA  By Sandra Tyler. Harcourt Brace, $22.


First in His Class?
To the Editor:
John B. Judis's review of David Maraniss's biography of Bill Clinton, "First in His Class" (March 19), may or may not be an accurate portrayal of the book.
But if the book does show, as stated by Mr.
Judis, "how Mr. Clinton stood out in each setting -- high school in Hot Springs, college at Georgetown, Oxford University, Yale Law School," then in at least one aspect the book is not an accurate portrayal of Mr.
Clinton's academic career.
One place where Bill Clinton did not stand out in any way was at Oxford.


Exquisite Dining In Tokyo Hotels
ALTHOUGH hotel restaurants in Japan have long enjoyed a fashionable image among local residents, I admit to having harbored the bias of many Americans who believe these establishments serve ordinary food at inflated prices.
A recent sampling of several Tokyo hotel restaurants has persuaded me to revise my thinking; the meals I had ranged from very good to wonderful, the atmosphere varied from congenial to serene, and all were fairly priced -- at least by Tokyo standards.
Traditional Japanese cuisine prides itself on shun, the use of seasonal ingredients exclusively, challenging kitchens to offer seemingly infinite variety with relatively limited resources.


Expanding On-Line Services
MORE mutual funds are offering on-line investor services for everything from education to account information to interviews with fund managers.
Vanguard Online, available through America Online (keyword: Vanguard), offers a four-step course on creating a diversified portfolio.
Investors can also retrieve prospectuses, get account information or share ideas with other investors on message boards.


HOW THE SOUL IS SOLD
Thomas Moore, author of the unexpected best seller "Care of the Soul" and the subsequent and much expected best seller "Soul Mates," opens the workshop with a story about a call he got from someone at "Oprah" after his appearance on the TV show.
"She wanted the names of people whose lives had been changed by my book," he says.
"I said no. She said, 'Don't you want to change people's lives?' I said no. They won't be changed anyway. The person who says they're the most changed is the least changed."
For any of the 200 people in attendance who want to give it a shot anyway, at a table in the back is a display of the ways Moore is selling his souls.
There is the handsomely boxed set of the two books, and separate hardcover, paperback and audio versions.
For people who need a more specific approach on how not to change their lives, there is the $58, six-volume set of tapes titled "Soul Life," with cassettes on topics like "Introduction to Soul Life" and "Soul and the Family."


Police Officer Found Guilty in Killing
A housing police officer has been convicted of criminally negligent homicide in the shooting death of a man who was stopped at a traffic light in lower Manhattan, a spokeswoman for the Manhattan District Attorney said yesterday.
The shooting occurred as the officer searched for a burglary suspect.
It was the first time since 1977 that a New York City police officer had been convicted of homicide.


School-Election Close-Up: 2 Wins, 1 Loss, 1 Surprise; Perth Amboy
Yes or no, it didn't matter which way the residents of Perth Amboy voted.
But in this low-income Middlesex County city -- one of 30 districts that get "special needs" aid from Trenton -- they rejected the budget anyway.
The vote was 982 to 733, in a turnout of 24 percent.
In most school districts, a rejected budget goes on to the municipal council, which usually makes cuts, though local school officials can then appeal to Trenton.
But under the state requirement that every special-needs district contribute a "minimum fair share" to its own schools, Perth Amboy cannot legally reduce its school taxes below $17.8 million; the total budget is $69 million.


A Serial Tree-Killer Confesses
Like George Washington in the legend of old, Peter Dworan stood up and admitted to chopping down the cherry tree.
And two others.
Mr.
Dworan, who lives with his wife in a three-family house near Shore Road in Bay Ridge, confessed to the arborcides Thursday in Kings County Supreme Court.
He apparently cut down the trees, to the great chagrin of his neighbors, for that most precious of real estate commodities: a water view.


John Hope Franklin
BEFORE THE EMANCIPATION proclamation came out in 1863, they had these freedom meetings where they waited for the wires, waited for the message to come," John Hope Franklin says as he hovers like a supplicant by the silent fax machine at the history department office at Duke University. "And here we are still waiting, as if there's nothing new under the sun."
Franklin, impeccable in his blue blazer, gray slacks, blue shirt and blue rep tie, ramrod straight and as sharp as a stiletto on the eve of his 80th birthday, says it in a droll deadpan, like an actor playing with his lines.
But if anyone in America can link the Era of Lincoln with the Era of Gingrich, it is John Hope Franklin, perhaps the century's pre-eminent black scholar and a man who has both lived and written much of the story of race in America.


It's Not Cramped Quarters, It's How We Raise Our Kids
To The Editor:
I don't think the premise of the argument in "The Neighbors From Hell" (April 9) is correct.
It's not that we are New Yorkers all crowded together.
It's that children aren't raised with any respect for others or consideration, morals or manners.


Tide Changes: Mexico's Rebels Talk
A new round of peace talks to end the uprising in Chiapas finally got under way today, as rebel supporters gave up their encampment and Government negotiators took their places at a table set up on a concrete basketball court in this poor Indian town.
Although the issues of Indian rights and poverty remain essentially what they were during a round of unsuccessful talks in February 1994, sweeping changes in Mexico have shifted the advantages of the two sides.
One effect has been to diminish the impact of the issues at the heart of the conflict.


A Sartorial Solution
I'd go for renaming our metropolitan-area football teams, but in such a way as to avoid arousing parochial jealousies.
Simply eliminate geographical references like New York or New Jersey.
In their place, use a characteristic part of the uniform -- the socks, for example, as has been done for years by baseball teams in Boston and Chicago.
Although hosiery may serve well as a symbol in baseball, for the muscular football players I would suggest the sweater-like garment worn over the upper torso, commonly called a jersey.


Women With H.I.V. Helped in One Place
ON a recent Wednesday a Lynbrook woman had an appointment for a gynecological exam on the fourth floor of the Lippert Pavilion of North Shore University Hospital in Manhasset.
Afterward she refilled a prescription and chatted with nurses.
"It's like one-stop shopping here," said the woman, who insisted on anonymity.
"If I don't feel well or need more medicine or something happens during the week and I just want to talk, this is the only place I can come to."


'Art &amp; Lies'
To the Editor:
In his review of Jeanette Winterson's "Art &amp; Lies: A Piece for Three Voices and a Bawd" (March 26), William H. Pritchard finds that if Ms.
Winterson brings Virginia Woolf to mind, "it is the unreadable Woolf of 'The Waves' rather than the magnificent Woolf of 'To the Lighthouse.' "


Mother of No. 1 Pick Finally at Ease
Kathy Carter is worried no more.
"When Ki-Jana was growing up," she said, "I worried about other kids falling on him when they played. But most of the kids were the same age, and they were all falling, but still they all looked so big. It was the same thing in high school and college. Now, the kids are all about the same age, but bigger."
Bigger, indeed.
Yesterday, the Cincinnati Bengals traded up for the first choice over all in the National Football League draft and took Carter, the Penn State running back.
At 5 feet 10 inches and 227 pounds, he will have to contend with defensive linemen perhaps 100 pounds heavier.


INSIDE
INVESTING IT /Page 5  One man's financial makeover: Straightening out a San Francisco architect whose money is in a muddle.
By Jane Gross.
INVESTING IT /Page 6  Chrysler has cash.
Raiders love companies with cash.
Kirk Kerkorian loves Chrysler.
Investors love raiders.
Here's a list (of companies with cash).
By Reed Abelson.
MUTUAL FUNDS /Page 9  A novice at the fund-management game steps out, seeking to follow the trails blazed by Buffett.
By Carole Gould.
EARNING IT /Page 15  Yes, Della, there is still a Secretary's Day.
What's missing are the secretaries.
By David M. Herszenhorn.


South Africa Emerges as a Force for Extending Nuclear Arms Pact
If support for indefinite renewal of a treaty limiting the spread of nuclear weapons is growing, a lot of the credit goes to a new force on the international scene: South Africa.
As a conference here on the treaty's future heads into its second week, South Africa could produce a far wider margin of consensus for an indefinite extension than the United States could achieve alone, arms control experts say.


BEHIND THE WHEEL/Ferrari 456GT and F355 Berlinetta; Ever Exotic, but Less Eccentric
IT can't be all fun and games managing Automobili Ferrari these days.
Sure, you still get to drive fast cars where nobody worries about speed limits.
And, no doubt, you can still work in a few long lunches to discuss the merits of Nicasil-coated cylinder liners and ZF Servotronic variable-assist steering over fresh porcini and aged Barolo.
But no longer is every Ferrari the factory makes sold before it reaches the showroom floor.
Too many Italians, it seems, now regard expensive sports cars as symbols of political scandal.
And too many Americans with money to burn would rather be seen in Range Rovers.


RUNAWAY MEMORY
In "Runaway Memory" (Hers, April 2), Linda Wolfe poignantly captured what Barbara Schrier, curator of the Chicago Historical Society exhibit "Becoming American Women," sought to express.


Big Risks, Big Losses, Big Fight
IT'S a long way from Wall Street to the narrow mountain roads leading here.
But Morgan Stanley &amp; Company knows the route all too well.
The fanciest firm in finance, Morgan Stanley is embroiled in a messy lawsuit that boils down to one simple question: Who is to blame when state investment funds embrace risk and lose big -- the brokers who became rich on the state business or the state itself.
The case, to be decided shortly by the State Supreme Court, has implications for Orange County, Calif., and other municipal finance calamities.
The case here began in 1983, when Kathryn M. Lester, a young secretary-turned-trader, was put in charge of West Virginia's $2.2 billion municipal investment fund.
Supervising her were a flock of politically connected bosses, several of whom ended up discredited or in jail.
Her formal training was in home economics, but with a mind for numbers and a stomach for aggressive trades, Ms.
Lester quickly turned the sleepy fund into the most successful in the nation.
She made billion-dollar bets and earned millions for her state, displaying a "Working Girl" savvy in her wheelings and dealings.


Corrections
An article in the Neighborhood Report last Sunday about a new piece of art in the traffic island at Fifth Avenue and 23d Street misspelled the last name of the dean of the Cooper Union School of Architecture.
He is John Hejduk.


The Back Flip in Hip-Hop
THE figure is a silhouette, a human windmill dancing hip-hop style furiously, frenetically, almost fast-forward, against a gritty, wet-slick cityscape.
Flashing in and out are the opening credits for Fox 5's sitcom "Living Single." At the end, the figure stops and steps to the side, panting and laughing.
"I was tired," Leslie Segar recalls of the trailer, shot last year.
"I was sucking wind."


Everett Survives The Climb
He landed in the infamous Dallas Green doghouse before he was given his first Mets uniform, and he dug himself into an even deeper hole the first week of camp.
But Carl Everett, the rookie outfielder, is now the Mets' opening-day right fielder.
Everett got his big opportunity when Ryan Thompson suffered a tear in an elbow ligament this spring.
Expected, at first, to contend for the center field spot, Everett -- who lost that option with the arrival of Brett Butler -- has now found himself with a second chance to disprove the reputation he earned in his first two organizations, the Yankees and Marlins.
That rap?
That Everett has attitude problems and might not have what it takes to make it in the major leagues.


IF IT'S TUESDAY, THIS MUST BE DAD'S HOUSE
If parents who are divorced think switching houses, neighborhood, community, possessions, friends and familiarity is so easy for kids, why don't the adults do it and leave the kids in one spot ("If It's Tuesday, This Must Be Dad's House," by David Sheff, March 26).
Divorce is no picnic, but putting kids in the middle only serves spoiled parents who continue to put themselves first.
CYNTHIA NEWMAN Scotch Plains, N.J.


George Wolfe and His Theater of Inclusion
FOR YEARS, THE JOSEPH PAPP Public Theater had the rudest box office in town.
Among the staff members, it was even a matter of pride.
One of the first things George C. Wolfe did when he took over as producer at the Public in March 1993 was to dismiss them.
Ticket sales can still be rushed, as might be expected when clerks at three windows try to handle five theaters for impatient patrons who won't take "sold out" for an answer.
But the mood these days is far friendlier.


Commercial Property/Atlantic City; A 74,000-Square-Foot Shopping Center Passes Go
IN large and economically vibrant cities, it might not be all that big a deal: A 74,000-square-foot shopping center with a Thriftway supermarket, a CVS drug store, a variety store, a low-priced apparel store and maybe a Taco Bell.
But in Atlantic City, the April 6 groundbreaking for Renaissance Plaza, a few blocks inland from the Boardwalk and bounded by Atlantic, Arctic, New York and Kentucky Avenues, was a big deal indeed.
Caterers served mahi-mahi and other fancy foods under a big tent.
Mayor James Whelan showed up, as did the chairman of the Casino Reinvestment Development Authority, Fredrick P. Nickles, New Jersey State Senator William Gormley and assorted businessmen and community leaders.


India Presses U.S. to Pass Biotic Treaty
India says it will seek to block American access to medicinal plants and other biological material from the third world unless the United States ratifies the international Biodiversity Convention by this summer.
The material -- herbs, medicinal plants, leaves, shrubs, roots, seeds and flowers -- is used in the drug, pharmaceutical and cosmetic industries, which are dominated by American and European companies.


Ellen Dubin, Matthew Shapiro
Ellen Rachel Dubin, the daughter of Seth and Dorothy Dubin of Manhattan, was married last evening to Matthew William Shapiro, a son of Alfred and Jaclyn Shapiro, also of Manhattan.
Rabbi Linda Goodman officiated at the Brooklyn Botanic Garden.
Ms.
Dubin, 31, is keeping her name.
She graduated from Amherst College.
She owns Ellen Dubin Photography, a photography studio in New York.
Her father is a partner at Satterlee Stephens Burke &amp; Burke, a New York law firm, and is also the president of the New York Hall of Science in Flushing, Queens.
Her mother is a real estate broker with Douglas Elliman, the real estate company in New York.


Laura Gaines, Michael Semler
Laura Ebersole Gaines, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Stanley N. Gaines of Palm Beach, Fla., was married there yesterday to Michael Semler, a son of Margot S. Semler and Ralph Semler, both of Washington.
The Rev.
Ralph Warren performed the ceremony at the Episcopal Church of Bethesda-by-the-Sea.
Mrs.
Semler, 26, was until recently the office manager at the Best Friends Foundation for inner-city teen-agers in Washington.
She graduated from Trinity College in Hartford.
Her father retired as the chairman of GNB Inc., an automotive and industrial battery company in Princeton, N.J.


IF IT'S TUESDAY, THIS MUST BE DAD'S HOUSE
It should be said that while a sense of "home" is obviously important, so is a sense of having a mother and a father.
And joint custody is, despite its flaws, better for a child than growing up in a household of unmitigated contention and far better than growing up without active, parental love.
RICHARD M. DEY Hingham, Mass.


Scientists and Engineers Need Broader Training, Report Says
The United States' system of doctoral education in science and engineering, while long a world model, should be reshaped to produce more "versatile scientists," rather than narrowly specialized researchers, according to a report by three of the nation's leading scientific advisory groups.
Many doctoral students are channeled into such specialization that they are not flexible enough for jobs involving new technologies and industries, a global marketplace, intensified economic competition, public health needs and environmental deterioration, the report said.


At the Casinos
What's happening on stage at all the Atlantic City casinos this week.
Tickets are available through Ticketmaster, (800) 736-1420.
Bally's Park Place
Boardwalk and Park Place. (800) 225-5977.


Maggie Kuhn, 89, the Founder Of the Gray Panthers, Is Dead
Maggie Kuhn, who called herself a little old woman and celebrated her forced retirement in 1970 by founding the Gray Panthers, died yesterday at the home she shared in Philadelphia with a like-minded coterie.
She was 89.
"She died peacefully in her sleep," said her personal assistant, Sue Leary, who could not say which of Miss Kuhn's many ailments, from arthritis to osteoporosis, had caused her death.


The Man Who Invented the Cat in the Hat
DR.
SEUSS &amp; MR.
GEISEL A Biography.
By Judith Morgan and Neil Morgan.
Illustrated. 346 pp.
New York: Random House. $25.


For Sale: Corporate America's Big Blue Period
IN the glory days of I.B.M., when shirts were white and the ink was always black, there was the art collection.
The founder, Thomas J. Watson Sr., gathered thousands of the finest paintings and hung them in offices worldwide, a sign of the company's lofty pedigree.
Now, I.B.M. has come down a peg or two, squeezing $6.5 billion out of its cost structure in the last three years alone and cutting staff by half in the last decade.
And it is selling much of its art collection.


New York in the Heat of the Jazz Age: Of Media and Money
EMBOLDENED by its own brand of municipal narcissism, New York has sometimes seemed almost too convinced of its own importance, as if every cultural ripple has started with a rock thrown in a New York pond.
But it would be hard to dispute the importance of the creative ferment that radiated in the 1920's from Manhattan's core, a media capital where career ambition intersected with commercial interests to create new forms that last until today.
Sometimes sheer will made it happen.


Discovering A Village In Vietnam
THE village, an old French hill station built in 1922 in the remote mountains of northwest Vietnam, had had almost no Western visitors since before World War II.
It rates only four short paragraphs in the Lonely Planet guidebook, the bible of offbeat travelers.
But this past year the buzz started on Sa Pa.
"I would guess that maybe 50 people from Aspen are traveling in Vietnam right now," said an art dealer whom we met at our hotel in Sa Pa, "but I'm one of the first to make it up here." A carpenter from England said he had been there for 10 weeks.
"I've been on the road for 10 months in Asia," said a young Israeli, "and this is one of the best spots."


Supermarket Lobbying Intense
Critics and proponents of a controversial proposal to build a Pathmark superstore in East Harlem have intensified lobbying efforts in advance of a vote on the project.
Both sides say the vote is too close to call.
The Manhattan Borough Board -- which includes Manhattan's 10 City Council members, Borough President Ruth W. Messinger, and, in this matter, the head of Community Board 11, Edward L. Baca -- is scheduled to decide on Thursday whether to sell a vacant, city-owned lot at 125th Street and Third Avenue to the supermarket's developer.
If the sale is approved, Mayor Giuliani will have final say.
He has not taken a public stand on the project.


Moroccan Storm
To the Editor: Your article "It's a Mirage. No! It's an Auberge!" (Feb. 26) reminded us of April 1989, when we and another couple were birding in Morocco.
We wanted to stay in Erfoud for the night but the accommodations looked less than ideal.
Our driver knew of this place out in the desert but he wasn't sure if it was open yet.
We decided to take our chances and push on, since we were looking for the Egyptian nightjar anyway.
Strong winds started to come up, and by the time we got there the makings of a full-fledged sandstorm were in evidence.
We were fortunate to have had a four-wheel-drive vehicle.


Jazz's New Fans Act as if It's Michael Jordan on Sax
THE SAXOPHONIST JOSHUA Redman's recent shows at the Village Vanguard had longtime observers of the local jazz scene laughing with amusement at the audience.
There was Mr.
Redman, playing his usual straight-ahead jazz with customary ease, and there was his audience, going bonkers.
The response of those who sat in the rows nearest the stage was fervent and out of the ordinary.
Mostly male, mostly in their early 20's (like Mr. Redman himself), they gasped in wide-eyed amazement every time his saxophone squealed.
When he honked rhythm-and-blues cliches, fists went up in the air.
When he moved his head back and his horn lifted up in a classic jazz pose, they drew a collective breath.
And when he honked louder in the high register, they roared.


The Commissioner's Team? Maybe Dead Last
CHICAGO WHITE SOX
If the White Sox lose offense this season, they will know where to find it: in Japan.
Julio Franco (.319, 98 r.b.i.) and Darrin Jackson (.312, 51) are there instead of being in the Chicago lineup.
In their place are two castoffs from Baltimore, Chris Sabo (.256, 42) and Mike Devereaux (.203, 33).


Yankees the Class of a Division Flush With Contenders
Argue all day about the best hitter in baseball.
Spend your vacation bickering over the best pitcher.
Wait on hold for an hour to tell a squawking talk show host what you think the best team is.
But do not waste your morning, your sun time or your spare quarters discussing which division is the best in the major leagues this season.
Confidently designate the American League East and speed to another issue.
No one will debate you.
Well, no one should debate you.
Not if they have watched the Yankees, Blue Jays and Orioles assemble dangerous teams.
Not if they are honest enough to admit that, strictly based on scouting reports, no division goes three deep with talented teams like the A.L.
East.
Actually, the Red Sox could make it a four-way scuffle while Detroit is doomed to absorb constant punishment.


Forget Comic Relief: '95 Mets Get Set for Serious Business
They still hear the jokes, every once in a while.
They are still one of David Letterman's objects of scorn.
Ask the Mets and they will tell you that the 1993 season, the season of 103 losses, seems to have taken place a long, long time ago.
In reality, though, it has been just one strike-shortened season since the Mets were considered the laughingstock of baseball, and Letterman still chuckles every once in a while.


Cajun Casual
BABY JAKE'S ++  (212) 254-2229; 14 First Avenue, at First Street; $; American Express
This former luncheonette serves pleasant Cajun cooking in a funky setting of checkerboard linoleum floors, red Formica tables, Southern road-sign displays and decorated shower curtains.
Salmon hush puppies in a beer-batter crust or fried cornmeal-coated oysters are good ways to begin.
Main courses include grilled sirloin steak with a wine and mushroom sauce, a vegetarian burrito, grilled breast of chicken with a pecan-maple barbecue sauce, and blackened catfish with a bourbon-pecan butter sauce. ($25 and Under: 1/21/94) The Star System The New York Times's star system rates restaurants on the following scale. ****
Extraordinary ***
Excellent **
Very Good *
Good None Poor to Satisfactory Price Range The price symbols are based on the cost of a three-course dinner with tax and a 15 percent tip (drinks not included).
Past reviews.
Hundreds of Times restaurant reviews are available from @times, an arts and entertainment guide on America Online.
Software and information: (800) 548-5201.


On Sunday Vallone Tends Queens Garden Of Grass Roots
PETER F. VALLONE, the City Council Speaker, allows generously for the spiritual unknowns of life.
His sense of otherworldliness is demonstrated every morning as he shrewdly rotates his attendance at daily Mass among all four Roman Catholic parishes of constituents thriving in the frame-house, working-class hamlet of Astoria, Queens.
The Speaker's tolerance of the spirit world was stretched to the sputtering point the other day by the sight of Mrs.
Erica's Tarot and Palm Reading establishment, an illegal business with big illicit signs emblazoned across a two-story house in Astoria's residential zone.


RESULTS PLUS
N.B.A.
Nuggets Nip the Warriors  Reggie Williams had 27 points as the visiting Denver Nuggets outlasted the Golden State Warriors, 130-129, in two overtimes yesterday.
The Nuggets play Sacramento in Denver today, with the winner gaining the Western Conference's eighth and final playoff spot. (AP) BULLS 116, HORNETS 100: Michael Jordan and Toni Kukoc scored 19 points each as Chicago beat visiting Charlotte, its opponent in the first-round of the playoffs. (AP)


Stacey A. Buck, Andrew J. Morris
Stacey Ann Buck, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Walter Hellier Buck of Scarsdale, N.Y., was married yesterday to Andrew Jeffrey Morris, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
James Douglas Morris of Columbus, Ohio.
The Rev.
William Bergen, a Roman Catholic priest, officiated at the Church of St.
Ignatius Loyola in New York.
Mrs.
Morris, 26, graduated from Dartmouth College and received a master's degree in anthropology and bioarcheology from Arizona State University.
She works as an archeologist and osteologist with BRW Inc., an engineering and urban design firm in Minneapolis.


NEW YORKERS &amp; CO.
Bronx Firm's Winning Bid Travels Electronically
The HSM Software and Computer Company, a small minority-owned business in the northeast Bronx, recently won a $52,000 contract to provide New Jersey Transit with security designs for a new light rail transit system.
The company bid on the contract electronically, after getting help from the South Bronx Overall Economic Development Corporation, a nonprofit agency known as Sobro.
Two months ago Sobro started a program, Defense Diversification Using Electronic Commerce, in which experts go into small businesses in the Bronx to show employees how to bid electronically for Government contracts.
By 1997, the Federal Government will require all government contractors to bid electronically.
An Italian Designer's Journey From Milan to Madison Avenue
Martino Midali, a popular clothing designer in Italy, is trying to make his mark in the United States.


April 16-22: Infant Deaths; A Housewife is Convicted of Murdering Her Five Children
For nearly a quarter century, the fact that Waneta Hoyt, a housewife in rural New York, had lost five babies to sudden deaths was taken as medical evidence that Sudden Infant Death Syndrome had a genetic basis.
A leading SIDS expert, Dr.
Alfred Steinschneider, had studied Ms.
Hoyt's last two children, and in a pioneering research article in 1972 he cited them as evidence that SIDS ran in families.
His study offered hope that children at risk could be identified and saved.


To Satisfy the Avid Angler, Nature and Currents Get a Little Help: 1.5 Million Fish
The two men, standing with their backs to the 12-foot falls, cast their lines into the rapids and let their lures drift into the placid water where the trout were supposed to be resting after the night's heavy rain.
The smaller man, an unlighted cigar in his mouth, eyes obscured by sunglasses, unruly blond hair partly hidden under a baseball cap, suddenly began reeling in his line.
After a brief struggle he scooped up a medium-sized brook trout into a green net.
From a bridge overhead, Bob Soldwedel watched with a mixture of envy, exasperation and pride.
Envy because he had just stood thigh deep in the same cold water, part of a stream running next to this town's historic Red Mill, with nary a nibble.
Exasperation because earlier, as he led two visitors on a morning tour of his favorite fishing holes, he had lost two prized spinners.
And pride because, as head of the state's Bureau of Freshwater Fisheries, he had as much to do with the fish being there as nature, evolution and the currents of the South Branch of the Raritan River.


Branching Out


THE EMASCULATION OF SPORTS
Professional sports are a microcosm of our society.
Organizations today are in a survival mode, eliminating employees under fancy-named plans that produce short-term profits and long-term anguish.
Most workers see themselves as free agents seeking the highest bidder.
Perhaps we need to re-examine our values.
We always hate what we see in others that may be wrong with ourselves.
RICHARD S. EMRICH Livonia, Mich.


Islanders Tumble Right Out of Playoffs
After this afternoon's embarrassment of a 40-minute performance against the worst team in the National Hockey League, the Islanders made official what most everybody knew anyway: they will not make the playoffs.
Bring on 1995-96.


Sari J. Mayer, Jeffrey D. Lapin
Sari Jocelyn Mayer, the daughter of Donald and Ylain Mayer of New York, was married last evening to Jeffrey David Lapin, a son of Harvey and Cheryl Lapin of Northbrook, Ill.
Rabbi Robert N. Levine and Brian Z. Mayer, a rabbinical student who is the bride's brother, performed the ceremony at the Water's Edge restaurant in Long Island City, Queens.
The bride, 28, is an analyst of telecommunications stocks at Salomon Brothers in New York.
She graduated cum laude from Amherst College and received an M.B.A degree from New York University.


Carole Stitt, Benjamin Bruner
Carole Mignon Stitt, the daughter of Hazel and Burton Stitt of Sea Ranch, Calif., and Benjamin Bender Bruner, a son of the Rev.
Laman H. and Sarah Bruner of Syracuse, are to be married today.
The bridegroom's father, an Episcopal minister, is to perform the ceremony at the Swedenborgian Church in Pacific Heights, Calif.
The bride, 42, is a brokerage manager at Charles Schwab &amp; Company in San Francisco.
She graduated from the University of California at Santa Barbara and received a master of divinity degree from Golden Gate Baptist Theological Seminary.
Her father is the owner of Burton E. Stitt &amp; Associates, employee benefits consultants in Sea Ranch.
Her mother is an artist.


Light and Delicate, Stewed or Braised, Rabbit Is Gaining Favor
RABBIT has been showing up more and more on restaurant menus and in butcher shops recently.
Chefs like it because it is light and delicate but has a more pronounced flavor than chicken and lends itself to a wide variety of seasonings.
It is also low in fat.
Rabbit is delicious stewed in white wine with herbs or braised in a mustard sauce and served on a bed of noodles.
It is also good rolled in bread crumbs and baked in the oven, which gives it a crisp coating and keeps it moist inside.


The Quiet Power of the Quilt


Back to the Grass Roots
LOSING GROUND American Environmentalism at the Close of the Twentieth Century.
By Mark Dowie. 317 pp.
Cambridge, Mass: The MIT Press. $25.


A Feast for the Ears as Well as the Eyes
NOW I know why I wait until late in the day to work outdoors.
The birds start to sing when the day is closing, sometimes solo, sometimes in populous choruses of tiny bodies hidden in protective shrubs.
The "cheer-up cheerily" of the robin is particularly delightful, the song going on for some time, and the sound an enthusiastic offering for sheer pleasure, I suppose.
It makes the work outdoors go faster and happier.
The gradual return of songbirds, inviting an appreciative work break, and the chilling weather earlier this month, inviting a return indoors, may have put some gardening on hold.
But spring is no time to dilly-dally.
The season moves along at quite a rapid pace once it gets started.


Donnybrook Ahead in Democrats' Bastion
Whatever is happening to the Democrats elsewhere, they are alive and well in San Francisco and spoiling for a fight -- among themselves.
The mayor's race here this year is shaping up as one of the most interesting and significant city contests in the country, an electoral donnybrook involving at least five candidates, all Democrats, that will severely test the vitality and resilience of the liberal, progressive coalition that long has ruled the nation's most free-spirited major metropolis.


Sheik's Tapped Calls Entered in Terrorism Trial
Between mid-February and early June 1993, militant Islamic loyalists in Pakistan, Saudi Arabia and, possibly, other countries had a series of telephone conversations with Sheik Omar Abdel Rahman in the United States that were captured by F.B.I. wiretaps.
Federal prosecutors say this was the period in which the sheik was leading a "war of urban terrorism against the United States," a campaign that they say included the bombing of the World Trade Center on Feb. 26, 1993, and plans to bomb other major New York buildings and transportation links.


Moroccan Storm
To the Editor: The flowery account by Jane Garmey of driving to Erfoud through barely marked sand dunes might be slighty misleading.
It is certainly an exotic trip, but rather than a sandy track in the desert, the road to Erfoud, which I have taken by bus, is a perfectly good highway.
Erfoud itself is a big beautiful oasis with a campsite and a four-star government hotel.
EDWARD FIELD  New York, N.Y.


Flat Tax Proposal Gives Middle Class a Break; Lifting Rich Boats
To the Editor:
"Debate on Flat Tax Revives Simplicity vs. Fairness Issue" (front page, April 18) on Representative Dick Armey's flat tax proposal, otherwise informative, might lead some readers to think that the Armey plan would merely substitute a single rate for our present five-rate structure while eliminating exemptions and itemized deductions.
But it is much more extreme than that.


April 16-22: A Great Divide; The United States is the New Bastion of Inequality
Of all the industrialized Western nations, not one has as great a gulf between rich and poor as the United States.
While Congress argues about who must scrimp and who can save, new studies, based on figures from the 1980's, show that 40 percent of the nation's wealth is concentrated in only 1 percent of American households.
Even Britain, a nation with a history of severe economic stratification, doesn't come close; the richest 1 percent of families there hold 18 percent of the country's wealth.
The United States is not only the most unequal nation in the West, but it is also "growing more unequal faster than the other industrialized countries," said Edward N. Wolff, an economics professor at New York University.
One hundred percent of the increased wealth during the 1980's went to the top 20 percent of American families.
Why?
Possible explanations include: falling wages for unskilled labor, the decline of trade unions, low minimum wages and low tax rates on the wealthy.


Prostitution Trial Upsets France-Gabon Ties
With its assertions about the private life of the President of Gabon, a prostitution trial in Paris has upset the traditionally close relations between France and its former colony.
Francesco Smalto, an Italian fashion designer charged with procuring prostitutes, admitted in court last week that for years he and two associates had provided what amounted to a call-girl service for the Gabonese President, Omar Bongo, in order to secure a tailoring business said to be worth $600,000 a year.


Quick Bite/Union City; When Does a Mere Sandwich Become a Genuine Hero?
Behind the counter of La Bella Salumeria, his shop in Union City, Gino Ricca layers Italian meats and cheeses into a succulent symmetry.
One bite, and you know why they call them heroes.
His family-owned store harks back to the period before World War II when Union City was an Italian enclave.
Since the 1950's, Latin American immigrants have lent their own flavor to the area.


Corrections
A caption on page 13 of the Arts and Leisure section today, with an article about the cartoonist R. Crumb, misstates the title of a drawing.
It is "Mr. Natural," not "Keep On Truckin'."


LONG ISLAND GUIDE
FREE CHOICES
TODAY Chamber music dominates the scene today with four Island-based groups: musicians with the Long Island Composers Alliance perform members' new works for string quartets at 2:30 P.M. at the Bellmore Library on Bedford Avenue (785-2990); the Roslyn Artists String Quartet plays "Vienna to Broadway" at 2 P.M. at the Bethpage Library on Powell Avenue (931-3907); the East End Winds offer Handel, Milhaud and Sullivan at 3 P.M. at St.
Mary's Parish Hall on Ponquogue Avenue in Hampton Bays (728-6241), and the American Chamber Ensemble performs Mozart and Dvorak at 3 P.M. at the Port Washington Library on Library Drive (883-4400).
Marking the 50th anniversary of the humorist's death, the Garden City Readers' Theater stages "Bentley's Best" at 2 P.M. at the Rockville Centre Library on North Village Avenue (766-6258).


Weavers Aren't The Whole Story In Fiber Art
BETWEEN 1950 AND 1980, MANY artists who work with fiber abandoned the loom to knot, braid, twine, wrap and crochet.
Their work changed the centuries-old craft from two-dimensional tapestries to three-dimensional sculpture.
Even weavers produced pieces that were technically innovative and monumental in scale -- in some cases huts and cocoons large enough to shelter their creators.
Fast-forward to the 1990's: Looms are humming again, and increasingly programmed by computers.
Compared with works of the previous decades, today's pieces are less ambitious, smaller scaled, smoother textured and occasionally wittier.


IN SHORT: FICTION
AMERICAN NOISE  By Campbell McGrath. Ecco, cloth, $23; paper, $11.


Correction
Because of an editing error, the Frugal Traveler column on April 9, about a bus trip from Santiago, Chile, to Buenos Aires, misstated the circumstances of the death of President Salvador Allende in Chile and his relationship with the Chilean novelist Isabel Allende.
Mr.
Allende died in 1973 during a military coup, in what a medical team ruled was a suicide.
Ms.
Allende is not his widow; she is the daughter of his cousin.


IN SHORT: FICTION
HAWAIIAN COWBOYS  By John Yau. Black Sparrow, cloth, $25; paper, $13.50.


Fewer Secretaries on Hand To Celebrate Their Day
DELLA, Perry Mason's secretary, is dead. But it's no big mystery who did it.
Even as the country prepares to mark National Secretaries Day for the 43d year this Wednesday, the letter-taking, coffee-fetching, hatted-and-gloved Dellas in our offices grow fewer and fewer.
The perpetrators?
Everything from downsizing to the spread of computers to the belief that fetching coffee is exploitive.


INVENTION: A Rose Is Made
To plant breeders, a rose is not just a rose.
It may be plant patent 9,042 like Meipaleo above, being sold under the name Marco Polo.
Like other new varieties of plants, Marco Polo was patented, by the Conard-Pyle nurseries of West Grove, Pa.
When Stephen Scanniello, the rosarian at the Brooklyn Botanic Garden, was asked for his picks for top roses on the market this spring, he picked the Marco Polo and several others: Regatta, a pink apricot with a strong aroma; Compassion, a climbing rose, and Curly Pink, a classic from 1948.
The Marco Polo is distinguished by its four-inch bloom, many medium-size thorns, leathery leaves and large conical buds, all described in some detail in the patent.
Also important in plant patents is lineage.
Meipaleo's seed parent was Meinuzeten, marketed under the name Ambassador.
The pollen parent was a cross between Sunbright and Anne-Lise Rothenberger.
Forty-five plants from the mating were grown in Antibes, France, and tested and compared.
The plants in the stores today were all asexually reproduced from one chosen plant.


Q. &amp; A.
What Is A Report On Title?
Q What is a title report and how does it differ from an abstract? . . .
Scott Tyrus, Bronx.
A "That's a good question because the differentiation has gotten blurred," said David L. Smith, a Manhattan lawyer who specializes in real estate.
"An abstract has to do with only the history of the title. It's really a summary of the ownership, while a title report is a presentation of everything affecting the title."


A Record $1 Million For a Tiffany Lamp
A Japanese private museum paid a record $1.1 million for a Tiffany lamp at an auction yesterday in Manhattan.
The leaded glass lamp, with a shade patterned in shocking pink and orange after the leaves of the Virginia creeper vine, was sold to the Louis Comfort Tiffany Museum in Nagoya.


Bookshelf
LIVES OF THE WRITERS: Comedies, Tragedies (and What the Neighbors Thought).
By Kathleen Krull.
Illustrated by Kathryn Hewitt.
Harcourt Brace. $18.95. (Ages 8 and up) The companion volume to "Lives of the Musicians" is a bouquet of deft prose sketches of 20 writers (eight of them women) ranging from William Shakespeare and Miguel de Cervantes to Murasaki Shikibu, Jane Austen and Emily Dickinson, each accompanied by a witty, stylized portrait.


Superfund On Long Island
To the Editor:
Your article on April 2 about the Liberty Industrial Finishing Superfund site in South Farmingdale, L.I., missed the opportunity to show how one Long Island community is working with a private landowner to solve a 50-year-old problem.


An Innocent on the Shanghai Exchange
THERE'S a wisp of magic in the air.
Men in double-breasted, $1,000 Italian suits chatter on portable phones in the back seats of limousines snaking through city streets; new buildings shoot upward on nearly every block; new businesses are created every day.
This is Shanghai in the 1990's.


Earth Days Have Become Earth Years
Yesterday, even as our thoughts and prayers were focused on the tragedy in Oklahoma City, we took time to remember that 25 years ago, a simple idea for a teach-in exploded into a national event involving 20 million people that changed the course of history.
Following the first Earth Day, our nation built from scratch the most advanced health and environmental safeguards in the world.
It is a great American success story that proves the old-fashioned idea that individuals can make a difference, that when the people speak, their leaders can listen and do something about it.
It ought to be a source of inspiration.
After all, in the past 25 years, we've cut air pollution by a third, even though we drive twice as many cars twice as many miles as we did then.
We've cut emissions of lead by 98 percent, and countless children are the better for it.
Twice as many rivers and lakes are safe for swimming.
And where 25 years ago boxes and beer cans lined the roadways, today people of all ages are recycling in 6,000 community programs.


Among a Judge's Choices, Some Extremes Between Extremes
EVERY year for the last 25, the Stamford Museum and Nature Center has cast its net in the art pool and invited a judge to sift through the catch.
The results, exhibited under the title "Connecticut Art," have been surprisingly varied considering the limitations imposed by geography and the predictable recurrance of a few regulars.
Still, the shows are generally more interesting for what they reveal of the judges' personalities than for the news they bring of the scene.


Elizabeth Dewberry, Robert Butler
Elizabeth Dewberry and Robert Olen Butler, writers based in Lake Charles, La., are to be married today at Tavern on the Green in New York.
The Rev.
Dr.
Bonnie Rosborough, a minister of the United Church of Christ, is to perform the ceremony.
Ms.
Dewberry, 32, is a novelist whose works include "Break the Heart of Me" and "Many Things Have Happened Since He Died." She graduated from Vanderbilt University and received a Ph.D. in 20th-century American fiction from Emory University.
She is a daughter of Sallie and James W. Dewberry Jr. of Birmingham, Ala.


When Broadway's Lights Go Down, Stalkers Appear
The first letter arrived a few weeks ago.
The writer said he was a fan of the Broadway actress, and that she should be on the big screen.
But it quickly became ugly.
"It said it should be a porno film," the young woman said.
"It said what he'd have me wearing, then it got really nasty -- about what I'd feel when he does this to that. . . ."


In the Region/Westchester; A Widow Takes Charge at a Real Estate Business
LAST Monday marked the one-year anniversary of a tragic day at Houlihan/ Lawrence, the largest residential real estate company in Westchester County.
The company's headquarters in a white clapboard building is where Peter Bailey Seaman spent most of his time while he was chairman and chief executive from May 1990 until April 1994, when he died of a brain tumor at age 42.
During her husband's illness, Nancy M. Seaman said, it was just assumed that in the event of his death she would take control of the company.
"We never talked about it because we always assumed that Peter was going to recover," Ms.
Seaman said.
"Up until the time he died, we still hoped and believed he would make it."


Roslyn Supermarket Has Local Support
Nowhere in your story regarding the construction of a Stop &amp; Shop supermarket in the commercial center of Roslyn Village  [ "Giant Store Jolts Roslyn Village," March 26 ]  did the reporter observe that a village of one square mile in size is in enormous economic pain, with a shrinking tax base and a half dozen stores vacant in our shopping area.
Nowhere in your story did you note that the proposal to build a supermarket was on land long zoned for commerical use and the site of a far larger retail project that had already been approved but shelved when the economy turned sour.
Nor did you report that there is important local support for the supermarket, including the Chamber of Commerce, which voted in favor of the plan because Stop &amp; Shop is willing to make its desperately needed parking spaces available to shoppers throughout the village.
In addition, while much is made about the alleged threat to the character of our historic village by the construction of a supermarket, you apparently never even bothered to interview the man who singlehandidly is responsible for preserving and protecting our historic homes, Village Trustee Dr.
Roger Gerry.
He voted in favor of the proposal because he recognizes that the project's economic impact will create the dollars needed to protect the village's historic integrity far into the next century.


ANIMAL OF THE WEEK: Big Frog With Teeth
Will incredible African frogs jump at Angels Camp, in Calaveras County, Calif., on May 18?
Or will the forces of darkness (i.e. the United States Fish and Wildlife Service) stop them?
Andy J. Koffman, frog importer, believes there's a conspiracy against him -- well, actually against the 3-foot, 12-pound frogs that he claims can jump 30 feet in three leaps.
The record for three jumps combined at the Jumping Frog Jubilee is 21 feet, 5 3/4 inches.


Exposed; Again, Bombs in the Land of the Free
AS Federal agents closed in on suspects in the Oklahoma City bombing, the challenge remained of finding some collective way to understand and respond to a horrific episode of domestic terrorism.
More than the solution of one terrible crime, this is the test of an open society: how to find some solid ground for the battered national psyche, some equilibrium between oppressive vigilance and terrifying vulnerability as the country looks in the mirror and sees the signs of an ever more violent future.
The trajectory of a wrenching and dizzying three days began with the public's widespread belief that foreign agents, probably Islamic militants, were responsible for the bomb that shattered a Federal office building and killed scores of people in the worst incident of terrorist violence on American soil.
The prospect was terrifying: pictures of the shattered building evoked images of Beirut, or of what the World Trade Center could have looked like had the Islamic radicals who bombed it two years ago been more adept.


Where, Oh Where, Is Mr. (or Ms.) Right?
CLEAN," in its world premiere at the Hartford Stage Company, is a confessional play about the capriciousness of love, its constant waywardness and built-in ambivalence. And about the aspects of love once called forbidden, of the kind that dared not speak its name. Or to hear one of the play's characters tell it: "Life would be so much simpler if I could fall in love with the right person."
That supposition is as profound as it gets in "Clean" -- a title of righteous defensiveness and a play that abounds in religious symbolism, of blood and the cross and the clergy.
Norry, a drag queen, is being fitted for a wedding dress by Mercy, the third wife of an abusive, alcoholic man, Kiko, who had once been married to both her sisters.
Where is it written that Norry and Mercy cannot fall in love?


After Defeat by the Flyers, Devils Feel Playoff Pressure
Not long ago, the Devils looked at the standings and locked in on one target: Philadelphia.
Comfortably in second place in the Atlantic Division, New Jersey was playing well, the Flyers were catchable and the division title was within reach.
But in this lockout-shortened season, three-game streaks can mean abrupt and sudden changes.


The Drought of '95? Probably Not. Here's Why.
You knew it was a mild winter.
But with just one major snowstorm, it was also an exceptionally dry one -- the third driest of the 20th century.
From October to March, precipitation in the state averaged just over 14 inches, nearly 6 inches less than normal.
In years past, this would have meant serious trouble for North Jersey's public and private water suppliers and the 3 million people who rely on them. (The rest of the state, with bigger reservoirs and aquifers, has seldom had to worry.) In 1985, after the century's second driest winter, North Jersey reservoirs sprouted mud flats, and residents in many towns were told to stop watering lawns and washing cars.


AMUSEMENTS: Exploding History
If petting zoos and rock shops seem a bit tame, you might consider the "Living History of Nitroglycerine" tour.
The Otto Cupler Torpedo Company of East Titusville, Pa., promises "a 40-foot fireball and other big explosions" as costumed workers demonstrate the early use of nitro as an oil field explosive.
But, says Richard Tallini, the company's president, "nitroglycerine isn't used anymore" in the oil field.
Other materials are exploded to fracture the rock in oil wells to produce more flow.
And the torpedo company, which once did a lot of oil-well work now has turned to tourism for income.


To Insurers, Terrorism Is Not Like War
AFTER the devastating explosion of a Federal office building in Oklahoma City on Wednesday, many Americans may be wondering whether terrorism has become a fact of modern life.
So far, insurance companies don't think so.
How can you tell?
Because big insurers, which try to measure the dangers of virtually all aspects of human behavior, don't treat bombings as a special case.
In general, they pay without hesitation the claims filed by victims of such events and their beneficiaries.


Misery Is Still Afghanistan's Ruler
UP in these burnished hills, the road winding onward to Afghanistan is busy with richly-decorated trucks -- upbound for Afghanistan and downbound again, laden both ways with television sets and refrigerators and washing machines as they roll past the great mud-walled forts that Moghul emperors built to guard the marches to their empire on the Indian plains.
In Central Asia, a region where commerce is as much part of ancient traditions as warfare, the freight passing back and forth along the sinuous road through the Khyber is remarkable only because it seems so self-defeating.
A traveler from distant parts must wonder why anybody would bother to ship electrical goods to Afghanistan, a country where even hospitals lack electrical power, and where the millions who have survived 15 years of war can hardly find enough money to buy food.


The Volunteer 'Someones' Who Mind the Trails
To the Editor:
Your article about hiking the Palisades ("Destination: Spring," April 9) mentions that "someone  [ has ]  painted white blazes" on the boulders that form the Giant Stairs on the 12-mile Shore Trail along the Hudson River.
The "someones" who paint the blazes and help maintain the trails -- not only in this park but on 900 miles of foot trails in New Jersey and New York -- are volunteers, all members of the New York-New Jersey Trail Conference, who have worked in cooperation with park agencies since the 1920's.
Year in and year out, volunteers clear and mark the trails so the public may gain access and enjoy to our open spaces.


School-Election Close-Up: 2 Wins, 1 Loss, 1 Surprise; Ridgewood
Although this year's school budget included the first tax increase in several years, voters in Ridgewood approved it overwhelmingly.
The Superintendent, Dr.
Frederick Stokley, attributed the results to widespread concern about cuts in state aid.
It was the fourth year in a row that residents of the wealthy Bergen County village accepted the budget, though turnout fell to 15 percent from 19 percent last year.
Among them, 1,454 voted in favor of the budget, and 752 voted against it.


Westchester Symphony Offers Anniversary Gala
ALTHOUGH the Westchester Symphony has been celebrating its 70th birthday all season, next Saturday's 8:30 P.M. finale at Purchase College is the orchestra's official anniversary gala.
It might also be called a celebration of youth, because Anthony Aibel, the music director, and Gil Shaham, the guest soloist, are both in their 20's, and the composer Lowell Liebermann, whose "Revelry" was commissioned for the occasion, is 33.


Never Enough
To the Editor:
Instead of celebrating the 200th anniversary of Beethoven's Opus 1, Edward Rothstein complains that too much Beethoven is scheduled for next season  [ "Schedulers, It Appears, Are in a Box," April 2 ] .
Isn't this like a theater critic complaining about too much Shakespeare?


Officials Say School Bus System Has Ties to Mob
Former and current officials of the union and 14 companies negotiating a new contract for New York City's school bus service have longstanding connections with organized-crime figures, according to court records and law enforcement authorities.
Two representatives of the union, Local 1181 of the Amalgamated Transit Union, have been co-defendants with Genovese crime family leaders in criminal and civil racketeering cases.
The companies until the early 1990's employed suspected Mafia leaders or had business affiliations with them.


School-Election Close-Up: 2 Wins, 1 Loss, 1 Surprise
All winter long, local school officials across the state had been dreading their annual budget elections.
Many even began mulling over the cuts they would make if voters still peeved about property taxes decided that the punishment they meted out last year was not enough.
But the elections on Tuesday yielded a surprise: 72.3 percent of budgets were approved, up from 51.4 percent last year, which was a two-decade low.


Home From J.F.K.
To the Editor: My thanks to Andrew Ratzkin for "A Long Day's Journey -- From the Airport" (Feb. 12).
I went through a similar experience Jan. 9 at about 5 P.M., trying to get into the city from La Guardia by Carey bus.
No ticket vendor, cavalier dispatchers, unmarked boarding areas, no one in charge, etc.


Giants' First Choice Is a 230-Pound Back To Insure the Future
While the first round of the National Football League draft unfolded like some wild soap opera, the Giants were sitting quietly in the middle of the pack.
They simply watched everything play out before them and patiently waited.
It became clear early on that they would get a good pick. A very good pick.


Other Parents, Other Views Of P.S. 9 and Its Principal
To The Editor:
We were dismayed by "Is Tough Love Too Tough?" (April 9), which provides a soapbox for a very small group of very disenchanted parents concerned about one of five programs at Public School 9, the Anderson Program, which our son attends.


A Lull in Battle Over the Pinelands, as All Wait for Whitman to Take Sides
This is the New Jersey Pinelands, a million acres of scrub pine and sand roads in the heart of the most densely populated state in the nation, a place so sparsely inhabited that a fire earlier this month burned an area larger than Manhattan without touching a single house.
To conservationists, the fact that a fire of such magnitude caused no damage to people or property testifies to the success of development controls in the Pinelands, which are sometimes popularly called the Pine Barrens.
And conservationists are asking, increasingly insistently, whether environmental regulations that took decades to put in place, here and across the state, will survive the administration of Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman as easily as the piney woods have bounced back from the spring fire season.


Clintons Give Testimony On Finances
The Whitewater independent counsel today took four hours of testimony from President Clinton and Hillary Rodham Clinton about a wide range of financial transactions that are being studied by a grand jury in Little Rock, Ark.
The Clintons were questioned under oath in separate back-to-back interviews at the White House by the Whitewater counsel, Kenneth W. Starr, and his aides, who have been investigating the the couple's personal and campaign finances.
Transcripts of the interviews remain secret and will be read to the grand jury in the coming days.


Next Year, the Olympics. This Year, the Braves.
This preview was prepared and written by Murray Chass.
Teams are listed in alphabetical order.
The Mets preview is on page 9.
ATLANTA BRAVES
Their streak of three consecutive first-place finishes ended last year, but they can extend their division championship streak to four because no champions were declared.


It's Not Mount Olive, But It's Close Enough
He is gazing down on Broadway, 44 floors up in the Marriott Marquis.
On this day, Steve McNair may not have required an elevator to get there.
He might have managed to leap that far in one, giant swoop.
At least he felt that way.


P.T.A.'s Soft Pedal After-School Success
THE Woodworking Club had ended, but Teddy Mukamal was not ready to quit.
Leaning on a table in the bustling hallway of the Fox Meadow Elementary School here, the fourth grader vigorously polished the bottom of his Knock Hockey game board to make it shiny and slick.
Upstairs in Barbara Hatcher's second-grade classroom, a group of girls in the Sip and Stitch Club reluctantly put away their needlepoint samplers.
Although the club meets after school, the girls -- who have tea and learn party manners -- also work on their samplers at recess and get help from Mrs.
Hatcher during the school day.


Roadside Retro: Square Deals, Sky-High Pies
A GOOD DINER is like good art: hard to define, but you know it when you see it.
More precisely, you know it when you smell it -- smell onion-laced hash browns sizzling on the grill and opaque coffee that flows like Niagara Falls and perfumes the air with the zest of caffeine.
You know a diner by its sounds: the clatter of thick china behind the counter, the hiss of Naugahyde upholstery when you ease down into a booth, the rumble of trucks highballing past on the highway just outside.
The staff at an exemplary diner is unique, too: no supercilious waiter is going to tell you his first name and arch an eyebrow if you order double gravy to smother your chicken croquettes and volcano-shaped mashed potatoes; instead, you'll likely get a good ol' gal in orthopedic shoes who will call you "hon" and slap down your check when she brings your dish full of wiggling red Jell-O for dessert.
There are diners nearly everywhere in the United States, but most of them, and the best of them, are in the Northeast.
And there is no state with a more wondrous variety than New Jersey.
Many of the most beautiful diners, from the glory days of stainless steel and boomerang-pattern Formica, were built here.
Jerry O'Mahony of Elizabeth, Silk City Diners of Paterson, Swingle Diners of Middlesex, Mountain View Diners of Singac: These are names that resonate in hash-house history as profoundly as do Mies van der Rohe and Frank Lloyd Wright in conventional building design.
To this day, New Jersey (and especially its northern half) is a roadside archeologist's wonderland, its highways, byways and city neighborhoods gleaming with chrome-banded beaneries that hark back to an age of streamlined high style and three squares a day.
To savor Eggs-in-the-Skillet, house specialty of the pint-size Short Stop Diner of Bloomfield, or a wedge of mile-high pie at the exuberant Tick Tock of Clifton (where the motto is "Eat Heavy") is to partake of a vintage national optimism that knew nothing of cholesterol and craved plenty of calories to grow healthy and strong.


New Clinic Serves Visitors to Moscow
A new private clinic has opened in Moscow to serve travelers as well as residents.
The service is provided by U.S.
Global Health, a members-only joint venture of Columbia-Presbyterian Health Services; the Fund for Large Enterprises in Russia, a private investment company, and Pepsico World Trading, which helps develop businesses for its parent company, Pepsico.
Four American-trained, board-certified doctors and their assistants prescribe medications and provide diagnostic outpatient services and lab work.
Doctors are on 24-hour call and in emergencies will make house calls, according to Sherrie Dulworth, Global's director of sales and marketing.
The clinic will also arrange for emergency hospitalization at the Kuntsevo Central Clinical Hospital.


Amy Rose, J. L. Silverman
Amy Rose, a daughter of Susan and Elihu Rose of New York, was married last evening to Jeffrey Lee Silverman, a son of Barbara Glickman of Weston, Mass., and Jack Silverman of Bloomfield Hills, Mich.
Rabbi Peter J. Rubinstein performed the ceremony at the Pierre in New York.
Mrs.
Silverman, 28, graduated cum laude form the University of Michigan.
She is a vice president of Rose Associates, a New York real estate development concern in which her father is a partner.


IF IT'S TUESDAY, THIS MUST BE DAD'S HOUSE
I agree with the premise that joint custody is difficult, but David Sheff and his children's friends seem to be part of an elite group of upper-middle-class families.
How many of us can afford to fly our children around, have a secretary take care of a child's schedule, etc.?
It seems that these children are possessions rather than people.
ROBERTA KAMAN-SULTZER Providence, R.I.


Archbishop Samuel, 87, Primate of Syrian Church
Archbishop Mar Athanasius Yeshue Samuel, the primate of the Syrian Orthodox Church of the United States and the man who obtained the first of the 2,000-year-old Dead Sea Scrolls and brought them to world attention, died last Sunday at his residence in Lodi, N.J.
He was 87.
The cause was a heart attack, church leaders said.


Ms. Michalopoulos and Mr. Vlasto
Deirdre Gibson Michalopoulos and Christopher James Vlasto, who are producers at ABC News in Manhattan, were married yesterday.
The Rev.
Peter Cullen performed the ceremony at St.
Paul's Episcopal Church in Brooklyn.
Mrs.
Vlasto, 30, graduated from Connecticut College.
She is a daughter of Emily Meyer Michalopoulos of New York and Eftimios Michalopoulos of Milan, Italy.
Her father is an opera singer.
Her maternal grandfather, John M. Meyer Jr. of Greenwich, Conn., was the chairman of Morgan Guaranty Trust in New York.


Looking to Emulate the Success of Bobby Van's
A YEAR ago Bobby Van's was going down for the count.
The venerable Bridgehampton standby had become a sagging afterthought among East End restaurants.
Then, just as it seemed as if the landmark dining spot might disappear, it was sold.
The new owners pumped life into the restaurant, updating the menu and turning a has-been into a light, open, exciting place.
Next month, the owners of Bobby Van's, Joseph Smith and Barney and Joseph Phair, are opening the Pike, on the Bridgehampton-Sag Harbor Turnpike, and Babette's, at 66 Newton Lane in East Hampton.


A Place to Show One's Pedigree


That Enchanting Glen, With Music to Match
BRIGADOON," the evergreen fantasy about a village that leaps to life every 100 years, was welcomed as fresh and original when it opened in 1947. But by the time of its first revival, just a few years later, reviewers were already calling it dated, relegating it to the antiquity of operetta.
Actually, the tale, about a couple of Americans lost in Scotland, was created some 20 years after the decline of operetta -- a term disavowed by Lerner and Loewe, who had their first success with it.


2 Years After Windfall From Annenberg, School Secures Its Goals
The ink wasn't quite dry on his diploma from the Peddie School in 1927 when Walter H. Annenberg, then a graduating senior, gave the prep school $17,000 to build a new track.
It wasn't his biggest gift to his alma mater -- not by a long shot -- but it was the earliest.
Since then Mr.
Annenberg, the publishing executive and former United States Ambassador to Britain, has given Peddie $140 million more, most notably a check for $100 million in 1993, the largest single donation ever given to an independent secondary school.


The Cadillac of Divisions (Despite Detroit)
This preview was prepared and written by Murray Chass.
Teams are listed in alphabetical order.
The Yankee preview is on page 8.
BALTIMORE ORIOLES
Benefiting from the demise of strikebreaker baseball, the Orioles, in spite of residency in the majors' toughest division, will at least have a chance to win.
They couldn't have won with replacement players because they didn't have any.


The Inflamation
THE INFORMATION By Martin Amis. 374 pp. New York:  Harmony Books. $24.


Play Ball! Hello-o-o-o! Anybody Watching?
ONCE UPON A TIME, PEOPLE SAT IN front of a television set and watched the test pattern as they waited eagerly for the baseball game to come on.
I know, because as a boy I was one of those people, and so was my Jewish-Russian immigrant grandmother, Molly, who lived with us.
She spoke no English and no baseball but was fascinated by the moving images that soon magically appeared and began flinging round objects at one another.
One has some idea of how long ago that was, because people weren't sitting around waiting for Court TV to come on.
And they weren't sitting around waiting for the guys who have become known as "the real players" to return to the diamond to replace the replacement players, also known variously as clowns, mountebanks and scabs.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
AN APPOINTMENT WITH SOMERSET MAUGHAM And Other Literary Encounters.
By Richard Hauer Costa.
Texas A &amp; M University, cloth, $35; paper, $15.95.


Miss Manolovici and Mr. Wernink
Alexandra Evans Manolovici, a daughter of Diana Preece of Charleston, S.C., and Gerard Evans Manolovici of New York, was married yesterday to Pieter Alexander Wernink, a son of Guusje Wernink of New Canaan, Conn., and the late Erik Wernink.
The Rev.
Dr.
Mark S. Anschutz performed the ceremony at St.
James' Episcopal Church in New York.
The bride, 26, and the bridegroom, 27, graduated from Kenyon College, he cum laude.


Yankee Fans United: Baseball, Art and Soul
Forty years ago, little Jane looked up at Grandpa Max and, with all the seriousness of a Zen student, asked: "What's the difference between a line out and a fly out?"
The old man turned down the televised Yankee game and, with all the seriousness of a Zen master, answered the question.


When the Ordinary Becomes Extraordinary
ON view here at City Without Walls is the sum of a good idea, art exemplifying it, and a lucid introduction -- assets seldom found under the same roof.
And at a time when apparently no show is complete without a ponderous two-part title, this one is named crisply if paradoxically "The Quotidian Sublime."
As explained in a brochure essay by the curator, Jon Berzinski, the premise is that while objects used and sights seen every day become overly familiar and hence all but invisible, there are ways in which they can, as it were, be born again.
An example is the long vacation that makes coming home a new, even strange experience.


The One Left Behind
THROUGH THE winter darkness, over the clicks and static of a frail satellite connection, comes the voice of the Road Warrior, calling from the Sarajevo Holiday Inn.
There has been shelling, but she is safe for the moment.
There is electricity, sometimes, and running water, but no heat.
It's 20 degrees at night.
She isn't trapped there; she chose this place, chose to reach it from Croatia, over Mount Igman on a winding road in a cold fog so the snipers wouldn't see the car she rode in, chose not to think about the wrecks she could see when she looked over the sheer cliff at the road's edge.
She's there to report and write about the siege.
That's her life.
My life is out here, in the undestroyed part of the world.


F.Y.I.
Road to Nowhere
Q.
At the southeast corner of 86th Street and Central Park West, near the Mariner's Gate, workers were recently putting the finishing touches on a path leading to a pedestrian entrance to the south of the transverse.
Then suddenly about two weeks ago, they built a wall where the entrance was, creating a road to nowhere.
What is going on?
A.
The entrance, in case the wall didn't tip you off, is being permanently closed.
The Central Park Conservancy, in an ongoing renovation project, determined that the area had enough entrances with the gate to the north of the transverse and a entrance a block to the south.
Besides, said Tim Matthews, deputy administrator for the Conservancy, "It's not the greatest spot in the world to be walking" because of its proximity to the roadway and its fumes.
The asphalt path has now been removed, though the remaining dirt betrays its old walkway's location.
The area will be reseeded and planted during the next couple of weeks.
"We're not going leave a path in if it's just leading to the wall," Mr.
Matthews said.
"Give us a little more credit than that."


Defining a Region
Governor Whitman's desire to change the geographic prefix of the Giants and Jets is simply ridiculous.
Would she argue for the renaming of other teams to the Orchard Park Bills and the Pontiac Lions?
Perhaps if the Governor brushed up on urban studies she would wisely change her mind.
New York City is not confined to the boundaries of the city proper.
It is a hub for a vast region that encompasses another phenomenon, one that the Governor does not appear to be familiar with: the suburbs.
New Jersey is largely suburban and would be a very different place if it were not for its proximity to New York City, or Philadelphia for that matter.
The Meadowlands, located in one of those things called a suburb, would not exist if it were not located less than 10 miles from New York City.


Fire-Prone Cigarettes
To the Editor:
While Jon McMillan is correct that the United States has the worst fire death rate in the industrialized world and that cigarette-caused fires are the predominant cause, he fails to point to the major culprit (Op-Ed, April 17).


Corrections
Another article in the Neighborhood Report about disputes over a principal's strictness at the Anderson Program for gifted students at P.S. 9, on the Upper West Side, referred incorrectly to the school's P.T.A. president, Jean Magenheim.
She is indeed the parent of a child in the program.


For the Weary, a Day for Feeling Good About a Battered Planet
The sun shone, the breeze was soft and it was an altogether swell day to feel good about this battered old planet.
So thousands of New Yorkers put on smiles and T-shirts to celebrate the 25th Earth Day with a parade up the Avenue of the Americas.
In most places, the sidewalks were not much more crowded than they would be on a weekday lunch hour.
But the onlookers cheered enthusiastically for a succession of marchers dressed as garbage cans, smokestacks spewing cotton and endangered tropical bird species.


C. M. Morris, J. M. Rhodes Jr.
Cynthia Marie Morris, a financial executive, and James Madison Rhodes Jr., a lawyer, were married yesterday.
The Rev.
Charles Ayars performed the ceremony at the Marble Collegiate Church in New York.
Mrs.
Rhodes, 39, is a senior vice president of the Granite Management Corporation in New York, an asset sales company.
She graduated cum laude from Douglass College and received an M.B.A. from New York University.
She is a daughter of Darlene Morris of Sewell, N.J., and Glen Morris of Oklahoma City.


Bengals Take Carter at No. 1; Sapp Slips to 12th
The National Football League's 1995 college draft got under way yesterday amid a swirl of drug allegations directed at one of the top college prospects, defensive tackle Warren Sapp of Miami, and a hail of trades that had teams swapping positions on the draft board.
The Cincinnati Bengals started the day off with a bang by trading their first-round pick (No. 5 over all) and their second-round pick (No. 36) to the Carolina Panthers for the first selection in the draft.
The Bengals took 38 seconds to select Penn State running back Ki-Jana Carter, who averaged 7.8 yards a carry last season and finished second to Colorado running back Rashaan Salaam for the Heisman Trophy.


Clinton and the First Lady Offer Solace to the Young
In the soothing voices of a bedtime-story hour, Bill and Hillary Rodham Clinton told the nation's children in a live radio and television talk this morning that, as the President put it, "It's O.K. to be frightened by something as bad as this," and urged them to overcome their fears about the Oklahoma City bombing by sharing them.
With two dozen children of Federal workers sitting cross-legged and quiet before them on the plush blue rug of the Oval Office, the couple that helped make sharing feelings a prominent part of political life led what amounted to a brief national teach-in on anxiety and reassurance.


2 Women Rob Bronx Priest of $1,500 From Church Safe
The Rev.
Carlos Lopez-Acosta had seen the women's faces before at Sunday worship services and on Saturdays when they picked up two small children from religion instruction classes.
But on Friday evening there were no songs or prayers.
The two women, a mother and daughter team, one of them armed with a knife, ordered Father Lopez-Acosta to open the safe in his Bronx church, and they made off with about $1,500 in checks and cash from the church safe, the police said.


On the Slopes in Summer
Skiing in July usually means the Andes.
But this year, Squaw Valley U.S.A. and Alpine Meadows, two California mountain resorts, plan to stay open until July 4, thanks to recent heavy snow.
Although Squaw Valley's daily adult lift ticket is still $43, it now includes night skiing, skating and use of the resort's lagoon and spa.
Starting May 1, when only the upper mountain will be open, the lift ticket will drop to $28.
The night skiing and other extras will not be included.
Alpine Meadows will reduce rates as more trails close down.
For Squaw Valley information, call (916) 583-6985; ski conditions, (916) 583-6955; reservations, (800) 545-4350.
For Alpine Meadows, call (916) 583-4232.


Sarah E. Geary, Charles S. Murphy
Sarah Ellen Geary, the daughter of Eileen A. Geary of Thornwood, N.Y., and Sean J. Geary of Bronxville, N.Y., was married yesterday to Charles Saxton Murphy, a son of Marcia and Judge Paul Murphy of Osterville, Mass.
The Rev.
Damien O'Connell performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at the Church of St.
Ignatius Loyola in New York.
Mrs.
Murphy, 29, graduated from Columbia University, from which she expects to receive her M.D. degree in May.
She is to become an intern in July at the Boston University Medical Center in Boston.
Her father is a managing partner in the New York law firm of White &amp; Case.
Her mother is an account executive in the sales department at A T&amp;T in New York.


Looking Behind the Gloss
To the Editor:
If March traditionally has its lion and lamb vagaries, we can be sure that it is marked by storms of tax forms.
For investors, there are floods of annual reports.
While I could sandbag them, I pile them up, read the notices of annual meetings, try to vote as sensibly as possible and, of course, wade through the usual self-congratulations or masked bad news.
Most, if not all, are delusionary, so one has recourse to the pages of figures until even the bottom line becomes unreadable to any but the most financially astute.
One is tempted to write and chart the home budget in travesty of the skewed hiding and glowing outlooks.


THE EMASCULATION OF SPORTS
Lipsyte's concern that the creeping shadows of commercialism will corrupt women's college basketball is reminiscent of a warning by another distinguished sportswriter, John Tunis.
More than 65 years ago, he said he hoped sport for women "remains a recreation and does not become a vocation or an industry." To a large degree, he got his wish.
But his cautions, and those of Lipsyte, assume that women will automatically make the same mistakes men do.
The fact remains that the single most constructive rivalry in recent sports history was between two women, Chris Evert and Martina Navratilova, who competed with heart and soul for almost two decades but still remained friends.
SUE MACY Englewood, N.J.


Unbusting the Sod
MIRACLE UNDER THE OAKS The Revival of Nature in America.
By William K. Stevens.
Illustrated. 332 pp.
New York: Pocket Books. $22.


Asbestos Alert at the Ansonia Hotel
The City Department of Environmental Protection has found dangerous levels of asbestos in the walls of the landmark Ansonia Hotel, at Broadway and 73d Street, and has issued five violations against the owners, Ansonia Associates, for doing plumbing work without proper safety precautions.
Environmental officials say that the health of residents is not in jeopardy, but they have ordered Ansonia Associates to test wall samples in apartments and corridors before proceeding with the plumbing work.
If asbestos levels are found to be above 1 percent, workers must seal the area while working to make sure that carcinogens are not released into the air.


THE HAND-OFF
As there was an outpouring of concern from many who read Ted Conover's article "The Hand-Off" (May 8, 1994), I am writing to inform your readers that Evelyn Torres Mirach lost her valiant battle against AIDS on March 28, 1995.


Some Indians Buck a Stereotype
WHEN he is not happy with the powers that be in the New Mexico state government, Jacob Viarrial, the governor of Pojoaque Pueblo, has a foolproof way of turning up the heat.
In a maneuver sure to stir up the environmentalists down in Santa Fe, he threatens to use the reservation, just a few miles from Santa Fe, as the site for a low-level nuclear waste dump.
That is what he told former Gov.
Bruce King a couple years ago when the state tried to interfere with the pueblo's plans to open a gambling hall.
And that is what he threatened earlier this year, when it looked as though the legislature might allow racetracks to compete with the state's proliferating supply of Indian-owned casinos.
"With different people wanting to force us out of Indian gaming, we need to look at other areas," Mr.
Viarrial said in an interview last week.
"Right now we're looking at low-level, but if it looks lucrative enough we might go with high-level waste."


Why Is This Bowl of Noodles So Cheap?
To Vincent Mangano, 50, a supervisor at a cable company, Chinatown has always meant good food at cheap prices.
So while he was on jury duty downtown one recent Tuesday, Mr.
Mangano chose a Chinese noodle shop on Canal Street for lunch and ordered a heaping bowl of rice noodle soup with roast duck.
"It's a very balanced meal," Mr.
Mangano said, pointing to the pieces of golden-colored duck crammed on top of the noodles and Chinese broccoli.
"You've got carbohydrate, protein and vegetables in one bowl."


Housing Court Is Heaven To Tenants Who Are Devils
To the Editor:
Unfortunately, Housing Court protects even the most rampantly abusive apartment dwellers, so there is no motivation for them to modify their behavior ("The Neighbors From Hell," April 9).
It is, therefore, virtually impossible for a landlord to take any action that would make a difference.


With Winter a Memory, It's Time to Get Started
NOW I know why I wait until late in the day to work outdoors.
The birds start to sing when the day is closing, sometimes solo, sometimes in populous choruses of tiny bodies hidden in protective shrubs.
The "cheer-up cheerily" of the robin is particularly delightful, the song going on for some time, and the sound an enthusiastic offering for sheer pleasure, I suppose.
It makes the work outdoors go faster and happier.
The gradual return of songbirds, inviting an appreciative work break, and the chilling weather earlier this month, inviting a return indoors, may have put some gardening on hold.
But spring is no time to dilly-dally.
The season moves along at quite quickly once it gets started.


In Hong Kong, the Beauty of Bespoke
NORMAN TSUI, my new tailor, could not have been less impressed.
"What is that, a store?" Mr.
Tsui said with a snarl, pointing to the label on the suit jacket that I had worn into his famed Hong Kong tailoring shop.
"Yes," I said sheepishly.
"It's a big store." The label read "Saks Fifth Avenue," and the jacket was part of a beloved charcoal-gray wool suit I bought a few years ago in New York.
Until the day I walked into Mr.
Tsui's shop, it had been my favorite -- the all-purpose suit I wore to weddings, funerals and every important occasion in between.


A Warm-Up Marathon Ends Today for Knicks
Today, the Knicks will finally reach the end of the regular season.
It has not been an easy journey.
At one point, they were 12-12.
They were dethroned as Atlantic Division champions by the Orlando Magic.
And even if the Knicks win the regular-season finale against the Magic, New York (54-27) will fall short of last year's 57-victory total.
But considering everything the Knicks have endured -- internal strife, injuries and the burden of championship expectations -- they have re-established themselves as a team to be reckoned with.
Friday's 99-92 victory over the Boston Celtics was New York's seventh victory in its last nine games.
The Knicks had the best road record (26-15) in the East this season, and championship teams win on the road.
So despite nagging injuries to Patrick Ewing (strained left hamstring) and Derek Harper (sore ankle), the Knicks feel confident about where they are, and where they are going.


Barbarar Zakin, Matthew Diebel
Barbara Ellen Zakin, a marketing director at Festival Marketing Inc., an events marketing company in New York, is to be married to day to Matthew Diebel, the features editor at The New York Post.
Rabbi Beth Klafter is to perform the ceremony at the Manhattan Penthouse in New York.
Ms.
Zakin, who is 33 and is keeping her name, graduated from Brown University.
She is a daughter of Jacques Louis Zakin and Laura Pienkny Zakin of Worthington, Ohio.
The bride's father is the Helen C. Kurtz professor of chemical engineering at Ohio State University in Columbus and a director of the Emissions Reduction Research Center at the New Jersey Institute of Technology in Newark.
Her mother is a contributing writer for The Columbus Monthly, a magazine.


April 16-22: Unreal Estate; Pataki Says Some Of the Homeless Should Pay Rent
In his latest proposal to revamp welfare, Gov.
George E. Pataki has advocated charging homeless people to stay in public shelters if the state can demonstrate that they work or have personal assets beyond welfare checks.
The costs would vary from person to person.
Someone earning, say, $200 a month and living in a shelter that costs $1,500 a month per resident to run would pay $61 a month.
State officials project that the state would save $320,000 -- a pittance for a government with a $32 billion budget.
Advocates for the homeless say the impact would be much greater.


Storming a Bastion; Peaceniks and Writers
Since the 120-year-old Racquet and Tennis Club doesn't make public its all-male membership or any historical information, it would be impossible to say for certain whether Lypsinka was the first drag queen to have set foot in the Park Avenue bastion of exclusivity.
"There was a great deal of fuss as to whether I should attend in drag or not," Lypsinka, in a pearl-laden cocktail dress, was saying at an April 19 benefit there for the Cancer Research Institute.
"But I think this dress is very tasteful. I just hope my being here tonight won't make anybody think I've turned Republican."


PLAYING IN THE NEIGHBORHOOD
SOHO  Peppers and Melons Are Food for Art
Think a giant green pepper might be just the objet d'art to complete your living room?
"The Great American Seed Show," opening on Friday at the Bruce R. Lewin Gallery in Manhattan, will display 76 pieces by the sculptor Peter Anton, who creates only food objects.
"He has a thing about food," said Mr.
Lewin, the gallery owner.
The sculptures, which include cantaloupes, watermelons, hot peppers, cucumbers and a three-foot red hot chili pepper, are made of everything from wood and wire lathe to plaster, acrylic and fiberglass.
All the works are for sale, starting at $1,400.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-16  DNA TESTS IN WALES
Police in Cardiff, Wales, have encountered little opposition as they conduct widespread DNA testing in their investigation of the rape and murder of a 15-year-old girl.  3  REREADING U.N.'S HISTORY
American officials read coded messages sent by the Allies at the end of World War II, helping the United States dominate the conference that shaped the United Nations. 4  DEATHS AT RWANDA CAMP
Dozens were killed and hundreds wounded when Rwandan Government forces opened fire on a makeshift camp in Rwanda where ethnic Hutu had been moved. 9  FRENCH TRIAL UNSETTLES GABON
With its assertions about the President of Gabon, a prostitution trial in Paris has upset the traditionally close relations between France and its former colony. 10  VIETNAM'S ANNIVERSARY STRUGGLE
The Vietnamese soldiers who won the Vietnam War cannot make up their minds about how to observe the 20th anniversary of the Communist victory. 12  A THREAT FROM NORTH KOREA
North Korea said that it would take a "necessary decisive measure" following the breakdown of nuclear talks with the United States. 12  DISPUTE OVER BIODIVERSITY PACT
India said it may seek to block American access to medicinal plants and other biological material from the third world. 13  Talks under way between Mexican Government and rebels. 14  A Canadian judge's ruling on artistic freedom. 14  South Africa's role in talks on renewal of nuclear treaty. 16  National 18-36  NATIONWIDE MANHUNT CONTINUES
From Michigan to Arizona, the authorities searched for a second suspect and clues linking right-wing paramilitary groups to the bombing in Oklahoma City.  1  VICTIMS: ORDINARY PEOPLE
The bomb that tore apart the Federal building claimed people who were leading ordinary lives.  1  THE SUSPECT AND HIS PAST
Timothy J. McVeigh, who has been arrested in connection with the bombing, is recalled as "the quiet one" by a former teacher, who added that "the quiet ones are the ones who have ended up doing scary things." 1  CLINTON COMFORTS THE CHILDREN
In a live broadcast, Bill and Hillary Rodham Clinton urged the nation's children to overcome their fears regarding the bombing.  35  A look at the defining agenda that ties right-wing militia groups.  33  THE UNRAVELING OF MARRIAGE
As gay men and lesbians flee difficult marriages, the impact on their nongay spouses and children is just beginning to be examined.  1  TURNABOUT ON HEALTH DEBATE
A year after contending that the Administration's health plan amounted to social engineering, Republicans now face similar charges.  1  RACING AGAINST THEMSELVES
San Francisco's mayoral race is turning into an electoral donnybrook with at least five candidates.
And they're all Democrats.  18  RE-INVENTING ENVIRONMENTALISM
As Earth Day turns 25, environmentalists are turning more and more to grass-roots efforts to achieve their goals.  24  Metropolitan 37-45, 56  BRUTALITY CASES DELAYED
The board that handles police brutality complaints in New York City has fallen so far behind in its work that a substantial number of cases may never be reviewed in time to punish any officers who are found at fault.  37  STALKING ON BROADWAY
Stalkers are a frightening dark side to the Broadway stage.
Theater actors are probably the most vulnerable celebrities.
Anyone with a ticket can be within 20 feet of them for two hours.
And they leave by the same door on a grungy midtown street at 11 every night.  37  ACCESSIBLE AUCTIONS
Venerable auction houses like Christie's and Sotheby's have become rarefied versions of Loehmann's: the ultimate places to find or try to find a deal.  37  Obituaries 47  Maggie Kuhn, founder of the Gray Panthers.
Porter Hardy Jr., a former Virginia Congressman.


Home From J.F.K.
To the Editor: Andrew Ratzkin, who took two and a half hours to travel from Kennedy Airport to Park Slope in Brooklyn, did not know one of the city's best-kept secrets: The Q-10 bus takes you from J.F.K. to the Kew Gardens E and F line subway station, just as the Q-33 bus takes you from La Guardia to the Roosevelt Avenue E and F station.
The cost: $1.25, one token.
These buses run frequently, 24 hours a day.
If he had known about the Q-10 bus, he could have been home in about an hour and a half.
JESSE BRYANT  New York, N.Y.


Corleone Mythology In the Kitchen
One wonders why you should choose to find virtue in a publication which seeks to gain profit capitalizing on all the negative stereotypes foisted upon Sicilan-Americans  [ "Wise Guy 'Cousins' Try to Dispel Myths With Pasta Secrets," March 19 ] .
With its "Godfather"-inspired title, "Sicilian-American Pasta, 99 Recipes You Can't Refuse," introduces authors Okas and Lichtenstein as "Brooklyn Wise Guys" replete with fictitious Italic surnames (Penza and Corsi) and even manages to trot out a "true tale" of Okas' uncle who once sold insurance to Al Capone.


The Assessment Game
To the Editor:  As a real estate tax consultant for over 40 years, I found "The Missing Link Between a Home and Its Property Tax" (Spending It, March 26) informative and replete with interesting examples of assessment procedures.
It may, however, raise false hopes for tax relief -- especially among property owners in New Jersey.
The article implies that if assessments are lower on comparable homes, an appeal may be successful.
Comparable assessments, however, are not evidence of value, and petitioners are not entitled to relief on this form of discrimination.
In New Jersey, one must first prove value and then apply the overall ratio or percentage level of assessments in the community.


Pataki Ponders Following A.&amp;S.'s Lead, Straight Outta Brooklyn
Government workers and local elected officials are decrying a plan under consideration by Governor Pataki to move the headquarters of the Workers' Compensation Board from downtown Brooklyn to upstate New York.
If adopted, the plan would sap hundreds of jobs from the area, which is already losing nearly 900 jobs as the headquarters of A. &amp; S. becomes a branch of Macy's.


Heel, Fetch
Summer Shoes Unleashed


Spoleto Festival in U.S. Restores Longer Run
The Spoleto Festival U.S.A. in Charleston, S.C., will resume a 17-day schedule this season after having pared its schedule to 12 days in 1994.
Now in its 19th year, the festival will run May 26 through June 11, with 51 classical, jazz, dance, opera and theater programs, as well as a new literary and visual-arts series.
The festival opens May 26 with a ceremony at Charleston City Hall and the first of four performances by the festival's orchestra of Strauss' "Rosenkavalier," directed by Giulio Chazalettes and conducted by Spiros Argiris, with the soprano Renata Scotto.
The festival's gala benefit on May 27 will feature the Dance Theater of Harlem in the first of two scheduled appearances.


Rise in School Enrollment Splits Jericho
LIKE many school districts on the Island, the Jericho system is experiencing a revived enrollment rise.
Faced with a shortage of space for the projected number of students, its school board has voted to move next year's kindergarteners into expanded space at one building.
This decision was criticized as poor planning and an alleged violation of the community's right to vote on the issue.


Revelers With a Cause
A benefit for the Cancer Research Institute, April 19.


The Lying Game
LIKE MOST AMERICANS, I LEARNED early on the importance of honesty from the story of George Washington and the cherry tree.
But it was only recently that I discovered the story's provenance, and thus its true significance -- as an illustration of the market economy at work.
It first appeared in Mason Locke Weems's best-selling "The Life of Washington," published in 1800, and reissued many times with fresh material.
The author, a man of the cloth, set the story down in the fifth edition of his book as follows (we join the action at its climax):


Doctors Go Jobless, Patients Do Without; Too Many Specialists
To the Editor:
Blaming health maintenance organizations for physician-specialist unemployment is like blaming the thermometer for the fever (front page, April 15).
The United States has been producing an excess number of specialists for years.
Medical schools and teaching hospitals have found training programs for specialists a source of low-cost labor, and the high-tech culture of most academic centers has provided students with specialists as role models.


Habitats/Shelter Island; For an Emigre Sculptor, Home Is Where the Art Is
IT is a strange setting for the house of a sculptor of symbols and monuments; looking out from the front yard, which is laden with bronze body parts of an enormous Christ on the cross, one sees prim yellow and cream houses with polite little subdivision porches in the near distance.
The house of the sculptor Ernst Neizvestny is 4,000 square feet, and, from the street in front, seems too grand for its plot here on a winding road of new and much smaller houses.
Its gray-stained vertical siding, with white-stained rough-hewn board columns and square black bolted iron connectors, is rugged and strong, like the simple silver jewelry the sculptor wears.
"See this, see this," Mr.
Neizvestny says, pointing to his heavy linked bracelet and the large squared off piece of silver he wears on his finger.
"I tell my friend who is architect I want house like this."


Residential Resales
In the following reports, the "listed at" price is the asking price when negotiations began that ended in the sale.
Time on market is from most recent listing to contract.
MANHATTAN
CARNEGIE HILL  $400,000
115 East 87th Street  (Carnegie Towers)  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,300-sq.-ft. postwar co-op; 24-hr. doormen, concierge, dining foyer, eat-in kitchen, 2 exposures; maintenance $1,200, 50% tax-deductible, listed at $440,000, 1 year on market (Broker: Corcoran)  GRAMERCY PARK  $325,000
21 East 22d Street  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,200-sq.-ft. co-op in a prewar building; 24-hr. doormen, renovated kitchen and baths, cedar closets, 12-ft. ceilings; maintenance $1,150, 50% tax-deductible, listed at $349,000, 26 weeks on market (Broker: Bellmarc Realty)  SUTTON PLACE  $230,000
50 Sutton Place South  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,320-sq.-ft. postwar co-op; 24-hr. doormen, concierge, manned elevator, 33-ft. long living room, 3 exposures; maintenance $1,481, 52% tax-deductible, listed at $250,000, 1 1/2 years on market (Broker: Sarit)
TRIBECA  $316,000
100 Reade Street  (TriBeCa Court)  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,550-sq.-ft. condo in a loft building; 11-ft.-ceilings, marble baths, 2 exposures; common charge $285; taxes $6,021, listed at $350,000, 26 weeks on market (Broker: Douglas Elliman)  BRONX
BAYCHESTER  $215,000
4327 Boyd Avenue  3-family, 70-year-old detached brick house; 2 bedrooms, porch in upper two units; 1 bedroom in other; eat-in kitchen, 1 bath in each; 2-car garage 25- by 65-ft. irregular additional lot; taxes $1,786, listed at $235,000, 17 weeks on market (Broker: J.A.V.)  WILLIAMSBRIDGE  $120,000
3024 Radcliffe Avenue  3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 37-year-old semi-attached brick house; dining area, eat-in kitchen, finished basement, 26- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,500, listed at $140,000, 4 weeks on market (Broker: Fasons)  BROOKLYN
DITMAS PARK  $217,000
252 Rugby Road  5-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 85-year-old detached house; dining room, eat-in kitchen, den, fireplace, front porch, 1-car garage; taxes $1,807, listed at $224,900, 1 year on market (Broker: Reliance; Wilk)  MIDWOOD  $155,000
1069 East 29th Street  5-bedroom, 3-bath, 60-year-old Victorian; dining room, eat-in kitchen, lead and stained-glass windows, front porch, 40- by 105-ft. lot; taxes $1,600, listed at $189,000, 26 weeks on market (Broker: Jacob Gold)  PARK SLOPE  $255,000
106 Prospect Park West  3-bedroom, 2-bath duplex co-op in a brownstone; dining room, eat-in kitchen, exclusive use of half basement, private garden, original molding and detail; maintenance $938, 67% tax-deductible, listed at $275,000, 10 weeks on market (Broker: Warren Lewis)  QUEENS
ASTORIA  $183,000
24-13 21st Street  4-bedroom, 4-bath, attached brick house; dining room, eat-in kitchen, 16- by 98-ft. lot; taxes $1,800, listed at $219,000, 26 weeks on market (Broker: Century 21/Best)  REGO PARK CRESCENT  $380,000
63-38 Dieterle Crescent  2-family, 60-year-old detached brick house; 2 bedrooms, 1 bath, dining room, eat-in kitchen in each unit; finished basement, 2-car garage; taxes $2,800, listed at $400,000, 2 weeks on market (Broker: Fortuna)  STATEN ISLAND
NEW DORP  $162,500
88 Vincent Avenue  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 35-year-old ranch; eat-in kitchen, hardwood floors, 40-by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,350, listed at $180,000, 13 weeks on market (Broker: Vitali-Sunshine)  NEW JERSEY
ALLENDALE  $325,000
112 Dale Avenue  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 24-year-old colonial; in-ground pool, fireplace, enclosed porch; taxes $5,9346, listed at $339,000, 1 week on market (Broker: Weichert)  ENGLEWOOD  $170,000
31 Regency Circle  1-bedroom, 1-bath, 10-year-old condominium townhouse; 1-car garage, fireplace, C/A, monthly maintenance $150; taxes $4,126, listed at $179,500, 4 weeks on market (Brokers: Prudential Higgins; C&amp;R)  MIDDLETOWN  $168,500
479 Locust Point Road  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 80-year-old colonial; eat-in-kitchen, walk-in closets, wood-burning stove, h/w floors; taxes $3,214, listed at $178,800, 6 weeks on market (Broker: Prudential New Jersey)  OCEAN CITY  $307,500  225 West 17th Street 2-bedroom, 1-bath, 45-year-old waterfront cottage; 3 boat slips, view of Atlantic City, dining room; taxes $4,305, listed at $375,000, 7 months on market (Broker: Richards)  WESTCHESTER
KATONAH  $830,000
500 Pea Pond Road  5-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, 56-year-old colonial; screened porch, library, fireplace, pantry; 4.6 acres; taxes $12,813, listed at $830,000, 5 1/2 months on market (Brokers: Renwick &amp; Winterling; Houlihan/Lawrence)  MOUNT VERNON  $340,000
131 Villa Street  6-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, 85-year-old colonial; summer dining room, enclosed porch, 7 fireplaces, stained-glass windows; 1/2 acre; taxes $10,963, listed at $385,000, 15 1/2 months on market (Broker: Lindsey)  PELHAM  $262,500
1105 Clay Avenue  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 69-year-old Tudor; entry hall, eat-in kitchen, maid's room, fireplace, attached 1-car garage, partial basement; taxes $8,231, listed at $285,000, 6 months on market (Broker: C.S. McClellan)
WHITE PLAINS  $92,000 55 McKinley Avenue  1-bedroom, 1-bath, 54-year-old condominium; entry hall,; common charges $226; taxes $1,925; listed at $99,500, 11 months on market (Broker: The Prudential Rita Cohen)  CONNECTICUT  GREENWICH  $630,000
7 Castle Court  5-bedroom, 3-bath, 34-year-old colonial-ranch; dining room, 2 fireplaces, rear deck, 2-car garage, 1.93 acre lot; taxes $5,796, listed at $669,900, 8 weeks on market (Brokers: Preferred Properties; Smith Hekker Collins)  GREENWICH 1.325 million
614 Riversville Road  5-bedroom, 4 1/2-bath, colonial built in 1840; new kitchen and family room, fireplace, floor-to-ceiling bay window, fireplace, 4-acre lot; taxes $9,247, listed at $1.65 million, 46 weeks on market (Brokers: Prudential Connecticut; Coldwell Banker/ Schlott)  RIDGEFIELD  $950,000
88 Salem View Drive 4-bedroom, 4 1/2-bath, 4-year-old colonial; dining room, library, 2 fireplaces, 9-ft. ceilings, patio, 3-car garage, 3-acre lot; taxes $10,651, listed at $995,000, 41 weeks on market (Brokers: Weichert Realtors; Homestead Realtors)  STAMFORD  $300,000
83 Riverbank Road  6-bedroom, 3-bath, 32-year-old raised ranch; dining room, barn with four stalls, 2-car garage, 1.04 acre lot; taxes $5,570, listed at $375,000, 17 weeks on market (Broker: Coldwell Banker/Schlott; Kam Ross Properties)  LONG ISLAND
GREAT NECK  $552,000,
107 Clent Road, Russell Gardens  5-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, 40-year-old brick expanded ranch; dining room, eat-in kitchen, den, finished basement, fireplace, 2-car garage, patio; taxes $14,100, listed at $695,000, 24 weeks on market (Broker: Great Neck Realty, Better Homes and Gardens)  LOCUST VALLEY  $122,000
6 15th Street, 5-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 70-year-old colonial; dining room, eat-in kitchen, den, attic, basement, porch; taxes $2,300, listed at $149,000, 26 weeks on market (Broker: Coldwell Banker Sammis)  MILLER PLACE  $165,000
339 Pipestave Hollow Road  5-bedroom, 3-bath, 20-year-old ranch; dining room, eat-in kitchen, den, laundry room, deck, 2-car garage; taxes $5,800, listed at $174,900, 10 days on market (Broker: ERA Manzoni)  WOODBURY  $380,000
19 Aron Drive  5-bedroom, 3-bath, 15-year-old farm ranch; dining room, eat-in kitchen, den, fireplace, deck, pool, 1.5 acres, 2-car garage; taxes $8,200, listed at $409,000, 39 weeks on market (Brokers: INR Realty; ERA Gatewood)


On the Roads: 9 Spots to Steer Clear Of
Trouble spots you may encounter in the next week -- or month, or months -- courtesy of Transcom, an interstate transportation agency.
1.
ROUTE 4 Fort Lee.
One eastbound lane closed over Interstate 95 until June.
Work is tentatively scheduled to start tomorrow.
2.
ROUTE 80 Hackensack and Ridgefield Park.
Local lanes and Exit 67 will be closed from midnight Thursday to 4 A.M.
Friday to build girders.
3.
GARDEN STATE PARKWAY Rochelle Park.
All but one northbound lane closed for resurfacing.
Monday through Thursday nights.
4.
GARDEN STATE PARKWAY Irvington.
Two northbound lanes closed for crack sealing.
Monday through Wednesday, 9 A.M. to 2 P.M.
5.
ROUTE 1-9 Elizabeth.
One southbound lane closed for traffic signal work.
Monday through Wednesday, 9 A.M. to 3 P.M.
6.
ROUTE 287 Bridgewater.
The ramp from southbound Route 287 express lanes to Southbound 202/206 will be closed for pavement work.
Tuesday, 10 A.M. to 3:30 P.M.
To exit, cross over to local lanes.
7.
ROUTE 287 Piscataway.
All but one lane closed in each direction for restriping.
Tuesday night.
8.
ROUTE 9 Woodbridge and Sayreville.
One southbound lane closed for patching and repaving on the Edison Bridge, through May 1.
All night Sundays; Monday through Thursday nights, 9 P.M. to 11 A.M.
9.
ROUTE 1 West Windsor.
Some lanes closed to build a curb, until fall 1996.
Significant delays expected.


Movie Palace Stars in Its Own Cliffhanger
The Loew's Oriental, a once-grand picture palace that dates back to the heyday of silent films, is facing an uncertain future.
Employees of the theater, at 86th Street and 18th Avenue, had been notified earlier this month that it would close effective April 13.
A later notice said that the theater would stay open indefinitely, but a "For Sale" sign is still on the building.


Soap Opera Detective to Lead Walkathon
CRISTOPHER LAWFORD has played clean-cut Charlie Brent, the private eye on ABC-TV's "All My Children," since 1992.
"As an actor, I'd like not to play such a nice guy some of the time," he said.
But next Sunday he will gladly take on a good-guy role: that of grand marshal of Walkathon 1995 of the Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals of Westchester.


France Heads to the Polls to Reduce The Presidential Contenders to Two
In France's first presidential election since the end of the cold war, voters are to decide on Sunday which two of the nine candidates seeking to succeed President Francois Mitterrand will make it to the decisive runoff vote on May 7.
Barring a major upset, the main question is who will come in second behind the front-runner, the conservative Mayor of Paris, Jacques Chirac.


'Trapped' In a Co-op
IN 1989, when Emily Nomer and her husband, Daniel Manzanares, bought their first home -- a one-bedroom co-op in a building near Union Square in Manhattan -- their intention was to upgrade to a larger apartment as their family grew.
Six years and two children later, they are still living in their one-bedroom apartment; they have partitioned off part of the living room to create the second bedroom they so desperately need.
They would like to buy a larger apartment but cannot because to do so they would have to sell the one unit in which they now live.
And they have discovered -- along with nearly every other unit owner in the building -- that their apartment is virtually unmarketable.


Enforced Delays Take Toll on Morale of Rescuers
Rescue workers endured a frustrating wait against weather and hope today as rain and wind whipped through the shell of the Alfred P. Murrah building, causing cracks in the concrete and turning the debris into a slippery, soggy mess.
Officials tensely monitored the building with cameras and other equipment, worried that debris dislodged by high winds and shifting wreckage could shear off parts of the building.


Uprising


A Feast for the Ears as Well as the Eyes
NOW I know why I wait until late in the day to work outdoors.
The birds start to sing when the day is closing, sometimes solo, sometimes in populous choruses of tiny bodies hidden in protective shrubs.
The "cheer-up cheerily" of the robin is particularly delightful, the song going on for some time, and the sound an enthusiastic offering for sheer pleasure, I suppose.
It makes the work outdoors go faster and happier.
The gradual return of songbirds, inviting an appreciative work break, and the chilling weather earlier this month, inviting a return indoors, may have put some gardening on hold.
But spring is no time to dilly-dally.
The season moves along at quite a rapid pace once it gets started.


A Legacy of Violent Anti-Government Militancy
June 1983: Gordon Kahl, a 63-year-old militan tax protester, is killed in a shootout in Annieville, Ark., in which Kahl fatally shot Gene Matthews, a 38-year-old local sheriff.
Kahl had been on the run from charges of murdering trwo deputy federal marshals in Medina, N.D., after they tried to arrest him for breaking parole in a tax evasion case.
Dec. 1984: Robert Jay Matthews, the leader of the Order, is killed in a shootout on Whidbey Island, Wash, The killing followed a string of bank robberies, bombings and killings, including the murder in June of Alan Berg, a liveral Jewish radio talk show host in Denver.
April 1985: State and Federal officers raid teh compound of a white supreacist group, the Covenant, the Sword and the Lord (C.S.A.), in northern Arkansas after a four-day standoff.
They found stockpiles of weapons as well as a 30-gallon drum of cyanide.
James E. Ellison, the group's leader, was convicted and sentenced to 20 years for racketeering and conspiracy.
He later testified against 14 former members of his group.
June 1989: Richard Wayne Snell, then 59, is convicted of the 1984 murder of a Jewish pawnbroker during a robbery in Texarkana, Ark., and the 1985 killing of a black state trooper in Arkansas.
At subsequent clemency meetings, he quoted teh Nazi Rudolf Hess and demanded to be set free.
Despite protests from the self-styled Michigan Militia, Mr.
Snell was executed in Arkansas last Wednesday, the same day as the bombing in Oklahoma City.
August 1992: Randy Weaver, a white supremacist, surrenders to Federal authorities outside of Naples, Idaho.
He had barricaded himself in his mountaintop cabin for eight days along with his three daughters after a series of gun battles in which his wife and son and a Federal marshal were killed.
Mr.
Weaver, 43 at the time, had been a fugitive from gun-peddling charges.
A jury subsequently exonerated him of Federal conspiracy charges.
He became a hero among anti-government extremists.
April 1993: The compound of the Branch Davidians, a religious sect in Waco, Tex., burns after Federal authorities storm the grounds.
More than 70 people, including David Koresh, the group's leader, and 18 children, die in the fire.
The attempt to flush out the cult followed a 51-day standoff that began with a Federal raid.
In the ensuing gun battle, four agents of the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms and six cult members were killed.


Architect Invests. Now, Back to the Drawing Board
LEW GOLDHAMMER blanched and stammered at the papers spread before him in the conference room at Brouwer &amp; Janachowski, an investment advisory firm where the 55-year-old architect had come for help with his muddled finances.
It was clear from his body language that Mr.
Goldhammer would rather be anyplace but here, facing a spreadsheet titled "Family Financial Independence Calculation," a list of recommended mutual funds and a packet of forms for closing and opening an I.R.A. and other accounts.


RUNAWAY MEMORY
Both Mary Gordon's March 19 cover story about her relationship with her mother and Linda Wolfe's Hers column renewed the frustration I often feel in listening to my older friends, who live in long-term-care facilities, and in working with my near-90-year-old parents, who are determined to stay in their home until life's final moment.
So many older adults struggle just to be themselves in the face of family members and a society that require them to be "O.K." and "happy." It often seems we demand that they be the role models we need to make us feel good about ourselves and the care we provide for them.
MARY ESTELLE MINEHAN Weatogue, Conn.


Earth Day at 25: Promoting a Cleaner Environment and a More Effective Bureaucracy
Celebrating a quarter-century of modern environmentalism, hundreds of volunteers performed an Earth Day ritual along the Anacostia River today, hauling debris out of one of the nation's most poisoned waterways.
The crowd had gathered at the bowers of the National Arboretum to enjoy a sunny day on the tainted river that runs across the nation's capital, joining the much cleaner Potomac not far from the waterfront towers of the Environmental Protection Agency.


Children's Books
SHAKESPEARE STORIES II By Leon Garfield.
Illustrated by Michael Foreman. 284 pp.
Boston: Houghton Mifflin Company. $24.95. (Ages 10 and up)  STORIES FROM SHAKESPEARE  By Geraldine McCaughrean.
Illustrated by Antony Maitland. 143 pp.
New York: Margaret K. McElderry Books. $19.95. (Ages 10 and up)  WILLIAM SHAKESPEARE'S THE TEMPEST  Retold by Bruce Coville.
Illustrated by Ruth Sanderson. 40 pp.
New York: Doubleday. $16.95. (All ages)  SHAKESPEARE AND MACBETH  The Story Behind the Play.
By Stewart Ross.
Illustrated by Tony Karpinski and Victor Ambrus. 45 pp.
New York: Viking. $16.99. (Ages 10 and up)  OTHELLO  By Julius Lester. 151 pp.
New York: Scholastic. $12.95.  (Ages 8 to 12)


POSTINGS: New Computer Software From Fannie Mae; Mortgages In One Hour
Using a computer-based underwriting system unveiled last week by the Federal National Mortgage Association, mortgage lenders across the country will soon be able to take a customer's mortgage application, forward it to Fannie Mae for approval and then notify the customer of Fannie Mae's decision -- all during the customer's lunch hour.
The system, which will initially be used by 19 lenders in 12 states, is a software package called the Desktop Originator and Desktop Underwriter.
With the system, lenders will be able to process mortgage applications electronically -- on a computer in the lender's main office, in a branch office or even in the field -- in about an hour.


Police Receiving More Calls Reporting Domestic Violence
THE woman who called 911 spoke in a whisper.
Her husband had beaten her, she told the emergency operator, and she was afraid of what else he would do to her and their 1-year-old daughter.
Soon afterward, when a Nassau County police officer arrived at her house, the woman said that everything was fine.
She apologized for calling 911 and said she did not want to file a complaint against her husband.


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
SPOTLIGHT ON PETS
Four-legged creatures will be doing unusual things at the New York Pet Expo in progress today from 11 A.M. to 4 P.M. at Rockland Community College in Suffern.
For instance, there is the cat named Motorcat.
He face is framed by a custom-made motorcycle helmet that buckles under her chin.
She rides untethered on motorcycles, bicycles and car hoods, with her owner and chauffeur, Catman.


Stephanie Goodman and Beau Everett
Stephanie Robin Goodman, the daughter of Frederick and Susan Goodman of East Brunswick, N.J., is to be married today to William Charles Everett, a son of Lonnie and Judy Everett of Winterhaven, Fla.
Rabbi Emily Faust Korzenik is to perform the ceremony in the Pegasus Suite at the Rainbow Room in New York.
Dr.
Goodman, 29, is keeping her name.
She graduated cum laude from Harvard University and received her medical degree from Yale University.
She is a resident in anesthesiology at Columbia-Presbyterian Medical Center in New York.
Her father is a senior consultant in quality management at the Chubb Services Corporation in Warren, N.J., a consulting subsidiary of Chubb &amp; Sons, the insurance company.
Her mother is a reading specialist at the Central School in East Brunswick.


Katharine Fitzgerald, John Green Jr.
Katharine Grace Fitzgerald, a daughter of Florence Fitzgerald of Clinton, N.J., and the late William T. Fitzgerald, was married yesterday to John W. Green Jr., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Green of Burlington, N.J.
The Rev.
Florian Gall performed the ceremony at Our Lady of Lourdes Roman Catholic Church in Whitehouse Station, N.J.
Mrs.
Green, 32, graduated cum laude from Tufts University.
She is the manager of E. Braun &amp; Company, a linen shop in New York.
Her mother is the chairwoman of the Mohawk Manufacturing Corporation, a steel fabricating company founded by the bride's father, in Whitehouse Station.


They're Baaaaack


Late Late Show, Low Low Price, Big Big Guards
Sure, the city that never sleeps. But can you go see a first-run movie at 2 A.M.?
Well, yes, actually. A 42d Street theater has been offering a "super late show."


For Concrete Plant, Abstract Ideas
There were great hopes, back in 1986, for the concrete plant along the Hudson River between 55th and 57th Streets.
It was to be a weapon against organized crime, an attempt by City Hall to undercut the concrete industry's high prices and circumvent mob influence.
But the experiment failed, and now a new and incongruous vision is being contemplated for the site: public space.


What Dangers Lurk in Suburban Lawns?
WE MOVED to our home almost three years ago.
We had fresh sod in the front yard.
It was an emerald fairway -- a turf lawn trimmed to perfect suburban height, watered copiously, free of weeds, crabgrass and other unsightly interlopers of all kinds.
We were proud.
The next year, we found dandelions. I pulled each one up by the roots.


Treating Malaria
To the Editor: As director of the Tropical Disease Unit at "Toronto's largest medical center," where Mr.
Heer's malaria was diagnosed and treated, I was embarrassed to learn of our emergency-room nurse's ignorance of our hospital's 24-hour, 365-day service to manage tropical disease emergencies, of which malaria is the most frequent.


Frazier, Fernandez and Heat Team Up to Defeat Austria
After a poised performance by the veteran Mary Joe Fernandez produced the same outcome as a flustered one from newcomer Amy Frazier, the United States took a commanding 2-0 lead over Austria today in their Federation Cup quarterfinal.
With her face mottled by heat, stress and, ultimately, the thrill of success, Frazier made a shaky but satisfying cup debut.
On an intimate Turnberry Isle hardcourt framed by hibiscus and high-rises, the 16th-ranked Frazier rebounded from an error-strewn opening set to defeat Austria's top player, 22d-ranked Judith Wiesner, 3-6, 6-4, 6-4.


Diary
CURRENCY Big Bird to the Rescue?
While the American dollar plunged last week to post-World War II lows against the yen, frustrations grew in Japan as hopes for a bright recovery there faced away.
In Tokyo, Japanese protesters -- some in animal suits -- blamed the United States for pushing up the yen.
HEALTH CARE  It's Raining Mergers  The way health care companies are pairing two by two, you'd think the Flood were coming tomorrow.
Last week -- in the second billion-dollar consolidation of home health care companies in 60 days -- Coram Healthcare agreed to buy Lincare Holdings for about $1.38 billion.
On March 2, Abbey Healthcare Group and Homedco Group had announced plans for a $1 billion merger, themselves.
The Coram half of soon-to-be Coram-Lincare was itself born of a four-way merger just last year.
One analyst indicated the home health care business would, indeed, flood Coram-Lincare and Abbey-Homedco -- with money.
She estimated that they would each command about 17 percent of the industry's $7 billion market next year.
COPING  Japanese Companies on Guard  Fearing a relapse into recession, several Japanese companies -- Mazda Motor, Mitsubishi Materials and Sumitomo Metal Industries are included -- have announced austerity plans.
Big companies, at least, seem highly capable of coping with the export-threatening rise of the yen.
But the Japanese economy might not fare as well.
Indeed, analysts indicated last week, the country's lifetime employment system may be in jeopardy.
ARMS CONTRACTORS  A Moveable, Affordable Feast  Georgia's in.
Washington's out.
Where costs are low, military hardware manufacturing plants are bustling.
Where costs are higher, wildflowers are growing around shuttered plants of the same sort.
It's as if military contractors are collectively moving the party -- albeit a smaller, post-Reagan affair -- to any location where the tab will be most easily digested.
Also on the in list: Colorado, Louisiana, Florida and Mississippi.
In some cases, the companies are even seeking what economists say are gifts of public goods like roads, schools and municipal airports -- and getting them.
Georgia's Cobb County, for example, is about to pay for a multimillion-dollar rail underpass to give a warm welcome to Lockheed Martin, the nation's largest arms contractor.
WEALTH  The Divided States of America  Picture a classroom of third-graders herded into two groups.
Less than a quarter of them are sporting Hanna Andersson all-cotton separates.
The rest are draped in itchy, ill-sized hand-me-downs.
Hands on hearts, they chant, "I pledge allegiance to the flag of the United States of America, and to the Republic for which it stands: one nation, under God, economically divisible . . . ." This amendment to the egalitarian pledge seems fitting: New studies were shown to establish last week that America has become the most economically stratified of industrial nations.
A very few possess much of the wealth.
AUTOS  Mini-van Monday?
If the audacious billionaire Kirk Kerkorian succeeds in buying Chrysler -- mind you, this is a big if -- and the auto maker is left heavily in debt as a result, analysts believe the bottom lines of shareholders, along with mini-van buyers, would be affected.
The analysts point to Philip Morris scrambling to cut Marlboro cigarette prices two years ago in an effort to stem the loss of sales to lower-priced competitors.
Chrysler, it follows, would be forced to cut prices because with the debt on its books, "Ford and G.M. would have a field day" going after its product lines, said the automotive stock analyst Nicholas Lobaccaro.
After Philip Morris announced its cut, the company suffered a sharp selloff that left its shareholders $13 billion poorer.
With Chrysler, Mr.
Lobaccaro predicted, instead of a Marlboro Friday, "you would have a mini-van Monday." WALL STREET  Salomon Is Still Bleeding  Somebody get Salomon Brothers a tourniquet!
Since a pay plan cutting the compensation of its managing directors was announced late last year, the investment bank has lost 10 percent of those directors.
Three were added to the list last week -- even as the firm, which reported 1994 after-tax losses of almost $400 million, announced an easing of the restrictive pay plan.
Analysts were skeptical about how effective the new plan would be.
If it is shunned, management will probably have to pay still more to keep valued workers.
LENDING  Sure, It's Less Red Tape, but ...
Banks that make loans to small businesses are no doubt sighing in relief.
Thanks to an overhaul of regulations aimed at encouraging banks and savings and loan associations to make more loans in moderate- and low-income areas, they face a lot less paperwork.
But the relaxed reporting requirements, adopted last week, are more relaxed than some minority-rights activists believe is healthy.
Under the new rules, banks do not have to collect and report information on the race and sex of their small-business borrowers -- as they have to do for home mortgages under the Community Reinvestment Act.
The collection of those details was sought by community and consumer groups as a method of uncovering lending bias.
But Federal regulators sided with bankers and Republicans in control of Congress and dropped the proposal.
The Federal Reserve will, however, let banks, insurance companies and investment houses gather and publish data on business loans by sex and race -- on a voluntary basis.
MEDIA  The Last Word in Houston  What to read in Houston?
Why, the Chronicle, of course.
The choice between it and the Houston Post was eliminated last week when Hearst, the owner of the 94-year-old Chronicle, bought the 111-year-old Post from Consolidated Newspapers -- and shut it down.
At a loss for words, printed or spoken, Post staff members embraced to comfort each other.
Now, as the country's fourth-largest city, Houston is the largest city in the country with a single major daily metropolitan newspaper.
It has plenty of company across the nation.
In Milwaukee, the Sentinel merged with the Journal on April 2, and Providence, R.I., the Evening Bulletin is set to merge with the Journal on June 5.
SWINDLES  'I'm Not Entirely to Blame'  No doubt, this is the headline Steven Hoffenberg would like to have dictated about his guilty plea last week to criminal conspiracy and fraud charges in connection with a $460 million Ponzi-scheme that he ran through his flagship company, Towers Financial.
After the Securities and Exchange Commission had accused him of being a swindler, Mr.
Hoffenberg had directed the coverage of his own regulatory troubles in what was then his New York Post. (The Post is now owned by the News Corporation.) In his court appearance last week, Mr.
Hoffenberg made accusations against Towers accountants.
He did the same thing earlier with one of his lawyers.
But no criminal charges against these people have materialized.


Thailand Eases Visa Requirements
Tourists from the United States and 55 other countries may now stay in Thailand without a visa for 30 days; the previous maximum was 15 days.
This applies only to visitors on pleasure trips; business travelers must get a visa regardless of how long they intend to stay.


Threat to Disneyland, Mentioned by Clinton, Is Termed a Hoax
Administration and law enforcement officials today played down a suggestion by President Clinton on Friday that the Government had thwarted a terrorist attack involving the release of deadly nerve gas at Disneyland during the crowded Easter weekend.
The officials said the incident had actually been a hoax involving a crank telephone call, the sort of routine false alarm that Disneyland and police departments around the nation handle all the time.
They said that although Mr.
Clinton had not misstated the facts of the affair, he had mischaracterized it and had inflated its significance.


Anita Cheng and Christophe Malbrel
Anita Ching-Tzu Cheng, the daughter of Teresia and Dr.
Ronald Cheng of Boulder, Colo., was married there yesterday to Dr.
Christophe Andre Malbrel, a son of the late Marie-Claude and Jean-Michel Malbrel.
The Rev.
Andrew Kimberling officiated at the Sacred Heart of Mary Roman Catholic Church.
The Rev.
Peter B. Barnes, a Presbyterian minister, took part in the ceremony.
Ms.
Cheng, 26, is keeping her name.
She is a graphic and multi-media artist in New York.
She graduated from Colorado College and received a master's degree in dance from the University of Michigan.
She was a Fulbright Fellow at the Hong Kong Academy for the Performing Arts.
Her father, an author, retired as a professor of sociology from the University of Colorado in Boulder.


THE EMASCULATION OF SPORTS
True fans dismiss sportswriters' grumblings because most of them have much to say about very little.
I don't care how many corporate sponsorships Michael Jordan has.
I just want to watch his grace and scoring ability on the basketball court because, to me and to most fans, it's still a game and it's only the game that matters.
DAN BRODY Washington


The Key to Auctions . . . Lot, Bid and Gavel
IT'S high season for New York's big auctioneers.
From now through June, there's practically a sale a day at either Christie's or Sotheby's.
Sometimes both.
If you've ever hankered to get in on the auction action, now is the time.
Both auctioneers have been putting out the welcome mat for new buyers, in hopes they will give the market new momentum.
And yet to many, the prospect of crossing the threshold of an auction house is daunting.
Auctions are seen as havens for tuxedo-clad men and jewel-bedecked women who emerge from limousines to spend millions of dollars on van Goghs -- and do it in a pressure-cooker atmosphere that brooks no morning-after changes of heart.
"Even though I was once an auctioneer, I find that my pulse quickens noticeably when I bid," said Jennifer Vorbach, director of C&amp;M Arts, a gallery in Manhattan's East Side.


Sins of the Father
THE PRIEST A Gothic Romance.
By Thomas M. Disch. 303 pp.
New York: Alfred A. Knopf. $24.


Betting on Books (and Cappuccino)
IN many ways, Borders tells the same story as Barnes &amp; Noble.
Both companies sell books at your local shopping mall, through Waldenbooks and B. Dalton, respectively.
They both run superstores crammed with thousands of discounted titles, where customers sip cappuccino and pretend to read Kafka.
And now the Borders Group, a division of Kmart, is planning to peddle its stock to the public just as Barnes &amp; Noble did a year and a half ago.
But, at this point, investors in new issues may expect the tales to diverge.
Barnes &amp; Noble's stock was an instant best seller in 1993, climbing 47 percent over its $20 offering price in one day and trading at $28.38 at Friday's close.
And in the I.P.O. market, stocks that sell a repeat idea -- book superstores, for instance -- are often not as successful as the original.


INSIDE
MAKING IT WORK 3 Doing backs flips in hip-hop: a dancer straight out of Queens rises in the world of music videos.
NEW YORKERS &amp; CO. 4  The economy of Chinatown:  a glut of restaurants and workers keeps prices down.
PLAYING IN THE NEIGHBORHOOD 15 Culinary and cultural smorgasbord at Riverside Church; art on a Brooklyn pier.
BOOKSHELF 17  New York in the 20's: when media and money reigned.
MOVIE CLOCK 19  What's showing at the local movie houses, today through Thursday.
GOOD EATING 20  East Village eclectic: Old-style Italian at Lanza; Southwestern-style Pisces.
LETTERS 21


The Rimbaud Connection
For his entire life, David Wojnarowicz (1954-92) threw himself whole into art.
He had been a wanderer, a hustler and a drug addict; his first serious photographs -- a series called "Arthur Rimbaud in New York" (1978-79) -- depicted various young men in T-shirt and jeans (all wearing a mask of the poete maudit) reading a magazine, masturbating on a dingy hotel bed, leaning against a white wall while shooting up or riding in a graffiti-covered subway car.
Wojnarowicz emerges not as a major artist but as a young man whose work spoke honestly and poignantly of his fascination with nature, sex and desire, and of his suspicion of authority.
Above all, Wojnarowicz seems to have relished photography's possibilities.
In "Where I'll Go After I'm Gone" (1988-89), vignettes of moons, eyes, trees, men, a horse and a winged foot dance on a grid of wheels and mechanisms.
Just like his pain, David Wojnarowicz's delight could be awesome.
CHRISTINE SCHWARTZ HARTLEY


Poland's in Europe, Isn't It? Isn't It?
ON a recent British Airways flight into Warsaw from London, a route packed with commuting business people, the stewardess mistakenly announced that the plane was landing in Moscow.
A roar from the passengers expressed the dismay of the Poles on board: how could their new sparkling airport and the capital's sprouting modern skyline be confused with the backwardness and chaos to the east?
The question of where Poland belongs -- West or East -- has been a leitmotif of the country's history and a consequence of its geography, smack-in-between Germany and Russia.
Now, unencumbered by the shackles of the Soviets, and its three-way partition of the last century a memory, Poland is, theoretically, free to choose.


Privacy, Business and the Internet
Computer programs that protect data from eavesdroppers and thieves are eroding the Government's ability to look in on electronic mail and computer data transmitted over the telephone lines.
The encryption programs allow callers to scramble information so that only the recipients can decode it.
The programs are legally available for use in this country.
But fear that criminals or spies will use encryption to hide crimes has driven the Government to classify the programs as "weapons" and restrict their export.
The attempt to block exports is destined to fail; computer software can be sent anywhere in the world via phone lines, and foreign companies already sell encryption systems of their own.
The chief victims of the export ban are American computer companies that are placed at a competitive disadvantage abroad, where finicky consumers reject American products in favor of foreign-made products with encryption systems built in.


Miss McCulloch, Mr. Vaughan Williams
Catherine Clifford McCulloch, a daughter of Mrs.
John I. B. McCulloch of New York and the late Mr.
McCulloch, was married yesterday to Rupert Vaughan Williams, a son of Shelley Vaughan Williams of London and the late Archibald Vaughan Williams.
The Rev.
Peter Daley performed the ceremony at St.
Phillip's Anglican Church in Antigua, West Indies.
Mrs.
Vaughan Williams, 32, is an art consultant in Singapore.
She graduated from Yale University.
Her father was the president of the English Speaking Union of the United States in New York.


Celebrating Rob Roy
The exploits of Rob Roy, the Scottish answer to Robin Hood, spawned Sir Walter Scott's book, which spawned the recently released movie.
Now comes the next step: a two-day package built around his life and legend at Gleneagles, a hotel near Perth.
Included are two nights in a double room, all meals and a guided tour to sites associated with Rob Roy.
Stops include Doune, where his guns were made; a boat ride on Loch Katrine, said to be his favorite fishing spot, and the Rob Roy Center in Callander, with its exhibits and video.
The Rob Roy package, including value-added tax, costs about $1,680 a couple midweek (at $1.60 to the pound) and $2,000 weekends. (800) 223-6800.


Master Mime


THE EMASCULATION OF SPORTS
The picture of sports fans, dressed to the nines (jackets, ties, hats) is as much a thing of the past as "muscular Christians." Fans were, at least, less rowdy then.
Perhaps today's fans are as responsible for the decline of sports as modern athletes are.
Maybe they deserve each other.
VINCENT H. PASCALE Bronxville, N.Y.


New &amp; Noteworthy Paperbacks
MASTER OF THE GAME: Steve Ross and the Creation of Time Warner By Connie Bruck.
Penguin, $12.95.
It was like a debutante marrying a Las Vegas showman: no one understood how the merger of the elite and staid Time Inc. and the plebian, nouveau riche Warner Communications could work.
But it has, largely because of Warner's founder, Steve Ross.
Last year our reviewer, David McClintick, called this book "masterly, and probably definitive." Another media empire, as wholesome as Warner was glitzy, is analyzed in THEIRS WAS THE KINGDOM: Lila and DeWitt Wallace and the Story of the Reader's Digest, by John Heidenry (Norton, $10.95).
The making of an American institution is recounted in a "hugely detailed, engagingly written history," Richard Lingeman said here in 1993.
THE CROSSING By Cormac McCarthy.
Vintage International, $13.
The second novel in the author's projected Border trilogy turns a young boy's peregrinations into a kind of mythical quest.
In the 1930's Billy Parham, the 16-year-old son of a cattle rancher, captures an elusive wolf who has been plundering local herds.
Instead of killing the animal, he decides to take her back to the mountains of Mexico.
Our reviewer, Robert Hass, said in 1994, "Mr. McCarthy is a great and inventive storyteller, and he writes brilliantly and knowledgeably about animals and landscapes -- but finally the power and delight of the book derive from the fact that he seems incapable of writing a boring sentence."  GENERAL JAMES LONGSTREET: The Confederacy's Most Controversial Soldier -- A Biography By Jeffry D. Wert.
Touchstone/Simon &amp; Schuster, $15.
Being a close friend of Ulysses S. Grant's didn't endear James Longstreet to Southern historians, who came to regard him as the diffident bungler who had lost Gettysburg.
This study attempts to redeem his reputation.
"The reader comes away with sympathy and respect," John Eisenhower said here in 1993.
The feelings of ordinary soldiers come to light in WHAT THEY FOUGHT FOR, 1861-1865, by James M. McPherson (Anchor/ Doubleday, $10).
Using passages from diaries and letters, the author argues that the Civil War rank and file was often as deeply committed as its leaders.
Our reviewer, Hal Goodman, found last year that some of the men's opinions were "striking, most notably the balancing act that many Southern soldiers performed with the concept of slavery." Intense passion for the Union cause imbues HARD MARCHING EVERY DAY: The Civil War Letters of Private Wilbur Fisk, 1861-1865, edited by Emil and Ruth Rosenblatt (University Press of Kansas, $15.95).
This correspondence chronicles a Vermont volunteer's daily life, in and out of battle.
"What may be surprising is just how literate a man Fisk was and what a firm grasp he had on the events of his day," John Glenn said here in 1992.
The political forces behind the Northern Army are the subject of FREE SOIL, FREE LABOR, FREE MEN: The Ideology of the Republican Party Before the Civil War, by Eric Foner (Oxford University, $13.95), which has been restored to print in an updated edition.
The Republicans' hatred of slavery was genuine and not an excuse to further their economic aims, the author says.
In 1970 our reviewer, David Donald, called it a "carefully researched, fair-minded book."  STONES FROM THE RIVER By Ursula Hegi.
Scribner Paperback, $12.
Trudi Montag is a dwarf -- in Nazi Germany, that is little better than being a Jew.
But her deformity confers on her a kind of independence, which allows her to become a conscience for her town.
"This moving, elegiac novel commands our compassion and respect for the wisdom and courage to be found in unlikely places, in unlikely times," Suzanne Ruta said here last year.
THE COLOR CURTAIN: A Report on the Bandung Conference By Richard Wright.
Banner/University Press of Mississippi, $15.95.
In 1955 the author traveled to Indonesia to attend a meeting of 29 African and Asian countries that were to discuss "problems of colonialism and racialism." This book is his analysis of the proceedings, which had special resonance for him as a black man and a Westerner.
In 1956 the reviewer for The New York Times, Tillman Durdin, called it "a vivid and illuminating job of reportage." The same publisher has also reprinted SAVAGE HOLIDAY ($16.95), Wright's only novel with no black characters.
First published in 1954, it focuses on a retired, middle-aged insurance executive who has to take measure of his own morality when he inadvertently causes the death of a child.
AS MAX SAW IT By Louis Begley.
Fawcett Columbine, $10.
The pain of deception -- particularly self-deception -- is an underlying current in this novel, which presents a homosexual relationship through the eyes of an uninvolved, ostensibly heterosexual man.
In 1994 our reviewer, Bruce Bawer, described it as "a consummately beautiful -- and major -- work of literary art."  IF YOU KNEW ME By Anne Roiphe.
Warner, $11.99.
Romance for the unmarried and over 40 is a cautious dance, requiring careful steps, the author suggests.
In this novel the lovers are a molecular biologist and a schoolteacher who has assumed the care of his disturbed younger sister.
"It lets us gaze into the honest lives of people caught together as if in the unforgettable, poignant yet almost meaningless arrangements of shell and sea-wrack," Robert Kelly said here in 1993.
NOW YOU SEE HER By Whitney Otto.
Ballantine, $12.
Kiki Shaw, a researcher for a game show, is growing invisible as she gets older -- a problem for most women, except that hers is not metaphorical.
Last year our reviewer, Peter Lefcourt, praised the novel's "charm and expressiveness." LAUREL GRAEBER


Ordinary Lives of Victims, Remembered in Grief
They were there for the most mundane reasons.
Sometime after 9 A.M., before the first cup of coffee got cold, many of them were murdered.
The bomb that tore apart the Alfred P. Murrah Federal Building murdered 3-year-old Zackary T. Chavez before he had time to build his daily castle from building blocks in the day-care center.
His body has been identified.


How to Invest in China Without Really Being There
A small investor doesn't have to ply the crowded streets of Shanghai to bet on China.
There are far easier and safer ways to invest in the country's growth, one reason why the shares reserved for foreigners on the fledgling stock markets in Shanghai and Shenzhen have been hurting so badly.
Since 1992, when the shares for foreigners began to trade, more than a dozen Chinese companies have listed their shares in Hong Kong, another half dozen on the New York Stock Exchange and a few more in Australia and Canada.


Late to Work? Let Us Know!
Your mother's finally doing her taxes and she couldn't understand how she can be elderly and still not get the elderly tax credit?
Hmm.
The Times seeks readers' tales of excuses for arriving at work late.
Send your story to On the Job, Money and Business, The New York Times, 229 West 43d Street, New York, N.Y. 10036.
Or by E-mail to onthejob@nytimes.com.
Include your phone number.
All submissions become the property of The Times and may be republished in any medium.


Knocking, Knocking On the N.B.A.'s Door
When I was 8, maybe 9, I began to think of nothing but basketball.
My dad, a huge basketball fan himself, was excited.
"In fact," he said, "I have an idea. Get in the car." He threw my sneakers and basketball on my lap and we drove off.
I didn't know where we were going until we got to the Boys' Club in Mount Kisco, N.Y., the town next to ours.


From Souzay, a Farewell More Apt Than the Last
GERARD SOUZAY, THEN well into his 70's, appeared at the 92d Street Y on a Sunday afternoon several seasons ago.
Bent, frail, with brilliantined black hair, Mr.
Souzay sang three songs before I found the opportunity to flee.
What self-deception could have persuaded such a distinguished man, perhaps the true spokesman of French song in the middle of the 20th century, so to have exposed himself?
The thought later crossed my mind that I had been present at an unintentional wake for a culture nearly dead.
Indeed, a peculiar and very special French way of singing French repertory may have largely disappeared with Gerard Souzay's powers to convey it.


No Soft-Pedaling
To the Editor:
In his essay "From a Day of Gentler Dispositions"  [ April 9 ] , Stephen Holden attacks the philosophy of folk music and its adherents.
But I question his central premise: "In its determination to unite people in a struggle for the improvement of humanity, the folk movement tended to soft-pedal the existence of evil. And as times changed, evil loomed larger."


Unheard Complaints On Police Brutality
The board that handles police brutality complaints in New York City has fallen so far behind in its work that a substantial number of cases may never be reviewed in time to punish any officers who are found at fault.
More than 18 months after it became independent from the Police Department, the Civilian Complaint Review Board has thousands of cases that it has failed to act upon, leaving some complaints unresolved for as long as two years.
Article, Page 37.


Family Therapy Offers Hope
The articles relating to the recent emergence of child abuse at its worst, death ("When a Child's Life Is at Stake," April 9), highlight the dismal facts and attempt to point the way toward solutions, or possible solutions.
I would like to add the viewpoint of a therapist who has been involved in the assessment and treatment of families with abuse for more than 20 years.
The solutions presented by the Department of Children and Families and other concerned professionals certainly address the immediacy of the safety of the child.
At the same time, they do not confront the enormity of the problem, nor do they focus on the systemic nature of the problem.
In other words, while the child may live, without a more global approach the problem has the potential to be perpetuated.


Washington Memo; Now It's Republicans Who See A Health Care Crisis Looming
It is Alice-through-the-looking-glass time on Capitol Hill.
The Republicans -- yes, the Republicans -- are desperately trying to persuade the public that there is a crisis looming in the nation's health care system.
"It's a huge thing," complains Haley Barbour, chairman of the Republican National Committee.
"It's amazing to me that people think this isn't news."


Saved by Language
COLOR IS THE SUFFERING OF LIGHT A Memoir.
By Melissa Green.
Illustrated. 341 pp.
New York: W. W. Norton &amp; Company.


The Survivors, In Their Own Words


Replanting Overgrown Fall Bloomers
Divide and replant overgrown clumps of late summer and fall-blooming perennials, but hold off on dividing spring bloomers, like bleeding hearts and peonies until after they have flowered.
Plant deciduous trees and evergreens, fruit trees and rose bushes as soon as possible so that their roots can get established in cool weather.
Top-dress the lawn with compost or an organic slow-release fertilizer.
Aerate the lawn if you have heavy, clay soil.
Seed over bare patches.


Friendly Faces, Helping Hands
IN Bushnell Park in Hartford one recent sunny Saturday afternoon, a nervous-looking man approached Gladys N. Hoyle to ask if she could accompany his little girl to the restroom.
He didn't feel comfortable taking the child to the men's room.
But he didn't seem bothered about approaching Mrs.
Hoyle, even though she was a stranger.
Her red windbreaker, golf cap and khaki slacks, made her recognizable as a Hartford Guide, someone always ready with a kind word and a helping hand.


Woof! Taxi!


Energy-Hungry, Asia Embraces Nuclear Power
IT'S difficult to imagine the hulking towers of a nuclear power plant rising up from the emerald-green rice paddies of Vietnam, a nation so poor that most people still depend on cooking over an open fire and lighting their homes with oil lamps.
But this month, the Vietnamese Government announced that it was considering a proposal from South Korea to build two nuclear reactors here at a cost of $3 billion.
Vietnam is one of the few Asian nations blessed by large deposits of fossil fuel -- it has huge tracts of offshore oil -- but its leaders are eager not to be left behind in the nuclear-power binge sweeping Asia.


Ms. Rosenbaum and Mr. Halliday
Dorothy Alice Rosenbaum, a social policy analyst in the Congressional Budget Office in Washington, and Tobias James Halliday, a project manager in the Office of Economic Adjustment at the Defense Department, are to be married today at the Strong Mansion in Dickerson, Md.
The nondenominational ceremony is to be performed by the bridegroom's brother Ethan Halliday, the pastor of the First Christian Church in Yuma, Ariz.
Ms.
Rosenbaum, 28, is keeping her name.
She graduated from Haverford College, and she and the bridegroom received master's degrees in public policy from Harvard University.
She is the daughter of Virginia and David Rosenbaum of Washington.
Her father is a reporter in Washington for The New York Times.
Her mother is a research associate at the Investor Responsibility Research Center in Washington, a not-for-profit organization that tracks financial data for institutional investors.


Alison Parent, Thomas Maloney
Alison Fyshe Parent, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Arthur F. Parent of Rumson, N.J., was married yesterday to Thomas Anthony Maloney, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Matthew Cassin Maloney of Brookfield, Conn.
The Rev.
Joseph Hughes performed the ceremony at the Holy Cross Roman Catholic Church in Rumson.
Mrs.
Maloney is an associate in global institutional services at Bankers Trust in New York.
She graduated from Skidmore College, and she and the bridegroom received M.B.A.'s form Columbia Univeristy.
Her father is the chairman of the Tripar Corporation, a private investment company in Red Bank, N.J.


Poets Unveil Works for Fixing
THE Stone Room Poets meet at Sarah Lawrence College here in a spirit of brave camaraderie.
Sharpshooters all, the group of six takes careful aim at each other's extraneous adverbs and leaden phrases, joined in the common pursuit of agile verse.
Adept at metaphor and fine-grain imagery, the group did not toil long to name its Live Poet Society: the room in which it meets in Slonim House, at the college's Center for Continuing Education, is made of stone.


Rita A. Ulrich, Michael Wilds
Rita Ann Ulrich, a daughter of Catherine Ulrich of Peekskill, N.Y., and the late Heinz Ulrich, is to be married today to Michael Wilds, a son of Lee Wilds of Glendale, Calif., and the late Lillian Wilds.
The Rev.
Gregory G. Gibbs, a Buddhist monk, is to perform the ceremony at Descanso Gardens in La Canada, Calif.
The bride, 31, graduated from Hunter College and received a master's degree in professional writing from the University of Southern California.
She is an assistant director of development at the U.S.C.
School of Medicine in Los Angeles.
Her mother teaches first grade at the Van Cort Elementary School in Peekskill.
The bride's father was the director of taxes at The New York Times Company.


PHOTOGRAPHER'S JOURNAL


Totaling Up the Minuses Of Affirmative-Action TV
WHATEVER THE FATE OF the affirmative-action programs now under assault around the country, they are doing just fine on television.
American Indians are the victims of choice this season.
A few days ago, CBS introduced "500 Nations," an eight-hour celebration of Indian civilizations in North America before the coming of Europeans.
Next month PBS rides in with "The Way West," a six-hour documentary about the nightmare that America's dream of expansion became for the peoples in its way.
Earlier this year, the Discovery Channel carried "How the West Was Lost," a seven-part series of similar content and spirit, and last October TBS gave six hours to "The Native Americans," an idyllic portrayal of life before the arrival of the Europeans.


Trying to Reconcile Exercise Findings
The new finding from a continuing study of 17,300 Harvard alumni suggesting that longevity is fostered by vigorous, but not nonvigorous, exercise has surprised leading researchers in the field.
They are striving to reconcile it with many other studies that point to a life-saving benefit from moderate exercise, and they are perplexed that the Harvard study failed to find the expected benefit.
Science often advances by indirect steps, however, and an anomalous finding may overturn conventional wisdom, or be reconciled with it, or turn out to be in error.
Such moments are as fascinating for specialists as they are troubling for the public, which wants clear, dependable advice.


PHOTOGRAPHER'S JOURNAL


Four Workers Killed in Blast Are Identified
As firefighters yesterday finally extinguished the blaze at a chemical plant that exploded on Friday morning in Lodi, N.J., relatives performed the grim task of identifying the four workers who were killed.
Using dental records and bits of jewelry, they identified the bodies of Thomas Furlong, 38, of West Long Beach; James Wilbur Gourdine, 55, of Irvington; Calixto Rivera, 37, of Newark, and Glenn Terraneo, 33, of Clifton.


Fokine to Chopin


Got a Booboo? Advertise It
FIRST there was the one filling the screen in the long, long shot of the back of the neck of Marsellus Wallace, the fat-headed mobster in "Pulp Fiction." Then there was a wide pink one on a sandy-haired knee in a Tommy Hilfiger advertisement.
And then there were two plastered to the forehead of a member of the Voodoo Glow Skulls, a punk band photographed in Rolling Stone.
What are they? Band-Aids.


Very French, Very Horsey, Very Chic
IF visitors expect hunting horn lamps and laughing foxes from the place in the Kips Bay Decorator Show House entitled Salon de Chasse, they are in for a surprise.
What will envelope them on the landing of the grand staircase with its richly figured iron grillwork is the air of an elegant French hunting lodge.
"Because of the character of the staircase I instantly thought of the French chateau," said Richard L. Ridge, who has lived in Sharon for the last 12 years.
"I wanted it to look like a hunting room in a very formal, dressy way." Mr.
Ridge and his partner, Roderick Denault, are the owners of Washington House Ltd.
Antiques Shop in New Preston.
This year marks Mr.
Ridge's ninth as a participant in what has proved to be one of the country's most prestigious and trend-setting show houses.


BENEFITS
Shakespeare's Birthday  TODAY -- A champagne reception to celebrate Shakespeare's birth in 1564 and to benefit the Shakespeare Globe Center (USA) Inc. will take place at 5 P.M. at the Players, at 16 Gramercy Park South (Irving Place).
Douglas Fairbanks Jr. will be honored, and Christopher Plummer, Rosemary Harris and Alec McCowen, among others, will give short performances starting at 5:30.
A light buffet dinner will follow.
Tickets, $100, at the door.
Information: (212) 475-6116.
More Shakespeare  MONDAY -- At the Supper Club, 240 West 47th Street, the Theater for a New Audience will hold a fund-raiser for its productions and youth outreach programs.
Drinks at 7 will be followed by Shakespearean selections by Sir Ian McKellen, who will be honored for his achievements.
There will also be a silent auction, dinner and dancing.
Tickets, $150, from (212) 229-2819.


This Taxi Will Brake For Animals
It's often tough to get a taxi in the city -- especially for New Yorkers with four legs and a bushy tail.
"If you've got a cat or dog and try to hail a cab, forget it," said Lawrence Reilly, speaking from experience as the owner of a German shepherd named Rin and a Shetland sheepdog named Dojo.


Director's Farewell in Ridgefield
AN era ends at 8 P.M. on Saturday at Ridgefield High School, when Beatrice Brown conducts her last concert as music director of the Ridgefield Symphony.
Having nurtured the ensemble through 25 of its 30 years, and having developed a fine professional orchestra from what was originally a small, largely avocational group, Ms.
Brown takes special pride in having taken the Ridgefield Symphony to Lincoln Center, as well as commissioning and premiering many important works, including Vaclav Nelhybel's "Six Fables for All Time," for which she received a silver Peace Medal from the United Nations.
Ms.
Brown will continue to play viola with the New York Pops and direct the Louise McKeon chamber series at the Keeler Tavern Museum in Ridgefield (where the Cassatt String Quartet closes the season with a 3 o'clock recital this afternoon).
Saturday's program lists popular works of Beethoven, Mozart and Khatchaturian plus Saint-Saens' Piano Concerto No. 4, with Donna Amato the guest soloist.
For reservations, call 438-3889.


Partying On (and On)
Celebrations for one and all, from young musicians to those who file their taxes at the 11th hour.


THE EMASCULATION OF SPORTS
We may not have heroes anymore, but Robert Lipsyte's essay "The Emasculation of Sports" (April 2) reaffirms his place in the sportswriting hall of fame.
I agree with just about everything he says, but I think he and I are both New York boys, now in our early 50's, angry at the trashing of the sports fantasy we cherished as children.
Maybe that's the point: sports are for children, not adults who peer behind the cartoon.


Live and Let Die
NOAH'S CHOICE The Future of Endangered Species.
By Charles C. Mann and Mark L. Plummer. 302 pp.
New York: Alfred A. Knopf. $24.


Blue Dog Demo
THE BLUE DOGS are poised to bite Newt Gingrich," Jackie Calmes wrote in The Wall Street Journal. "To date, the Republican House speaker has had the votes of these self-described 'Blue Dog Conservative Democrats.' "
Twenty-three Democrats in the House of Representatives who are eager to reduce the Federal deficit now sport lapel pins that depict a blue hound.
Lest observers miss the point, the symbol is surrounded by the words "Blue Dog Conservative Democrat."


Now for the Next Century
A dinner and awards celebration is held at Sotheby's for the Lenox Hill Neighborhood House, April 19.


Valerie Grulich, Jeffrey Thompsen
Valerie Edith Grulich, a daughter of Mrs.
Harold B. Judell of New Orleans and Norman H. Grulich of Miami, was married yesterday to Jeffrey Thompsen, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Per Johan Thompsen of Greenwich, Conn.
The Rev.
Linda Moeller performed the ceremony at the Episcopal Church of the Heavenly Rest in New York.
Mrs. Thompsen attended the University of Miami, from which her husband graduated.


April 16-22; If Balls Fly, Can Strikes Be Far Behind?
Baseball's hiatus between seasons lasted 75 days longer this winter and plunged the players and owners several levels deeper into hostility.
But Tuesday night the hiatus ends,the new season begins, and the animosity will fly away with the first ball that sails high and deep into the stands.


Faust Seen In a Sequence Of Snapshots
A POWERFUL NEW RECORDING OF Schumann's "Scenes From Goethe's 'Faust,' " by Claudio Abbado and the Berlin Philharmonic, is a reminder of the extraordinary shadow Goethe's play once cast.
The basic story is ancient and familiar: a man sells his soul to the devil.
The play itself is rarely read or seen nowadays, at least by Americans.
But for a century it spoke with almost frightening urgency to Europeans.
Its encyclopedic text, mixing farce and epic drama, elliptical poetry and eccentric fantasy, created a tragic vision of desire that defined an era.
Goethe thought it was impossible to set his play to music, but Spohr, Gounod, Berlioz, Boito and Busoni went on to do so.
Wagner wrote a "Faust Overture," Liszt a "Faust Symphony." Schumann, in the midst of his own confrontations with "sinister demons," took on the task during his last years of sanity.


F.B.I. HUNTS 2D BOMBING SUSPECT AND SEEKS LINKS TO FAR RIGHT; RAIN STALLS SEARCH OF RUBBLE
A nationwide manhunt continued today for a second suspect in the bombing of a Federal office building in Oklahoma City, and the search for possible links between right-wing paramilitary groups and the 26-year-old Army veteran already in custody moved from a muddy Michigan bean field to the Arizona desert.
Federal investigators said they believed there was a broader plot behind the bombing and were searching for evidence of a conspiracy hatched by several self-styled militiamen who oppose gun laws, income taxes and other forms of government control.
Federal agents descended on Kingman, Ariz., the last known address of the suspect arrested on Friday, Timothy James McVeigh, and on the high desert surrounding the town, a training site for one such militia, the Arizona Patriots.


Plenty of Precedents
The Jets and Giants no longer are New York teams; they moved to New Jersey.
This is like saying that the L. A. Raiders are really an Oakland team, they just happen to play in L. A. If the Giants and Jets have a problem being known as New Jersey teams, they can always move back across the river.
JANE NEALE Clifton


Nothing Seen Whole
STUDY FOR THE WORLD'S BODY New and Selected Poems.
By David St.
John. 144 pp.
New York: HarperCollins Publishers.
Cloth, $22.
Paper, $11.


Troubles Waters
SEA CHANGE A Message of the Oceans.
By Sylvia Alice Earle.
Illustrated. 361 pp.
New York: G. P. Putnam's Sons. $25.95.


One Last Incarnation for Edgewater's Barges: Scrap and Mulch
On a bright spring morning, progress is a 16-ton clamshell crane bucket munching its way down the waterfront.
Its gaping metal jaws glinting in the light, the crane swoops down, scoops up a huge mouthful of Item S331 -- rotten planks, charred beams, frayed cable -- and spits it out onto a heap of scrap piled 15 feet high in the Hudson River.
For the Army Corps of Engineers, it's another day in the 20-year effort to rid New York Harbor of driftwood.
But S331, an old boat-storage barge, is not just a number on the Army Corps's map.
It's a piece of history, a splintery relic of the days when people worked, fished, partied and even lived on the more than 100 decommissioned and abandoned barges -- dump scows, rail barges, lighters, car floats -- that clogged the muddy shoals off the north end of town known as the Edgewater Flats.


Civilian Board Falls Behind On Its Cases
The board that handles police brutality complaints has fallen so far behind in its work that a substantial number of cases may never be reviewed in time to punish any officers who are found at fault.
More than 18 months after it became independent from the New York City Police Department, the Civilian Complaint Review Board has thousands of cases that it has failed to act upon, leaving some complaints unresolved for as long as two years.


Mets Pick Mlicki As No. 5 Starter
With four days until the start of the regular season, the Mets announced their No. 5 starter tonight and made their final roster decisions, releasing or reassigning five players.
Dave Mlicki, the front-runner in the race for the final spot in the rotation, was officially named the Mets' No. 5 pitcher and is expected to pitch against the Cardinals on April 30 in Shea Stadium.
He pitched one inning tonight in the Mets' 5-2 victory over the Yankees, and is expected to pitch again Tuesday in Toronto.


Ruth Frantz And Jon M. Healy
Ruth Patterson Frantz, the daughter of Mrs.
Robert Lewis Frantz of Pittsburgh and the late Major General Frantz, was married yesterday to Jon Michael Healy, a son of Marjorie and James Healy of Port Allegany, Pa.
Bishop Alden Hathaway of Pittsburgh performed the ceremony at Calvary Episcopal Church there.
Mrs.
Healy is a product manager at Clairol in New York.
She graduated from Wellesley College and received an M.B.A. from the University of Pennsylvania.
Her father, the commander of the 99th Army Reserve, which then covered Ohio and West Virginia and part of Pennsylvania, was also a partner in Buchanan Ingersoll, a Pittsburgh law firm.


Q and A
Biking in France
Q.
I am planning a bicycle trip with friends through the foothills of the French Pyrenees.
We would like to rent 18-speed mountain bikes with racks to accommodate panniers for our clothes.
Rentals in such cities as Toulouse, Tarbes, Pau or Bayonne would fit the bill. -- Gerald Stillman, Maplewood, N.J.


Carving Out a Niche for Herbal Iced Tea
TEA for two is nice, but tea for thousands is infinitely nicer.
That's the view of the marketing professional Maurice C. Hakim.
Mr.
Hakim, president of the Teacrest Corporation in Bedford, said he believed his company's herbal iced tea product is about to make a big splash in the consumer market.
The tea's name, T4 2, is a visual play on H2 O (the chemical formula for water) and the size of the recyclable glass bottle (16 ounces, enough for 2 people).


School Prayer Is Already Allowed
With the first 100 days out of the way, social revolutionaries of the right in Congress are pressing for enactment of their deferred social agenda, especially the political prize of school prayer.
They want to weaken and circumvent the First Amendment, which the Supreme Court rightly has held to forbid government-sponsored devotional expression as a coercive intrusion on individual beliefs.
The aim is a radical reduction in the religious liberty Americans have long known.
All Americans, in school or wherever they may be, are free now to pray by themselves and express their faith.
There is no need to bring officially sanctioned prayer back to schools or to lower other barriers that separate church and state.


INSIDE
Death at Rwandan Camp
Dozens were killed and hundreds were wounded when Rwandan Government forces opened fire on a makeshift camp where Hutu refugees had been moved.
Page 9.
Officer Convicted in Killing  A housing police officer was convicted of criminally negligent homicide in the shooting death of a man who was stopped at a traffic light in lower manhattan in 1992.
Page 39.
The Clintons Testify
The Whitewater independent counsel questioned President Clinton and Hillary Rodham Clinton at the White House about their personal and campaign finances.
Page 25.
Gray Panther Founder Dies
Maggie Kuhn, who began her fight against age bias and other injustices began after she was forced to retire in 1970, died at 89.
Page 47.
2 International


One Man's Complex Path to Extremism
"Take it as it comes,
"Buy a Lamborghini,


Upset Adds to Derby Muddle
The confusion surrounding the countdown to the Kentucky Derby grew thicker yesterday when Mystery Storm ran out of the money, while Dazzling Falls was winning the $500,000 Arkansas Derby, the last major prep race before the Run for the Roses in two weeks.
Mystery Storm, the winner of the Rebel Stakes and the Southwest, was trying to complete a rare triple at Oaklawn Park in Arkansas before going on to Louisville for the Derby.
But he faded to fifth place in the homestretch as Dazzling Falls swept past to win by two lengths over Flitch, with On Target and Beavers Nose next.
Dazzling Falls, owned by the Chateau Ridge Farm and trained by Chuck Turco with Garrett Gomez riding, won the Remington Park Derby in record time two weeks ago.
He came back yesterday to run the mile and an eighth in the Arkansas Derby in 1:503/5 .
He paid $8 for $2 to win and was expected to run next in the Derby.


Pianist as Polymath (Pollyanna?)
FIFTY YEARS AGO, LEON Fleisher made his debut with the New York Philharmonic, playing Brahms's D-minor Piano Concerto, with Pierre Monteux conducting.
A gangly 16-year-old, the pianist had secured the approval of his renowned teacher, Artur Schnabel, who severely restricted the youth's choices of engagements and repertory.
Schnabel had already broken a longstanding policy of not teaching children, accepting Mr.
Fleisher when he was just 9, and he was not about to let some pushy promoter enter the picture.
Mr.
Fleisher's debut was a triumph.
Olin Downes wrote in The New York Times that with his breathtaking performance, "Leon Fleisher at once established himself as one of the most gifted of the younger generation of keyboard artists." A major career was predicted.
A major career transpired, but not in the expected way.


Balls? Strikes? Homers? It Sounds Vaguely Familiar
Far from Rye Brook, N.Y., psychically at least, and from Herndon and Leesburg, Va., and assorted other decidedly alien sites, major league baseball returns from its longest winter hibernation ever on Tuesday night.
After negotiators roamed the country fruitlessly seeking a solution to the longest and costliest work stoppage in professional sports history, players will return to the grass, real and artificial, of major league parks to resume the game they ceased playing last Aug. 12.


Politicians Are Arriving to See, To Be Seen and to Commiserate
In the political rite that follows catastrophe, the Speaker of the House, Newt Gingrich, toured the wreckage of the Federal building here before dawn today, and President Clinton is scheduled to arrive on Sunday for a memorial service for the victims of the bombing.
With the focus of the nation, and much of the world, fixed on Oklahoma City since the explosion on Wednesday that killed dozens, people here said the visits by politicians could be expected but mattered hardly at all.


Those Who Lived, Mostly Just by Chance, Tell Their Stories
Some of them had spent their careers in the Alfred P. Murrah Federal Building.
Others just happened to be nearby.
Shortly after 9 A.M. on Wednesday, they all found themselves written into a terrifying chapter in American history.
Although haunted by what happened to them, they are by definition the lucky ones: the ones who are here to describe those first few minutes after the explosion.


War Decoding Helped U.S. To Shape U.N.
American officials read coded messages sent by the Allies in the final months of World War II, and this helped the United States dominate the United Nations charter conference that opened in San Francisco 50 years ago this Tuesday, a historian reports.
Some 635 pages of diplomatic messages were intercepted and decoded by the United States Army Signal Security Agency, and delivered to high-ranking American officials like Secretary of State Edward R. Stettinius Jr. and Secretary of War Henry L. Stimson.


Streetscapes/The old Metropolitan Opera House; Why Mimi No Longer Dies at Broadway and 39th
IN the celebration this month of the 30th anniversary of the Landmarks Preservation Commission, little has been said about one important building -- the old Metropolitan Opera House, at West 39th Street and Broadway.
The 1883 building among the first structures to be considered by the commission for landmark status.
But it was later torn down with the commission's consent, after a battle that left bitter memories.
The case of the sprawling, Romanesque-style building is an interesting one, because the main force against its preservation was no rapacious developer but the Metropolitan Opera itself.


Love Him Tender
IT was a 15-scarf show, somewhat below average for Tony Roi's Elvis act on a weekday night.
On the weekends, when nearly every seat in Bally's Park Place Park Cabaret is filled for the "Legends in Concert" tribute show, Mr.
Roi will toss as many as 50 sweat-soaked scarves at his hooting female admirers while he shakes and shimmies and sings "Jailhouse Rock," "Blue Suede Shoes," "Love Me Tender" and "(You Ain't Nothing but a) Hound Dog" during his 22-minute act.
Though Mr.
Roi's contract provides a fixed number of white scarves, he buys additional ones in electric blue, fire-engine red and hot pink "with my own money, so I can give the people something extra," he told an interviewer backstage, in the narrow dressing room he shares with performers who portray Tom Jones and Neil Diamond.


Sports of The Times; The Jets Ignore Sapp And Others
WHEN nearly a dozen slabs of prime beef were introduced and Warren Sapp was ignored before the National Football League's annual stockyard sale, the draftniks in the Paramount at Madison Square Garden yesterday chanted, "Warr-en, Warr-en." Not too loudly, but loud enough.
The chant would get louder, almost loud enough for the Jets to hear out in their complex in Hempstead, L.I.


Home From J.F.K.
To the Editor: While sign postings at the local airports are as abysmal as Mr.
Ratzkin suggests, given his pride in his beloved Brooklyn, he should have realized there is almost always a way to get someplace in the city by public transportation.
From Kennedy Airport to Park Slope, the most direct public-transportation route would be the free shuttle bus to the Howard Beach-J.F.K.
Station of the A train, which would take him to the Hoyt-Schermerhorn station in downtown Brooklyn, where he could transfer to the G train and at the next stop to the F train to Park Slope.
The time involved in this trip is about the same as that from Heathrow to Central London on the Piccadilly line, and on a day without more than the usual delays, less than that of getting into Paris from Charles de Gaulle on the RER train.
And, as opposed to changing trains in London or Paris, with endless walks and staircases, each of these changes would have been on the same platform.
CHARLES W. BROOKS  Washington, D.C.
The author responds: Thanks for the advice.
The Q-10 to E and F option, however, would also have required reaching Brooklyn via Manhattan.
The A train, which Mr.
Brooks suggests, was what we took.
A switch to the F or G would have taken me even farther from my part of the Slope, and would have left the other person on this venture, Art, nowhere near his Flatbush location.
The only way to reach the IRT, which we both required, is either to go through Manhattan, or take the B-15 to New Lots, which I've tried before with poor results.


INSIDE
THE SCHOOL-BUDGET VOTE  On Politics: Iver Peterson on the mixed messages for Whitman. 2 Listening to the grass roots: How 3 districts decided. 8 IN PERSON  What was the story with New Jersey's first governor?
Charles Cummings knows. 4 ON THE TOWNS  'Brigadoon,' straight up, at the Paper Mill. 13


A Feast for the Ears as Well as the Eyes
NOW I know why I wait until late in the day to work outdoors.
The birds start to sing when the day is closing, sometimes solo, sometimes in populous choruses of tiny bodies hidden in protective shrubs.
The "cheer-up cheerily" of the robin is particularly delightful, the song going on for some time, and the sound an enthusiastic offering for sheer pleasure, I suppose.
It makes the work outdoors go faster and happier.
The gradual return of songbirds, inviting an appreciative work break, and the chilling weather earlier this month, inviting a return indoors, may have put some gardening on hold.
But spring is no time to dilly-dally.
The season moves along at quite a rapid pace once it gets started.


April 16-22: Nuclear Weapons; The Haves and Have-Nots Have It Out
One week into a monthlong conference to decide whether the treaty to stop the spread of nuclear weapons should be made permanent, almost all sides in the debate have staked out their positions.
Of the five declared nuclear weapons powers, the United States, Britain and France say they favor an indefinite and unconditional extension of the Treaty on the Nonproliferation of Nuclear Weapons.
Russia is expected to do the same on Monday.
Only China, trying to stay halfway between the industrial powers and the developing world, says it could go either for an indefinite extension or for rolling (and more or less automatic) 25-year renewal periods.
Among nations that do not have nuclear weapons, there is both unity and discord.
Many of the non-nuclear nations agree that an indefinite extension of the treaty could divide the world forever into nuclear haves and have-nots.
They want faster nuclear disarmament, and they see the regular renewal periods as a way to keep pressure on the nuclear powers.
They also want stronger guarantees of help in case of attack and a more generous sharing of nuclear technology.


Higher Priorities
If the the name of a football team is important to the Governor, she should get her priorities straight: environment, education and tax considerations for the state's middle class.
TERENCE FERRARO Edison


Murder, He Said


Meg Steinbaum, Stewart Russell
Margery Beth Steinbaum, a daughter of Carl and Ellen Steinbaum of Boston, was married last evening to Stewart Martin Russell, a son of Stephen and Margery Russell of New York.
Rabbi Robert D. Schreibman performed the ceremony at Tappan Hill in Tarrytown.
Mrs.
Russell, 26, is known as Meg.
A graduate of Emory University, she is a senior negotiator with Time Buying Services Inc., a media purchasing agency in New York.
Her father is a director and a vice president of Arthur D. Little Inc., the management consultants, in Cambridge, Mass.
Her mother is a freelance writer.


Fees at the Forum
To the Editor: In Rome, I encountered a curious phenomenon.
At the Forum there is a notice that all seniors from the European Union will be admitted free.
The list of eligible seniors also included Albanians, Poles, Latvians and others whose countries do not belong to the European Union.
What rankles is the fee of 12,000 lire ($8) for United States seniors to enter.
These same people paid through their taxes for the Marshall Plan to rebuild Italy after World War II.


2 Years After Windfall, a School Secures Its Role
The ink wasn't quite dry on his diploma from the Peddie School in 1927 when Walter H. Annenberg, then a graduating senior, gave the prep school $17,000 to build a new track.
It wasn't his biggest gift to his alma mater -- not by a long shot -- but it was the earliest.
Since then Mr.
Annenberg, the publishing executive and former United States Ambassador to Britain, has given Peddie $140 million more, most notably a check for $100 million in 1993, the largest single donation ever to an independent secondary school.


Yale Case Illustrates Swindle of Grade Inflation
To the Editor:
It is worrisome that a transfer applicant to Yale University could deceive an admissions officer about his record at a state college in California (Week in Review, April 16).
But the most significant fact in this episode is that the student, whose grade point average at his state college was just 2.1 (out of a possible 4.0), had a record of 3.0 at Yale.


Heartening
To the Editor:
It was heartening to hear Clint Eastwood defend the casting of a 45-year-old woman (instead of a much younger woman) in the role of a 45-year-old woman, although depressing to think that the casting of Meryl Streep, one of this nation's finest actors, needs defending  [ "Go Ahead, Make Him Cry," March 26 ] .


A Voice for The Shoreline East
I live in Madison, so I am prejudiced, but the Governor's decision to eliminate the Shoreline East train ("The Fight to Keep the Shoreline East on the Rails," March 19) works against everything that the 21st century is suppose to bring: an era of mass transit, with less reliance on private cars, the building of fewer bridges and an end to the defacement of our cities by huge parking garages.
The Governor is planning to shut down the railroad in order to save money, and all of us can applaud that intent.
But the fixed costs already in place will go on because someone has to pay for the new train stations, the parking lots, locomotives already ordered, and doubtless much more.


Big Demand And Short Supply Lift Rents In Manhattan
RENTING a place to live in New York hasn't been easy or inexpensive in recent years.
Yes, rents fell somewhat in the early 1990's, thanks to the recession and a decline in the quality of life in the city.
Since then, however, rents, particularly in Manhattan, have crept back up to -- and in some cases moved beyond -- the highs that occurred in the real estate boom of the mid- and late 1980's.
"Rents have been rising and are continuing to rise for most apartments," said Nancy Packes, president of Feathered Nest, a rental agency in Manhattan.
"The only exception has probably been large three-bedroom apartments on the Upper East Side. And that's only because there's a small market for them, and people are buying them now rather than renting them."


Maureen Sherry, Steven Klinksy
Maureen Ann Sherry, a managing director of Bear, Stearns &amp; Company, the New York investment bank, was married yesterday to Steven Bruce Klinsky, a general partner in Forstmann Little &amp; Company, the New York investment firm.
The Rev.
Gerard Travers performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at Our Lady of Good Counsel Church in New York.
The bride, 31, graduated from Cornell University.
She is a daughter of Kathleen Sherry of Alpharetta, Ga., and the late James Sherry.
Her father was a manager in Alpharetta for A.T.&amp;T.
Her mother is a broker at Northside Realty in Atlanta.


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: April 23, 1995
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
4
THE CHAMBER, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $7.50.) A lawyer represents a racist who is on death row for his part in a 1967 bombing.
2
15
CIRCLE OF FRIENDS, by Maeve Binchy. (Dell, $6.50.) The coming of age of women in an Irish village and in Dublin's academia.
3
4
UNTIL YOU, by Judith McNaught. (Pocket, $6.50.) An American woman who is a chaperone in Georgian England finds romance.
4
4
DAYBREAK, by Belva Plain. (Dell, $6.99.) Two families are divided and then united by a series of surprising developments.
5
13
TOM CLANCY'S OP-CENTER, created by Tom Clancy and Steve Pieczenik. (Berkley, $6.99.) The operations of a secret Government agency.
6
4
ANGEL, by Barbara Taylor Bradford. (Ballantine, $6.99.) The reunion of four people is transformed by two celebrated men.
7
1
"K" IS FOR KILLER, by Sue Grafton. (Fawcett, $6.99.) Kinsey Millhone investigates the strange death of a waitress's daughter.
8
10
ACCIDENT, by Danielle Steel. (Dell, $6.99.) A car collision involving four teen-agers tragically alters the lives of five families.
9
13
THE DAY AFTER TOMORROW, by Allan Folsom. (Warner Vision, $6.99.) A doctor stumbles into a tangle of conspiracies.
10
4
MURDER ON THE POTOMAC, by Margaret Truman. (Fawcett, $6.99.) A law professor discovers a corpse in the Potomac River.
11
26
CONGO, by Michael Crichton. (Ballantine, $6.99.) An American team seeks to discover why a group of archeologists died among ruins.
12
5
DECIDER, by Dick Francis. (Jove, $5.99.) An architect gets caught between the warring factions of a clan that owns a racecourse.
13
45
THE SHIPPING NEWS, by E. Annie Proulx. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $12.) A man mourns his adulterous wife in Newfoundland.
14
8
INCA GOLD, by Clive Cussler. (Pocket, $6.99.) Dirk Pitt contends with a ring of thieves for possession of ancient artifacts in the Andes.
15
8
THE ROBBER BRIDE, by Margaret Atwood. (Bantam, $6.50.) A woman who long manipulated three friends suddenly reappears.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
NonFiction
1
31
EMBRACED BY THE LIGHT, by Betty J. Eadie with Curtis Taylor. (Bantam, $5.99.) A woman's near-death experience.
2
30
HAVING OUR SAY, by Sarah L. Delany and A. Elizabeth Delany with Amy Hill Hearth. (Dell, $5.99.) Two black sisters, both of them over 100, reflect on their lives.
3
67
CARE OF THE SOUL, by Thomas Moore. (Harper Perennial, $12.) A psychotherapist discusses spirituality in daily life.
4
4
REVIVING OPHELIA, by Mary Pipher. (Ballantine, $12.50.) The everyday dangers that beset teen-age girls.
5
598
THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $10.95.) Inspiration.
6
8
THE HIDDEN LIFE OF DOGS, by Elizabeth Marshall Thomas. (Pocket, $5.99.) An analysis of canine behavior.
7
13
HOW WE DIE, by Sherwin B. Nuland. (Vintage, $13.) A surgeon reflects on "life's final chapter."
8*
3
THE AGENDA, by Bob Woodward. (Pocket, $6.50.) The inner workings of the White House in the first year of the Clinton Administration.
9*
19
SOUL MATES, by Thomas Moore. (Harper Perennial, $13.) A discussion of love and relationships.
10*
7
SAVED BY THE LIGHT, by Dannion Brinkley with Paul Perry. (Harper Paperbacks, $5.99.) An account of two near-death experiences.
11
18
SEINLANGUAGE, by Jerry Seinfeld. (Bantam, $5.99.) Observations on life's pleasures and ordeals by the star of "Seinfeld."
12*
9
MAKES ME WANNA HOLLER, by Nathan McCall. (Vintage, $12.) The life of a young black man in America: the memoirs of a Washington Post reporter.
13*
112
I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS, by Maya Angelou. (Bantam, $4.99.) The poet's depiction of her childhood and adolescence.
14*
34
A HISTORY OF GOD, by Karen Armstrong. (Ballantine, $14.) The development of monotheism over the past 4,000 years.
15
40
REENGINEERING THE CORPORATION, by Michael Hammer and James Champy. (Harper Business, $13.) Innovation in business.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Advice, How-To and Miscellaneous
1
30
CHICKEN SOUP FOR THE SOUL, compiled by Jack Canfield and Mark Victor Hansen. (Health Communications, $12.95.) Stories meant to "open the heart and rekindle the spirit."
2
208
THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE, by Stephen R. Covey. (Fireside/S&amp;S, $12.) Principles for success.
3
10
THE CELESTINE PROPHECY: An Experiential Guide, by James Redfield and Carol Adrienne. (Warner, $8.99.) Ways to apply the inspirational message of the novel "The Celestine Prophecy."
4
4
DRIVEN TO DISTRACTION, by Edward M. Hallowell and John J. Ratey. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $12.) Coping with attention deficit disorder.
Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending April 8, at 3,050 bookstores plus wholesalers serving 38,000 other retailers, statistically weighted to represent sales in all such outlets nationwide.
An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.


Word for Word/Tom Mandel and Friends; A Death On-Line Shows A Cyberspace With Heart and Soul
As the technologically timid shy from the complexity of computers and skeptics of cyberspace frown over its vulgarities and torrents of chatter, it may be useful to consider also the case of Tom Mandel, a futurist and computer-networking specialist who died in Stanford, Calif., on April 5 of lung cancer at the age of 49.
He is one of the first (if not the first) to share on-line, with a wide audience, his own experience of dying.
And having done so he seems a striking illustration of computers' potential for fostering community and intimacy.
Mr.
Mandel was host of the message boards for Time Online, Time magazine's computer neighborhood on America Online, and was a prolific and opinionated participant in the wide-ranging dialogues of the WELL, or the Whole Earth 'Lectronic Link, an on-line network based in San Francisco.
Thus Mr.
Mandel had a high on-line profile long before he announced his illness in November.
In the five ensuing months, as he transmitted updates on his condition, Mr.
Mandel and his many correspondents (many of whom he never met) shared both sad and happy moments -- including his wedding just before his death -- while musing on religion, poetry, friendship and the meaning of life.
Below are excerpts from their more than 2,500 postings on Time Online.
Full identifications are provided where available; otherwise only "screen names" are given.
TOM KUNTZ


Porter Hardy, 91, Ex-Congressman From Virginia
Porter Hardy Jr., a former Virginia Congressman who uncovered Government waste and fraud during 22 years in the House of Representatives, died on Wednesday at his home in Virginia Beach.
He was 91.
Mr.
Hardy, a Democrat who retired in 1969, had been suffering from pneumonia, said his daughter, Lynn Yeakel of Rosemont, Pa., the unsuccessful Democratic nominee for the Senate in the 1992 race against Senator Arlen Specter of Pennsylvania.


THE EMASCULATION OF SPORTS
Your cover was unfair to Charles Barkley.
Surely he doesn't belong with the likes of a convicted rapist, an admitted wife batterer (and accused murderer), a chronic drug abuser, etc.
Barkley might not be a good example to our nation's youth, but let's not confuse poor sportsmanship with criminal behavior.
WILLIAM H. SHERMAN Coram, L.I.


20 Years After Victory, Vietnamese Communists Ponder How to Celebrate
The Vietnamese Government has come up with a name for the momentous anniversary that this country will mark next Sunday.
It has been formally declared "The 20th Anniversary of the Complete Victory in the War-Resistance Against U.S. Aggression for National Salvation."
But the name is about all that has been decided.


Radical Right's Fury Boiling Over
No one could have predicted the disaster in Oklahoma City, but experts who follow right-wing extremists say that signs of mounting violence and anger on the far right have become increasingly obvious in recent years.
And as links continue to emerge between the radical right in the United States and the bombing of the Alfred P. Murrah Federal Building in Oklahoma City, experts say that at least three things are clear about the loosely knit movement.


D. M. Bianchini, Dominic Morandi
Danielle Marie Bianchini, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Valentino Bianchini of Dix Hills, L.I., was married there yesterday to Dominic Paul Morandi, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Dominic Thomas Morandi of Grant City, S.I.
Msgr.
Saverio C. Mattei performed the ceremony at the Roman Catholic Church of St.
Matthew.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
A SHOVEL OF STARS  The Making of the American West, 1800 to the Present.
By Ted Morgan.
Simon &amp; Schuster, $30.


Ms. Loveman, Mr. Harteveldt
Kristy Lynn Loveman, the daughter of Sondra F. Loveman of Cleveland and the late S. Michael Loveman, was married last evening to Robert London Harteveldt, a son of Mrs.
Irvin Gomprecht of Jupiter, Fla., and the late Henry H. Harteveldt Jr.
Rabbi Rosette Barron Haim officiated at the Beechmont Country Club in Cleveland.
Mrs.
Harteveldt is a public relations consultant in New York.
She graduated from the University of Maryland.
Her father was the president of the Loveco Group, a former Cleveland investment company.


Winter's Gone; Time to Get Going
NOW I know why I wait until late in the day to work outdoors.
The birds start to sing when the day is closing, sometimes solo, sometimes in populous choruses of tiny bodies hidden in protective shrubs.
The "cheer-up cheerily" of the robin is particularly delightful, the song going on for some time, and the sound an enthusiastic offering for sheer pleasure, I suppose.
It makes the work outdoors go faster and happier.
The gradual return of songbirds, inviting an appreciative work break, and the chilling weather earlier this month, inviting a return indoors, may have put some gardening on hold.
But spring is no time to dilly-dally.
The season moves along quite quickly once it gets started.


THE EMASCULATION OF SPORTS
Baseball is us and we are baseball for better and for worse.
As the producer, director and co-writer of the documentary series "Baseball," I emphatically reject attempts by writers to divorce me from my cherished sport because they periodically find, to their horror, that the game looks like the rest of America: profound, unknowable, corrupt and redemptive.
Baseball has been a complex repository of many, often contradictory, American tendencies since its establishment in the middle of the 19th century.
Players and owners have always battled each other over money; cynicism has always afflicted the star center fielder, the front-office executive and, yes, the cranky sportswriter, ever since the first umpire yelled "Play ball!"


A QUESTION FOR: Donald Johanson
Q: After Lucy, you found a bonanza of hominid fossils starting in late 1975 at Hadar, in Ethiopia, then almost nothing until 1990.
And last year, Timothy White announced a new 4.4-million-year-old species of hominid.
Why the gap?
A: With the exception of Lucy (at the tail end of the Nixon Administration), we found a great number of fossils at the time of Carter's election and shortly thereafter.
Then, under Reagan and Bush, there was a 12-year drought.
As soon as Clinton got elected, hominid fossils started turning up again at Hadar and other sites.
The dull explanation for the drought is that the Eritrean war forced a suspension of fieldwork during the 1980's, but I prefer another theory: Republicans are better at keeping skeletons in the closet.


Journal; Bountiful
Fifty-four years ago this week a young man from Texas named Horton Foote made his playwriting debut in New York with a drama called "Texas Town." Brooks Atkinson, the critic of The Times, declared it a "feat of magic."
Last week and some 50 plays later, Mr.
Foote, now 79, won the Pulitzer Prize for Drama for "The Young Man From Atlanta." In the intervening half-century, he has passed through Broadway during its Golden Age -- Lillian Gish starred in his "Trip to Bountiful" in 1953 -- and won two Oscars in Hollywood (for "To Kill a Mockingbird" and "Tender Mercies").
But, incredibly, Mr.
Foote is now in some ways back where he started in the theater.
Not only is he still writing about the same Texans but his Pulitzer-winning play, just like "Texas Town," was staged on a shoestring in a tiny Off Off Broadway playhouse.


MAR-A-LAGO BOULEVARD
Michael Rubiner's article about me, Mar-a-Lago and the Mar-a-Lago Club was false, defamatory and, above all, vicious (Endpaper, "Mar-a-Lago Boulevard," March 12).
As an author of two No. 1 best-selling books (The New York Times list), I can state with great authority that the author of your piece is a third-rate talent who, unfortunately, never even called to check his incorrect facts.
For a writer to spew venom without knowledge is insulting to all, especially The New York Times Magazine.


Lace Curtains and a Prix-Fixe Menu
TELL someone you just enjoyed a four-course French dinner (including crusty, fresh-baked bread and a ramekin of rillettes) in a Connecticut restaurant for $19.50, plus a bottle of a good French wine for $12, and you might be accused of hallucinating or worse.
Yet that is what you can expect at Le Petit Cafe, facing the village green in Branford.
It is very small (a handful of tables) but full of French spirit, with lace curtains, sponged mustard-hued walls, green-veined marble tables and a checkerboard-tiled floor.
It is also Very Good bordering on Excellent and bargain-priced to boot.


Millenium, Asked to Move 4 Trees, Axes Them
Last fall, Millenium Partners planted four majestic linden trees on Broadway at 67th Street.
Neighbors and local officials thought the trees were beautiful, but worried that they blocked a bus stop that had been temporarily removed from service while the real estate developer finished constructing the building that now houses the Sony Theaters at Lincoln Square.
With the building completed, community leaders spent three months negotiating with transit officials and Millenium Partners to restore the bus stop and have the trees replanted elsewhere in the neighborhood.
But last week, with no notice, Millenium Partners chopped the trees down.


On the Towns
MUSIC ALL SAINTS' CHURCH The Dryden Ensemble, a chamber group performing on period instruments, presents "1695: Music of the Nineties." Saturday, 8 P.M.
Tickets: $12; students and the elderly, $9.
All Saints' Church, Terhune Road.
Princeton. (609) 466-8541.
NEW JERSEY SYMPHONY "Audience Favorites" includes pieces chosen by audience members through a survey conducted last spring.
The concerts include Wagner, Tchaikovsky, Strauss and Bizet.
Wednesday at 8 P.M. at the State Theater in New Brunswick; Thursday at 8 P.M. at the John Harms Center in Englewood; Friday at 8 P.M. at the Count Basie Theater in Red Bank; Saturday at 8:30 P.M. at the Crescent Theater in Trenton and next Sunday at 3 P.M. at Symphony Hall in Newark.
Tickets: $42, $32, $28, $20 and $12. (201) 624-8203.
RIDER UNIVERSITY PLAYHOUSE The Westminster Opera Theater presents Monteverdi's "Coronation of Poppea." Friday through next Sunday, 8 P.M.
Tickets: $10; students and the elderly, $8.
Westminster Choir College of Rider University. 101 Walnut Lane, Princeton. (609) 921-2663.
SETON HALL UNIVERSITY The International Chamber Music Festival presents a concert with Robert McDuffie, violinist.
Tuesday, 8 P.M.
Tickets: $10; the elderly, $5.
Bishop Dougherty Student Center, South Orange. (201) 761-9098.
SYMPHONY HALL Andre Watts, pianist, in a program that will include Scarlatti's Three Sonatas for keyboard, Mozart's Fantasy in D minor and others.
Presented by the New Jersey Symphony Orchestra.
Today, 3 P.M.
Tickets: $65, $50, $35, $25. 1030 Broad Street, Newark. (201) 624-8203.
TEMPLE B'NAI ABRAHAM "Voices From the Holocaust," a new full oratorio composed by Dr.
David Eddleman for three soloists, choir and orchestra.
Friday, 8 P.M. 300 East Northfield Road, Livingston. (201) 994-2290.
UNITY CONCERTS "The Maestro Series of Unity Concerts." Stephen Hough, pianist, makes his first solo appearance.
Today, 3:30 P.M.
Tickets: $25, $20, $15.
Montclair High School Community Auditorium, Park and Chestnut Streets, Montclair. (201) 744-6770.
UNITED METHODIST CHURCH The New Brunswick Chamber Orchestra presents "Winds of Mozart," a concert of wind quartets and quintets.
Saturday, 5 P.M.
Tickets: $12; students and the elderly,$8.
George and Liberty Streets, New Brunswick. (908) 707-9542.
THEATER CROSSROADS THEATER COMPANY "Two Hah Hahs and a Homeboy," with Ruby Dee, Ossie Davis and their son, Guy Davis.
Tuesday through Saturday, 8 P.M.
Saturday and Sunday, 3 P.M.
Matinee on Thursday at 11 A.M.
Through May 21.
Tickets: $20, $25. 7 Livingston Avenue, New Brunswick. (908) 249-5560.
GEORGE STREET PLAYHOUSE "Off-Key," a musical by Richard Adler and Bill C. Davis.
Tuesday through Saturday, 8 P.M.; Sunday, 2 and 7 P.M.
Through April 30.
Tickets: $30. 9 Livingston Avenue, New Brunswick. (908) 246-7717.
McCARTER THEATER The Triangle Club presents "Rhyme &amp; Punishment," a musical revue.
Today at 7:30 p.M.
Tickets: $15, $17, $18 and $20. 91 University Place, Princeton. (609) 683-8000.
MOUNT HEBRON SCHOOL THEATER "Cabaret." Friday and Saturday, 8 P.M.; next Sunday, 2 P.M.; May 4, 5 and 6 at 8 P.M., and May 7 at 2 P.M.
Tickets: $17.50 and $12.50 (on Thursdays).
Bellevue Avenue, Monclair. (201) 669-5588.
PAPER MILL PLAYHOUSE Lerner and Loewe's "Brigadoon." Through May 28.
Tickets: $29 to $44.
Wednesday through Sunday, 8 P.M.; Thursday, 2 P.M., and Saturday and Sunday, 3 P.M.
Brookside Drive, Millburn. (201) 376-4343.
ST.
FRANCIS AUDITORIUM The St.
Francis Players present Rodgers and Hammerstein's "Carousel." Saturday, next Sunday and Friday, and May 6 and 7. 8 P.M.; Sunday performacnes at 3 P.M.
Tickets: $10.
Bergen Avenue and Park Street, Ridgefield Park. (201) 440-1829.
MUSEUMS AND GALLERIES COMMON BOUNDARIES Visitors can pick up a brush and paint over someone else's painting.
It's all part of "Art Amok." Through today, 11 A.M. to 7 P.M.
Free. 68 Mercer Street, Jersey City. (201) 333-0949.
MONMOUTH MUSEUM "Japanese Expression in Paper" by five sculptors from the papermaking town of Imadate.
Through June 11.
Admission: $3.
Tuesday through Saturday, 10 A.M. to 4:30 P.M.; Sunday, 1 to 5 P.M.
Brookdale Community College, 765 Newman Springs Road, Lincroft. (908) 747-2266.
MONTCLAIR ART MUSEUM "What Is a Print?" features the works of 60 artists and demonstrates the wide range of prints produced in America over the last 150 years.
"Native American Jewelry" surveys the evolution of this Southwestern art.
Through June 25.
Admission, $4; the elderly and students with ID, $3. 3 South Mountain Avenue. (201) 746-5555.
MORRIS MUSEUM "Star Trek: Federation Science" is an interactive exhibition based on the futuristic themes of "Star Trek." Daily, 10 A.M. to 5 P.M.
Through April 30.
Admission: $9; the elderly, $8; students, $7; children under 12, $6. 6 Normandy Heights Road, Morristown. (201) 538-8069.
NEWARK MUSEUM "Protecting the Pinelands Through Art" illustrates the ecology of the New Jersey Pinelands.
Wednesday through May 21.
"The Arts of Nepal" includes sculptures and paintings of the Himalayan kingdom.
Through June. 49 Washington Street. (201) 596-6550.
NOYES MUSEUM "Messages From the Planet: Artists Work to Save the Earth," two- and three-dimensional works by artists in the mid-Atlantic region.
Through June 18.
"Looking Due South: Paintings of South Jersey by Glenn Rudderow." Through July 9.
Wednesday through Sunday, 11 A.M. to 4 P.M.
Admission, $3; the elderly, $1.50; students and children under 18, 50 cents.
Lily Lake Road, Oceanville. (609) 652-8848.
PATERSON MUSEUM "Transitions" are painting and computer photo constructions by Robert Anderson.
Through April 30.
Tuesday through Friday, 10 A.M. to 4 P.M.; Saturday and Sunday, 12:30 P.M. to 4:30 P.M. 2 Market Street. (201) 881-3874.
SETON HALL UNIVERSITY An exhibition of Ukrainian folk art, showing samples of pysanky (Ukrainian Easter eggs), ceramics and woodcarvings.
Through May 28. 9 A.M. to 5 P.M.
Monday through Friday.
Walsh Library Gallery, South Orange. (201) 761-9476.
SHEILA NUSSBAUM GALLERY "Masters' Vision," featuring paintings by Ruth Gikow.
Through May 20.
Monday through Saturday, 10 A.M. to 5 P.M.; Thursday until 8 P.M. 341 Millburn Avenue, Millburn. (201) 467-1720.
TRENTON CITY MUSEUM The Trenton Artists Workshop Association presents the mixed-media work of Katharine Bruce.
Through May 28.
Tuesday through Saturday, 11 A.M. to 3 P.M.; Sunday, 2 to 4 P.M. (609) 989-3632.
UNTITLED (#130), LTD "Member Invitational Exhibit," with paintings, sculpture and photography.
Starts Friday.
Through May 14.
Friday, 1 to 9 P.M.; Saturday, 10 A.M. to 7 P.M.; Sunday, noon to 5 P.M. 130 Ryerson Avenue, Wayne. (201) 633-6767.
SPOKEN WORD BROOKDALE COMMUNITY COLLEGE Susan Zucotti, author of "The Italians and the Holocaust," will discuss how many Italians helped Holocaust victims.
Next Sunday, 2 P.M.
Free. 765 Newman Springs Road, Forum 103.
Lincroft. (908) 224-2880.
CLOSTER NATURE CENTER Horst Krekeler, a bonsai master from Germany, will give a lecture and demonstrate how to create and care for a bonsai.
Free.
Today, 10 A.M.
Piermont and Ruckman Road, Closter. (201) 568-3650.
PARK PASTRIES CAFE Paul F. Peacock's Exhibition of Formalist Poetry continues with "Twenty One: Coming of Age," featuring 20 formalist poems and one prose poem in a visual presentation.
Through Friday.
Tuesday through Friday, 7 A.M. to 7 P.M.
Corner of Eighth and Park, Hoboken. (201) 659-1199.
REEVES-REED ARBORETUM "The Wisdom of Walden," lecture by Sander Zulaf, a member of the Thoreau Society and a professor of English at Morris County College.
Next Sunday, 3 P.M.
Free. 165 Hobart Avenue, Summit. (908) 273-8787.
SETON HALL UNIVERSITY "Poetry-in-the-Round." A. R. Ammons will read from his works on Tuesday at 8 P.M.
Sir Charles Tomlinson will read from his new book of poems, "Jubilation," on Wednesday at 8 P.M.
Tickets: $5.
In the Walsh Library on the South Orange Campus. (201) 761-9098.
TEMPLE BETH OR Bernard Gwertzman, foreign editor of The New York Times, will discuss how the newspaper is put together, giving insights from his experiences in this country and abroad.
Next Sunday, 7 P.M.
Free. 56 Ridgewood Road, Washington Township, Bergen County. (201) 664-7422.
SPORTS FIGURE SKATING "Tour of World Figure Skating Champions." Saturday, 1 P.M.
Tickets: $45 and $30.
The Meadowlands. (201) 935-3900.
ICE HOCKEY Devils vs.
Pittsburgh, Wednesday; vs.
Florida, Friday.
Tickets: $45, $35, $30, $24 and $18.
The Meadowlands. (201) 935-3900.
MINOR LEAGUE BASEBALL Trenton Thunder vs.
Bowie Bay Socks, Monday at 7:05 P.M., and Tuesday at 12:35 P.M.; vs.
New Haven Ravens, Friday at 7:05 P.M., Saturday at 1:35 P.M. 1 Thunder Road, Trenton. (609) 394-3300.
PRO BASKETBALL Nets vs.
Boston.
Today, 6 P.M.
Tickets: $75, $49.50, $39.50, $20, $16 and $10.
The Meadowlands. (201) 935-3900.
CHILDREN FORUM THEATER GROUP "Free to Be You and Me." Saturday, 1 P.M.
Tickets: $8. 314 Main Street, Metuchen. (908) 548-0582.
MAURICE LEVIN THEATER Bennington Puppets present "The Sorcerer's Circus." Wednesday, 1:30 P.M.
Tickets: $9.
Jewish Community Center of Metropolitan New Jersey, 760 Northfield Avenue, West Orange. (201) 736-3200, extension 253.
MEADOW THEATER "The Frog Prince and the Princess." Saturday, 11 A.M., and Sunday, 1 P.M.
Through May 14.
Tickets: $6.
The Galleria Atrium, Bridge Avenue and West Front, Red Bank. (908) 758-0099.
NEWARK MUSEUM "Cosmic Questions," for ages 6 to 10, at 1 and 3 P.M., and "Journey Through Time and Space," for ages 9 and older, at 2 and 4 P.M.
Saturday and Sunday through June 25.
Adults, $2; children under 12, $1. 49 Washington Street. (201) 596-6550.
NEW JERSEY STATE MUSEUM Take a simulated flight down the 3,000-mile-long Martian Grand Canyon on Mars in "Fantastic Sky." Saturday and Sunday at 1 and 3 P.M.
Learn about the greenhouse effect and holes in the ozone layer in "Spaceship Earth." Saturday and Sunday at 2 P.M.
Through July 2.
Tickets: $1. 205 West State Street, Trenton. (609) 292-6308.
TEANECK PUBLIC LIBRARY "Let's Go Fly a Kite" will instruct youngsters how to construct kites.
Free.
Thursday, 10:30 A.M. 840 Teaneck Road, Teaneck. (201) 873-4171 FOLK TALES The Shoestring Players present "Fire in the Snow," a quartet of international folk tales from Iceland, Ireland, Native America and Finland.
Saturday, 10 A.M.
Free.
West Windsor-Plainsboro Middle School auditorium, 55 Grovers Mill Road, Plainsboro. (609) 799-0909.
ETC.
BOAT SHOW Hundreds of boats ranging in size from 14 to 60 feet.
The event will include fishing and boating demonstrations, an appearance by Hulk Hogan on Thursday and a fishing seminar for children on Saturday.
Thursday through next Sunday, 10 A.M. to 7 P.M.
Free.
Lincoln Harbor Yacht Club, 1500 Harbor Houlevard, Weehawken. (800) 940-7642.
CAPE MAY WHALE WATCHER A sightseeing cruise around Cape May, with tales of local heroes, legends and the town's history.
Saturdays through June 17.
Tickets: $10 and $5.
Miss Chris Fishing Center, Third Avenue and Wilson. (609) 884-3351.
ROTHMAN CENTER Native American Arts Festival.
Traders and artists will display such items as rugs, pottery, baskets, stone and bone carvings, blanket coats and orginal artwork.
Today, 10 A.M. to 7 P.M.
Tickets: $8; the elderly, $6.
Fairleigh Dickinson University, Hackensack. (914) 357-3252 SHAD FESTIVAL Lambertville's 14th Annual Shad Festival, celebrating this hard-fighting member of the herring family, which swims up the Delaware each spring to spawn.
Featuring children's games, jewelry, bonnets, and, of course, shad.
Saturday and next Sunday. (609) 344-7855.
SCHOLARSHIP BENEFIT Ben Vereen will perform for the 15th Annual Richard Stockton College Foundation's benefit.
Saturday, 6:30 P.M.
Tickets: $100, including reception, dinner and performance.
Stockton Performing Arts Center, Jimmy Leeds Road, Pomona. (609) 652-4470.
Not a Bad Hair Day Edward Van Halen's pulsing guitar and wild hair are just part of the show as Van Halen tours the United States in support of the band's 11th album, "Balance."  THE MEADOWLANDS Tuesday at 7:30 P.M.
Tickets: $40 and $25.
The Meadowlands. (201) 935-3900.
Art in America More than 100 prints document the development of "Printmaking in America" from 1960 to 1990.
Drawn from private collections and museums around the country, the exhibition includes works by Andy Warhol, Roy Lichtenstein, Roger Brown (above) and others.
ZIMMERLI ART MUSEUM at Rutgers.
Opens Today.
Through June 18.
Free.
George and Hamilton Streets, New Brunswick. (908) 932-7237.
Folk Festival The 21st annual New Jersey Folk Festival will focus on the folk traditions of Puerto Rico.
Activities include workshops on the "cuatro," a folk instrument, food, an arts and crafts market, a children's activities area and lots of Puerto Rican folk music.
DOUGLASS CAMPUS of Rutgers University.
Saturday, 10 A.M. to 5 P.M., rain or shine.
Free.
George Street and Clifton Avenue. (908) 932-9174.


Nothing Face-Saving In Nedved Turnaround
In the last four games, Petr Nedved has four goals, two of them game-winners.
In the span of a week, the young Ranger center has almost doubled his previous output of 5 in his first 36 games.
But his coach, Colin Campbell, measures Nedved's improvement by a different statistic.
"Facial cuts," Campbell said. "In our business, they are a badge of courage."


Deception


The Outhouse: Repository Of History
On his day off, Jeff Kantoff relaxes by digging around in old outhouses.
Part urban archeologist, part bottle collector, part amateur historian, Mr.
Kantoff scours brownstone Brooklyn with three friends for houses built before 1860, when the city of Brooklyn began to install sewer lines.
As those old brownstones added bathrooms to their back walls and ran pipes out to the main sewer lines, their occupants filled in the malodorous outhouse pits with discarded household items.
But what was once common trash has become a trove of curios rich and strange.
The passing of more than a century has also stanched the stench.


Corrections
Articles and picture captions yesterday about the arrest of a suspect in the Oklahoma City bombing misstated the man's first name, based on information from the authorities, in some copies.
He is Timothy James McVeigh.


IN BRIEF
Athletes May Play Where Toxic Fires Burned
The PJP Landfill in Jersey City may be transformed from a field of fire into a field of dreams.
There has been talk recently of converting the 87-acre toxic dump into a recreational area, with fields for softball, cricket and football and a paved track.


From Polish Vets to Punk, in Only 30 Years
NO nabe is an island.
When Japan began investing in American real estate and the Soviet empire lost its hold, it was only a matter of time before East 15th Street was transformed and Andrew Rasiej, who has a degree in architecture, became the operator of a hot nightclub called Irving Plaza.
Let's begin 30 years ago.
"I remember this place from when I was a kid," said Mr.
Rasiej, who remembers when the Irving Plaza marquee out front read Dom Weterana, or Home of the Veteran.
"It was the staging area for the Pulaski Day parade. My father would bring us in from New Jersey. After the parade, the men would go into the 119 bar, and we kids would get bored and start running around the dance floor. One of the few flat theater floors in the city, by the way. When I got older, I saw the Police here."
Mr.
Rasiej, who is 36, graduated from Cooper Unionand went on to work on the construction of the South Street Seaport and Battery Park City.
When Mr.
Rasiej (pronounced RAH-shay) formed his own company to advise not-for-profit organizations on real-estate dealings, his father's lodge, the Polish Army Veterans Association of America, District 2, was among his first clients.
The association's four-story building -- actually a string of four brownstones that starts on the northwest corner of 15th and Irving Place -- also houses the bar, a luncheonette, a dance studio, and the rock club.


What's Ahead on the Electronic Highway
A LOT has been said about Kirk Kerkorian, not much of it kind, since the mysterious billionaire moved to gobble up the Chrysler Corporation.
But no one has faulted his impeccable sense of timing.
On the morning he announced his intent, much of the world's automotive press was digging into soggy scrambled eggs at the breakfast preview of the New York Auto Show.
They were hungry for news, and news they got.


Expressing the Hyphen in 'Asian-American'
A MAN IS CRAWLING THROUGH the streets of Chinatown.
He inches up the shadowy ravine of Mosco Street as if climbing a mountain.
In the next sequence of the video, he's on Canal Street, crawling past the fish stands and the feet of passers-by.
Nearby, on the gallery walls, hang several pairs of stained and torn chinos, mounted on stretchers.
The lacerated fabric resembles the canvases of Lucio Fontana or Yves Klein.
A square pedestal holds fragments of asphalt.
A sign on the wall transcribes a child's rhyme: "Chinese, Japanese, dirty knees, look at these."
The installation, "Search," was seen in 1993 at American Fine Arts, in SoHo.
The 29-year-old artist, Alexander Ku, describes the action of his piece as "looking for one's mother."


Through the Eyes Of a Real Estate Broker
Benjamin Fox is a real estate broker whose specialty is retail stores and restaurants.
A native of Riverdale, Mr.
Fox said he spent his youth taking walks in Manhattan to look at architecture and pick up neighborhood flavor.
Eight years ago, he and two partners founded New Spectrum Realty Services, which represents landlords with space to lease and retail tenants hunting for locations.
Mr.
Fox, 45, has selected sites for such clients as The Gap, McDonald's, Woolworth's, and Barnes &amp; Noble.
Now, he is working on leasing a vacant 25,000 square-foot building on 14th Street, sitting between the aging Palladium and a vacant lot that once held Luchow's restaurant.
Mr.
Fox recently led a reporter, Jennifer Kingson Bloom, on a tour of the neighborhood, tracing its history and outlining his theories on the retail leasing business


In This Fight for Schools, Tax Anger Took 2d Place
Why do we live here?
Some of us do because this is where our parents lived.
Some of us were moved here by our employers.
An awful lot of us moved here when the kids started coming and we had assembled the downpayment for a house in Bergenfield or Passaic or West Windsor.
But dig deep enough into all the reasons people live where they do in New Jersey and you will find a common thread: We live here for the schools.


The Reds Will Keep One Eye on the Cardinals
CHICAGO CUBS
Andy MacPhail, who performed wondrous deeds in Minnesota, has been imported from the other league to make some sense out of a directionless organization.
He named a new general manager, Ed Lynch, who hired a new manager, Jim Riggleman, who hopes to develop a new script for the season.


Don't Blame Your Landlord If Neighbors Are From Hell
To the Editor:
"The Neighbors From Hell" (April 9) was a terrific article about a pervasive problem in a vertical city like ours.
However, we take issue with the strategy recommending that unhappy tenants victimized by their neighbors take it out on their landlord by withholding rent.


Voting With the Republicans
Representatives Rob Andrews and Frank Pallone were the New Jersey Democrats most likely to vote with Republicans on the Contract With America.
Of 15 votes so far on the Contract, Mr.
Pallone joined the Republicans 9 times while Mr.
Andrews sided with them 9 times and did not vote twice.
The other three Democrats in the state's 13-member House delegation disagreed more often.
Robert Torricelli and Robert Menendez sided with the Republicans five times apiece.
Donald Payne never voted with the Republicans.


Toxic Spill in Lodi Blast Killed Thousands of Fish, E.P.A. Says
The explosion that killed four people at a chemical plant Friday in Lodi, N.J., also spilled a toxic chemical into the Saddle River, killing thousands of fish, Federal officials said yesterday.
Jim Daloia, a Federal Environmental Protection Agency supervisor at the scene, said the chemical had been identified as phenol, which forms carbolic acid when combined with water.


Meeting Presidential Hopefuls
For Republicans, the best show in town is the Northeast Republican Leadership Conference next month.
Party members will gather here from May 19 through May 21 to hear three Presidential hopefuls who say they want to build a better America: Bob Dole, Arlen Spector and Lamar Alexander.


Abroad at Home; Cupiditas Vincit Omnia
"We have an obligation tonight to talk about the legacy we're leaving our children and grandchildren." So Newt Gingrich said in his talk to the nation two weeks ago.
"No truly moral civilization would burden its children with the economic excesses of the parents and grandparents."
Speaker Gingrich's concern for what we shall leave our grandchildren would be more convincing if he worried about leaving them not only a burdensome debt but a country of despoiled land, air and water.


An Advocate of New Media Promotes Old Newspaper Values
Down the block from the Miners National Bank here, the vacant storefronts on Centre Street suggested that time had left this old mining community behind.
But around the corner, inside the offices of this small city's daily newspaper, computer screens were blinking evidence of the digital age.
A state-of-the-art newspaper layout system was going through its paces.


Accounts
*
Taco John's International, Cheyenne, Wyo., to Clarity Coverdale Fury, Minneapolis, to handle the Mexican restaurant chain's account, previously at Colburn Whiddon Advertising, Coconut Grove, Fla.
The billings were estimated at $5 million. *
Thompson Minwax Co., Montvale, N.J., owned by Forstmann Little &amp; Company, to IDM International, New York, to handle the national television media buying portion of its account, with billings estimated at $25 million.
Under the company's previous ownership, those duties were handled by Ammirati &amp; Puris/ Lintas, New York, a unit of the Interpublic Group of Cos.


Times Co. Promotion
The New York Times Company has promoted Steve Rago to vice president for strategy and new business development in the company's Information Services Group.
In his new position, Mr.
Rago, who is 44 and previously served as the group's director for new media, will head the new media/new products unit of the group.
He will also assume responsibility for strategy and the development of media products and services throughout the division, the company added.


Marketing Group Seeking Director
The Promotional Marketing Association of America is beginning to search again for an executive director after Richard I. Hersh, named to the position last month, declined it for medical reasons.
Thomas M. Hamilton, a former chairman and president of the association in New York, which represents more than 700 companies, will temporarily serve as executive director.
Mr.
Hersh, president of Team Inc. in Washington, had been named to succeed Chris Sutherland, who left to join Zing Systems L.P. in Englewood, Colo.


On Tightrope Now, Arafat Totters on Same Dilemma
It takes no time to tote up the number of Islamic militants who have heeded a warning from the Palestinian police, issued 11 days ago, to register their guns by mid-May or risk losing them.
The answer is zero.


An International Tetralogy With Spice as the Theme
When Rebecca Kelly Dance offered two premieres on Saturday night at the Kaye Playhouse, the troupe looked much as it has in recent years.
The balletically trained dancers were crisp and tidy and showed that they were at home in both the classical idiom and steps derived from modern-dance and jazz techniques.
Yet Ms.
Kelly's choreography, though fluent, remains bland.
"Spice Suite," performed to a recorded musical potpourri, was inspired by spices from four regions.
Its best scene was "Ginger" (East Asia), a solo that displayed the brio of Long Zhao.
But because the twisty movements of "Cloves" (Zanzibar), the wobbling knees and flapping arms of "Chili Pepper" (Louisiana) and the wigglings of "Annatto" (Caribbean) appeared obviously contrived, these supposedly spicy episodes lacked real savor.
They were danced by the other members of the company: Gerard Alexander, Dolores DeAzcarraga, Gina DeRicco, Julie Hebb, Tim Kasper, Jeffrey Polston, Andres Santiago and Julie Voshell.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  A SUPERMARKET IN A QUAGMIRE
In some places, a supermarket is a supermarket.
In New York, it's a supermess.
That is about the mildest way to describe the status of a proposed $12 million Pathmark for East Harlem.
The long-pending project has turned into a racial, ethnic and political quagmire involving scores of politicians, three levels of government, community groups, nonprofit groups and declaiming lobbyists.
It has pitted blacks against Hispanic New Yorkers, devolved into name-calling, and sent the normally bold Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani into the hiding place of neutrality.
Metro Matters by Joyce Purnick, B3.
FOR DISCO SKATERS, THE MUSIC STOPS
The battle over the macadam of Dead Road started with boom boxes, escalated to conga drums and settled into an edgy stalemate with an a capella version of "The Star-Spangled Banner." Doo-wop was the next weapon in the uneasy conflict, which pits an entrenched group of dancing Rollerbladers and skaters against the police and park officials.
The officials are determined to silence an informal disco rink that rolls to life weekly on the straightaway of Dead Road, on the eastern edge of Sheep Meadow in Central Park.
The tug-of-war is the latest skirmish in a battle as old and as venerable as Central Park itself -- over whether the park is for reflection or for more active forms of recreation.
B3.
CUTS IMPERIL AFTER-SCHOOL PROGRAMS
The thump of basketballs can be heard most nights from outside P.S. 42 in the quiet Eltingville section of Staten Island.
Inside, a group of teen-agers play a fierce game in the gymnasium while a smaller group of boys and girls work on arts and crafts on cafeteria tables.
But this program, along with other after-school programs, would be shelved under Mayor Giuliani's budget for the fiscal year that begins in July.
The Giuliani proposal has upset both the people who manage the programs and the parents who argue that shuttering them will deprive their children of an alternative to the mischief and dangers of the streets.
Mr.
Giuliani's plan to slash $37 million, or more than half, of the youth services agency's budget would also be felt in middle- and working-class white neighborhoods like Eltingville.
B3.
REGION  FAMILIES MOURN BLAST VICTIMS
On Friday morning, chemicals in a vat at Napp Technologies in Lodi, N.J., exploded, turning much of the old plant into an inferno and killing four workers.
After the identities of the four were officially confirmed, relatives gathered at each victim's home, sweeping one another up in tearful embraces and with bittersweet memories.
Some of what they said bore directly on the accident.
But mostly they remembered loving details -- a generous gesture, a wise joke, an offbeat talent.
The widows wanted to remember the first time they met their husbands and the last words they exchanged.
B5.
E.P.A.
MONITORS SITE OF EXPLOSION
The explosion that killed four people at a chemical plant Friday in Lodi also spilled a toxic chemical into the Saddle River, killing thousands of fish, Federal officials said.
Jim Daloia, a Federal Environmental Protection Agency supervisor at the scene, said the chemical had been identified as phenol, an organic compound that forms carbolic acid when combined with water.
Mr.
Daloia said E.P.A. investigators had found no remaining traces of airborne chemical toxins at the site, and no sign of ground water contamination.
However, the E.P.A. was continuing to monitor the wreckage of the plant, which was still smoldering in places, Mr.
Daloia said.
B5.
NEW JERSEY FORCE LAGS IN RACIAL HIRING
The New Jersey state police are closer to full strength but no closer to reflecting the racial makeup of the state.
The State Police Superintendent, Col.
Carl A. Williams, said his division was doing all it could to draw women and members of minority groups into the ranks despite the low numbers those efforts yield.
The latest class of 94 new troopers that graduated from the State Police Academy on April 7 included six black, two Hispanic and six female graduates.
"We do as good or better job than any police department around" at recruiting minority applicants, Colonel Williams said.
Members of minority groups make up 15 percent of the state police, while they are more than 25 percent of the state's population.
B5.
Chronicle B2


DANCE
New Heights of Nuttiness In Four New Dances  Sally Silvers Performance Space 122
Sally Silvers has an extraordinary eye and instinct.
The images she put together in four new dances performed on Friday night -- wittily costumed and fast-moving tableaux vivants of quirky pell-mell motion -- are joined not by a flowing dance impulse but by a logical illogic.


Long-Distance Phone Giants AT&amp;T and MCI Are Ruffling Some Local Feathers
Many consumers have been suspicious of the sales pitches by telephone companies ever since the mid-1980's, when the AT&amp;T Corporation and the MCI Communications Corporation began hurling invective at each other in their battle for long-distance customers.
Now, as these two giants break into the lucrative short-haul long-distance market, the clamor is starting all over again.
Only this time, the local phone companies are the ones crying foul.


American Center In Paris Is Stylish But Going Broke
In an urban landscape transformed in recent years by monumental architectural projects paid for by the national Government, the new American Center in Paris stood out not only as an exciting example of New World panache but also as an expression of faith in nongovernmental financing of the arts.
Designed by Frank Gehry with contrasting classical and Cubist facades, the $41 million building opened in the Bercy section of eastern Paris in June last year, raising hopes that it would add fresh verve to an American cultural presence that predates the American Center's founding in 1931.
But if financial troubles were already on the horizon last year, they now threaten the center's survival because the private donations needed to run it have not come through.
Put bluntly, the center has a fancy new headquarters but no money in the till.


John C. Stennis, 93, Longtime Chairman of Powerful Committees in the Senate, Dies
Senator John C. Stennis, a courtly Mississippi Democrat who served in the Senate longer than all but one other person in history, died today at St.
Dominic-Jackson Memorial Hospital in Jackson, Miss.
He was 93 years old.
Mr.
Stennis died of complications of pneumonia, said Rex Buffington, director of the John C. Stennis Center for Public Service at Mississippi State University in Starkville.


Beijing Suicide (Or Was It Murder?) Spurs Politics by Allegory
On a bright spring day early this month, Beijing's powerful Deputy Mayor left his chauffer-driven car and walked into a ravine northwest of the city, where he smoked his last cigarette and then, officials said, killed himself with a pistol.
Now, a Beijing newspaper has asked the question, "Murder or suicide?" -- but in such an oblique manner that it seems a throwback to another era in Communist Party history.


On a Successful Draft Day, the Giants' Staff Turns Chaos Into Science
One reason the Giants are one of the top organizations in football is because so many of their people have had great success and believe passionately in what they do.
But that passion can sometimes lead to eruptions of the kind that took place Saturday when several observers said the team's War Room was filled with the most draft-day arguments they had ever seen.
The debate centered on Michigan running back Tyrone Wheatley, whom the Giants eventually selected with the 17th pick in the first round, Ohio State lineman Korey Stringer and Colorado running back Rashaan Salaam.


New Images of Terror: Extremists in Heartland
When news of the Oklahoma City explosion first spread, it was invariably depicted as an alien stab directly at America's heretofore invulnerable and innocent heartland.
But when the suspect turned out to be a white extremist from a small town near Buffalo, the finger of guilt turned precipitously inward.
Suddenly there was a new image of the heartland, of alienated white men nurturing racism and hatred in grimy trailer parks, of shady, gun-loving right-wing groups that held the Federal government as the source of all evil.


A Canadian Favorite for the Derby?
In the 120 years of the Kentucky Derby, only twice has a horse come out of Canada for the most prestigious race in North America and won it.
Northern Dancer did it in 1964; Sunny's Halo in 1983.
But one week from next Saturday, another horse from Canada will try.
He is a large, dark brown, tame but businesslike colt named Talkin Man, and he may even go to the post as the favorite.
But Talkin Man also could score another distinction of geography: He could become the first horse to win the Derby after winning the Wood Memorial in New York since Pleasant Colony did it 14 years ago.
And he could become the first to win the Derby after capturing New York's major preps, the Gotham Stakes and the Wood.
And he won both of those after a five-month layoff prompted by a siege of virus that apparently caused him to run 10th in the Breeders' Cup Juvenile -- behind many of the same colts who will line up alongside him at Churchill Downs, their teams wondering how in the world he got there.


Wind Halts Conner's Bid
An unsteady breeze forced the postponement today of a crucial America's Cup match between Dennis Conner's Stars &amp; Stripes and Young America.
The race was rescheduled for Monday.
If Conner wins, he will earn the right to defend the America's Cup against New Zealand's Black Magic.


Autos Weave in and Out of U.S.-Japan Relations; Getting Asia Foothold
To the Editor:
Michael Lind's "Asia First: A Foreign Policy" (Op-Ed, April 18) mentions my company, U.S.
Asia Commercial Development Corporation, as an example of the type of company "supported by Japanese business interests and U.S. companies with stakes in Asia."


Navratilova Finishes Off Fed Cup Sweep
The sun dealt everybody a knockdown, but it was the United States that applied four consecutive singles blows, then added the knockout punch of a Martina Navratilova-Gigi Fernandez doubles dream team, to sweep Austria by 5-0 in their Fed Cup quarterfinal this weekend.
The doubles victory today left the 38-year-old Navratilova with a perfect 37-0 record in Fed Cup play; no other player in the 32-year history of the event has an unblemished record in singles and doubles.


JAZZ
Echoes of 70's Pop and Soul, Mixed With Improvisation  The Charlie Hunter Trio S.O.B.'s
Jazz for the masses is a call that has been heard, off and on, since the end of World War II, when jazz began losing its position as a popular musical form.
Lately the call has been gaining strength as various jazz hybrids have reconnected the music with popular culture.
On Thursday night, the guitarist Charlie Hunter and his trio made music that brought together the pop and soul sound of the 1970's with improvisation.


2 Who See Government As an Intrusive Authority
James Nichols, who ran the family farm here, stamped dollar bills with red ink in protest against currency and told his neighbors that they were "sheeple" for obeying authority like livestock.
His younger brother, Terry, who helped James on the farm before moving away more than a year ago, told a local judge that he rejected the authority of the courts and considered himself "a natural citizen of the American Republic." The brothers refused to obtain drivers' licenses, but drove anyway.


Protecting Anonymous Speech
Acting in its free-speech tradition, the Supreme Court has upheld the right of a lone pamphleteer to distribute anonymous political campaign literature.
It struck down an Ohio election law and called into question similar laws in other states, but probably only to the extent that the states threaten the rights of gadflies like Margaret McIntyre.
Mrs.
McIntyre, a constant critic of fiscal practices in the Westerville, Ohio, school district, was fined $100 for passing out unsigned leaflets opposing a school tax increase.
She opposed the fine in every available court, and after she died last year her husband took over her appeal.


CLINTON SEEKS BROAD POWERS IN BATTLE AGAINST TERRORISM; OKLAHOMANS MOURN THEIR LOSS
Vowing that "those who trouble their own house will inherit the wind," President Clinton honored the victims of Oklahoma City today and pledged to ask Congress for broad new powers to combat terrorism, including creation of a domestic counterterrorism center headed by the Federal Bureau of Investigation.
The White House said Mr.
Clinton would seek new authority for Federal agents to monitor the telephone calls and check the credit, hotel and travel records of suspected terrorists.
He also wants financing to put into effect legislation that requires telephone companies to assure easy access for court-ordered wiretaps of new, harder to monitor, digital computer lines.


Sports of The Times; Judges Make the Typical Call: Vegas Verdict for the 'House Fighter'
IN boxing, "house fighter" means the gladiator the promoter hopes will win.
In gambling, "house money" means what you're playing with in a casino if you're ahead.
Every so often in Las Vegas fights, like a king and an ace dealt out of the deck onto the green felt of a blackjack table, those two phrases fall together.
They usually mean the house fighter was awarded a decision he didn't deserve because he's the attraction for the casino's house money that's behind not only that bout but the next bout.


CLASSICAL MUSIC
Some Startling Miniatures, Along With Lisztian Thunder  Shu-Ching Evelyn Chen, pianist Alice Tully Hall
From Scarlatti's sonatas to Schoenberg's "Klavierstucke," from Beethoven's Bagatelles to Ligeti's Etudes, the more modest piano forms have been the scene of revolutionary utterances.
For her recital on Thursday night, Shu-Ching Evelyn Chen, the recipient of this year's William Petschek Award at Juilliard, assembled a program from startling miniatures: the 18 movements of Schumann's "Davidsbundlertanze"; Barcarolles of Faure, Chopin and Bartok, and six etudes by George Perle.
These 27 short pieces were framed by two bigger works of Liszt: his Prelude after Bach's Cantata No. 12, "Weinen, Klagen, Sorgen, Zagen," and his Variations on the same Bach passacaglia material.


Remarks by President, Governor and Dr. Graham at Memorial Service
Following are excerpts from remarks by President Clinton, the Rev.
Dr.
Billy Graham and Gov.
Frank Keating of Oklahoma yesterday at a memorial service in Oklahoma City for victims of the bombing of the Federal office building last Wednesday.
The President's remarks were recorded by The Associated Press and Dr.
Graham's and Governor Keating's remarks by The New York Times.
President Clinton
Today our nation joins with you in grief.
We mourn with you.
We share your hope against hope that some may still survive.
We thank all those who have worked so heroically to save lives and to solve this crime, those here in Oklahoma and those who are all across this great land, and many who left their own lives to come here to work, hand-in-hand, with you.


The Consumers
It was a cool afternoon and a soft breeze pulled at Chris Pawlowski's cap as he scanned a lot full of gleaming new cars at Marina Del Rey Toyota and faced some harsh facts.
A steady drumbeat of price increases in the last few years caused by the relentless plunge of the dollar against the yen, and another $200 price jump just two weeks ago, meant that he had had to abandon the idea of buying a new car.
He was looking at a used car, and wrestling with finances.


Economic Calendar
Listed below are the scheduled release dates for major economic indicators this week.
Monday  None  Tuesday  Existing-Home Sales . . .
March  Consumer Confidence . . .
April  Wednesday  Durable-Goods Orders . . .
March  Thursday  Weekly Jobless Claims  Friday  Gross Domestic Product . . . 1st Qtr.


Now Divorcing Parents Must Learn How to Cope With Children's Needs
On a warm Thursday afternoon, Susan Cinelli, a 32-year-old chemist, sat in the hall of the Wyandotte County Courthouse here, leafing through a handout called "Sensible Approach to Divorce," and waiting for her parent-education class to start.
Like every other divorcing parent in Wyandotte County, Ms.
Cinelli, who separated from her husband in November after nine years of marriage, was under court order to attend the two-hour class, aimed at teaching her how to get through the divorce with as little damage as possible to her children.


The Acquirers
As head of European mergers and acquisitions for Merrill Lynch, Ed Annunziato has seen a big surge recently in European purchases of American companies.
But while the fall of the dollar enabled the European companies in some cases to bid more aggressively, it was long-term strategic planning and economic recovery -- not currency fluctuation -- that drove the deal-making, he said.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-9  FRENCH ELECTION SURPRISE
Lionel Jospin, the Socialist candidate for President, outdistanced both of his conservative opponents in the first round of voting in a major upset.
A1  WAR CRIMES INDICTMENT
The International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia will name the Bosnian Serb leader Radovan Karadzic as a suspected war criminal on Monday.
A1  CARNAGE IN RWANDA
United Nations officials estimated that 2,000 Hutu were killed and more than 600 wounded on Saturday, shot by Rwandan troops or trampled in the ensuing panic.
A1  JAPANESE SECT OFFICIAL KILLED
A top official of the religious sect suspected in the Tokyo subway nerve gas attack last month was fatally stabbed outside the sect's offices.
A3  MYSTERY IN BEIJING
Since Beijing's Deputy Mayor was found shot dead, the question has been circulating: Was it suicide, or was it murder?
A3  WAGES OF WEAKNESS
The feeble dollar is squeezing United States Government operations overseas, raising the cost of everything from Embassy salaries to soldiers' living allowances.
A7  Palestinian Authority has yet to demonstrate it is in control.
A6  Italy's center-right parties held their own in regional elections.
A9  Pendeli Journal: Greek Orthodox Church reclaims an old role.
A4  National A10-14, B6-10  THE PRESIDENT PAYS HIS RESPECTS
President Clinton honored the victims of the Oklahoma explosion and pledged to seek broad new powers to combat terrorism.
A1  Anti-terrorism legislation is expected to face little opposition.
B6  A CITY MOURNS ITS VICTIMS
Church bells rang throughout Oklahoma City as residents mourned the lost and struggled to understand the evil that hit home.
A1  HOLDING ON TO THE SUSPECTS
Law enforcement officials will probably charge two suspects with unrelated criminal offenses to keep them in custody while the investigation continues.
B6  How will America deal with an enemy from within?
B8  Arizona neighbors recall suspect's love for weaponry.
B9  A MILITANT COUNTERCULTURE
A small but increasingly militant right-wing counterculture has quickly sprung up across the United States, according to the authorities and civil liberties groups.
B9  In Oklahoma City, Muslims feel pain from unfair blame.
B10  Businesses in the heart of Oklahoma City remained closed.
B10  FUNDAMENTALS OF DIVORCE 101
Courts are beginning to require divorcing parents to attend classes that teach them, and their children, how to cope with divorce.
A10  PICNIC FOR A PLAYWRIGHT
Independence Journal: In Kansas, a town honors William Inge, playwright and native son.
A10  CONFUSION OVER 'CONTRACT'
Many voters, eager for change in November, are now unsure of what the Republicans' Contract With America has accomplished.
A12  A FOCUS ON DEFICIT REDUCTION
When Congress returns from its recess it will face the Republicans' central campaign promise to erase the deficit by 2002.
A12  A PROBLEMATIC HEALTH PROGRAM
In Florida, H.M.O.'s save the government money, but at what cost?
Officials are struggling to eliminate fraud and lapses in care.
A12  POLICE OFFICERS LIVING WITH LESS
Due to budget cuts, Washington's police department is living with less: fewer repairs, smaller caseloads and less back-up.
A14  Metro Digest B1  Sports C1-9  Baseball: Yanks' McDowell signs one-year contract.
C3  Umps hope law is on their side.
C3  Basketball: Knicks jar Magic.
C1  Nets sorry season ends.
C5  Boxing: Foreman again.
C1  Columns: Lipsyte on Cosell.
C1  Anderson on boxing.
C2  Araton on Knicks.
C5  Football: Giants turn bickering into successful draft.
C7  Draft accent on passing.
C7  Hockey: Rangers lose game they needed.
C4  Racing: The Canada threat.
C2  Arts/Entertainment C11-18  American Center in Paris is broke.
C11  A director as interpreter.
C11  Theater: "Dancing on Moonlight." C11  Music: A Brazilian melange.
C12  Boyz II Men.
C14  Books: Harold Ross biography.
C18  Television: Peter Jennings on Bosnia.
C16  Business Digest D1  Obituaries B11-12  Howard Cosell, sports broadcaster.
B11  John C. Stennis, former Democratic Senator from Mississippi.
B11  Don Pullen, jazz pianist.
B12  Archbishop Mar Athanasius Yeshue Samuel, primate of the Syrian Orthodox Church.
B12  Editorials/Op-Ed A16-17  Editorials  A twisted rage.
Protecting anonymous speech.
TV town.
Diluting day care.
Letters  William Safire: The hanging of Flor.
Anthony Lewis: Cupiditas vincit omnia.
Gary Milhollin and Meg Dennison: China's cynical calculation.
Roy Spiegel: A toothless law.
Bridge C16 Chronicle B2 Crossword C18


China's Cynical Calculation
Secretary of State Warren Christopher could hardly have been surprised when China announced that it would sell Iran a nuclear reactor over his protests.
After all, the United States has sniffed out a series of secret shipments of Chinese poison-gas ingredients to Iran over the last three years but has declined to impose sanctions on Beijing.
In addition, China's missile exports to Pakistan have continued.


Federal Spending
The rate of return on Federal tax dollars in the region continued to decline in fiscal 1994.
As the states with the three highest personal income levels in the nation, Connecticut ($7,135 per person), New Jersey ($6,690) and New York ($5,736) have high per capita Federal tax burdens.
They consequently send more dollars to Washington each year than they receive in Federal spending.
The three states accounted for approximately 15 percent of Federal tax dollars for fiscal 1994 but received only about 11 percent of the year's spending.
For every $1 paid to Washington by states in the Northeast in fiscal 1994, only 90 cents made its way back in spending, compared with $1.16 in the south and $1.05 in the West.


Don Pullen, Pianist, 53, Dies; Distinctive Improviser in Jazz
Don Pullen, one of the major jazz pianists of his generation, died on Saturday at his brother's home in East Orange, N.J.
He was 53 and lived in Passaic, N.J.
The cause was lymphoma, said Don Lucoff, a publicity representative for Blue Note Records.


Sports of The Times; Pushing and Shoving, The Knicks Are Back
MICHAEL JORDAN reintroduced himself with two words -- "I'M BACK" -- and that was all anyone had to hear.
The Knicks needed three games' worth of tough body language to make the same case.
"The intensity is back," John Starks declared after yesterday's 113-99 victory over Orlando concluded the long, and winding, regular season at Madison Square Garden.


Pendeli Journal; From Greek Church, a Louder Nationalist Voice
There could be no doubt about the passions of Father Timotheos.
Outside the medieval monastery, the sun was bouncing off the walls and polishing the domes, but the priest's face lit up only when he had reached the depths of the vaults.


What They Wanted to Hear, About Love
Somewhere along the line on Friday night, the four singers that make up the group Boyz II Men had to take their clothes off.
They were overdressed, wearing turquoise blazers and ties.
Every hip grind made the mostly young and female audience (accompanied by an occasional chagrined boyfriend) wild.
And it is convention: take off those clothes and simulate sex with the stage; everybody does it.
The group, which performed at Nassau Coliseum, came close, dropping their jackets, taking off their ties and unbuttoning their shirts to the waist.
Then offstage the singers went for a costume change.
They are good, not bad, teasers, and the young audience loved them for the flirtation.
The group updates doo-wop and gospel quartet singing; it is one of the biggest pop groups in the world, and after 34 weeks its latest album "II" (Motown) is still in the Top 10 of the Billboard charts.
The singers are after the slow burn of a ballad, a high tenor voice quivering against the crumpled bedsheets of the harmony.
Every song is about love and rarely about passion; the group uses lines like "got to feel your love running through my mind" and "it's so hard to say goodbye to yesterday" to show that love is important, and if passion follows, well, it was meant to be, and the next day the boy will still love the girl.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Dollar Pushes Up U.S. Costs Abroad
The Federal Government is finding overseas operations more expensive, including salaries for secretaries at the Embassy in Tokyo and living allowances for American troops in Germany.
A7.
Congress to Take Up Budget
Congress returns from its recess to find the central campaign promise of Republicans -- to erase the Federal deficit by 2002 -- due and payable on demand.
In the winter legislators queued up behind the abstract concept of requiring a balanced Federal budget.
Now, they will vote on the real thing: at least $1 trillion in spending reductions over seven years, crimping actual services popular with actual voters.
A12.


Sinking Dollar Raises the Costs of U.S. Operations Overseas
The weak dollar is badly squeezing the Federal Government's operations overseas, raising the cost of everything from salaries for Embassy secretaries in Tokyo to living allowances for American soldiers in Germany.
The Pentagon estimates that the dollar's recent plunge to post-World-War-II lows against the Japanese yen and the German mark will increase the costs for the American military by $700 million this year.
The Pentagon's total budget is $253 billion.


A Stew of Musical Styles From Northeast Brazil
Northeastern Brazil has stoked Brazilian music for decades with a steady supply of traditional styles and forward-looking performers who mix and match those styles with rock, reggae and anything else that sounds promising.
Two of them, Elba Ramalho, who was born in Paraiba, and Margareth Menezes, from Bahia, teamed up for a jubilant show on Friday night at the Supper Club.
They shared a band; their musical goals easily converged.
Ms.
Ramalho, who started recording in the late 1970's after working in the theater in Rio de Janeiro, popularized northeastern rhythms like the bouncy forro and frevo; she can also belt like a full-tilt rocker.
Ms.
Menezes, in her most distinctive material, uses her raw-edged contralto in samba-reggae songs akin to the music of Bahia's blocos afros, the drum troupes dedicated to Bahia's African heritage.


Plans for Supermarket Caught Up in Politics
IN some places, a supermarket is a supermarket. In New York, it's a supermess.
That is about the mildest way to describe the status of a proposed $12 million Pathmark store for East Harlem.
The long-pending project has turned into a racial, ethnic and political quagmire involving scores of politicians, three levels of government, community groups, nonprofit groups and declaiming lobbyists.
It has pitted blacks against Hispanic New Yorkers, devolved into name-calling and sent the normally bold Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani into the hiding place of neutrality.


A Go-Between for an Author and His Audience
In Giorgio Strehler's 50 years of directing, his art has been his unconditional passion.
It is, he says, a "relationship of total love." In more than 250 productions, a majority of them for his company, the Piccolo Teatro in Milan, Italy, he has re-envisioned plays by Shakespeare, Brecht, Goldoni, Pirandello and others.
Along with Peter Brook and Ingmar Bergman, he is one of the great international directors, but in the United States he remains relatively unknown to the general public.
On Wednesday, his production of "The Mountain Giants," Pirandello's unfinished final play, will have the first of five performances at the Brooklyn Academy of Music.
Mr.
Strehler is making his first visit to New York City in 35 years, although his extraordinary vision of "The Tempest," which toured the United States, played at Summerfare in Purchase, N.Y., in 1984.


INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY: The Meaning of Digital Life; Publishers Sell Remedies for Computer-Age Angst
It was Al Gore who came up with the notion of an "information superhighway" -- a phrase that's already a cliche, a reality that's somewhere in the future.
But nobody seems to know quite what it is, this highway of digital technologies that is somehow supposed to change the face of work, schools, home life and society itself.
Which is why America's leading book publishers see an opportunity to cash in with the definitive what-it-all-means best seller.


3 Big New Customers for Open Market Inc.
Open Market Inc. will announce today that three major media companies will use its software and services to provide content and conduct business on the Internet.
A privately held company based in Cambridge, Mass., Open Market said it had signed agreements to provide technology to the Tribune Company, Advance Publications and the Time Inc. unit of Time Warner.


Two Marketers Expanding Rosters
Two consumer marketers are expanding their agency rosters.
The ITT Sheraton Corporation, a subsidiary of the ITT Corporation, has awarded Moss/Dragoti in New York the assignment to introduce Four Points Hotels, a chain of mid-priced hotels formerly known as Sheraton Inns.
Dan Weadock, president and chief operating officer of ITT Sheraton in Boston, said Friday that in the 12 months beginning in July the company plans to open 50 to 100 Four Points units and to spend $5 million to $10 million on an introductory campaign.
Moss/Dragoti is a spinoff from the Wells Rich Greene BDDP Advertising unit of the BDDP Group, which handles the worldwide ITT Sheraton account.


'He Made People Listen, Made People Think'
Roone Arledge, who loosed Howard Cosell upon America in the early 1960's, recalled yesterday how the late sportscaster's combination of intellect, truculence and iconoclasm scared establishment sports organizations.
"Pete Rozelle wanted announcer approval on 'Monday Night Football,' " said Arledge, the former president of ABC Sports.
Rozelle backed down "never knowing I wanted Howard. Pete was beside himself. Bowie Kuhn wanted to get out of our baseball contract because I put Howard on. The Montreal Olympic Committee asked us as a condition of buying the rights that we not use Howard."


Anti-Terrorism Bill Is Expected to Receive Little Opposition
President Clinton's promise today to seek legislation strengthening the Federal Bureau of Investigation's tools to combat terrorism will probably face little opposition in Congress.
Since the F.B.I. became an effective Federal anti-crime agency in the 1930's, lawmakers have acceded swiftly to such requests at times of public anxiety and anger about crime.
But it is also during such periods that civil liberties advocates worry that government may be too quick to seize the opportunity to expand its powers.


Market Place; The spring selloff in technology stocks: Does it compute?
FUNDAMENTAL security analysis and efficient-market theory, both efforts to assure us that stock prices are governed by rules of logic, seem to provide little help in explaining the annual spring selloff of technology companies.
After all, the long-term prospects for chip makers, computer manufacturers and biotechnology companies cannot swoon each spring and recover each fall.
Besides, if everyone is aware of the annual rite of the "seasonal correction," market theory would suggest that those expectations should be already built into the share prices of high-tech companies, preventing a seasonal dip.


People
Jill Savini, a partner and creative director at CKS Partners, San Francisco, was named creative director of a New York office that the agency's parent, the CKS Group, Cupertino, Calif., plans to open by September. *
Stephen King was named senior vice president and creative director at Robert A. Becker Inc.
Euro RSCG, New York, part of Euro RSCG, succeeding Guy Dess, who left.
Mr.
King was previously executive vice president and creative services director at Ketchum/BRH&amp; M, New York, a unit of Ketchum Communications.
Also, Ernestine McCarren was named senior vice president and managing director of a new consumer health division; she was previously an executive vice president and management director at Medicus Intercon, New York, part of D'Arcy Masius Benton &amp; Bowles.


Fortune Adds Service Sector To Its '500' List Of Corporations
After 40 years of publishing its benchmark Fortune 500 list -- an annual compilation of the 500 largest industrial corporations in America -- Fortune magazine is making a dramatic change.
Having decided that its list no longer reflected the top level of American business, Fortune will announce Tuesday that for the first time since 1955 the 500 list will include service corporations -- banks, life insurance companies, utilities and so on -- as well as industrial ones.


Young Reader to Visit Capital
Lavada Dale is on her way to Washington.
The 8-year-old Jersey City girl won the Reading Is Fundamental national poster contest.
At the awards ceremony Wednesday, she'll get to meet Juwan Howard, the Washington Bullets basketball star.
SUSAN JO KELLER


Trial Starts in Slaying of Girl
Six-year-old Latisha Goodman was playing in a fenced-in yard when she disappeared in July 1993.
Within hours, her body was found under the porch of an abandoned house near her aunt's Asbury Park home.
Today the man charged in the kidnapping, raping and killing of the girl goes on trial in Superior Court here.
The authorities said that David Cooper, then 22, had been living in the abandoned house.
The prosecutor is seeking the death penalty.


Essay; The Hanging of Flor
The dictatorial regime in Singapore, long critical of American weakness in upholding the law, hired a trio of American dry-bone experts to help gain moral absolution for too quickly executing a Filipino maid questionably convicted of murder.
Last month's hanging of Flor Contemplacion, who was one of the 60,000 Filipino household workers treated as little better than slaves by their Singaporean masters, has made a mockery of Strongman Lee Kuan Yew's pretense of upholding "Asian values" against the decadent West.


Equity Issues Set for Offering This Week
The following equity and convertible debt offerings are expected this week:
Acceptance Insurance Cos., Omaha, $60 million of convertible subordinated notes due in 2005.
Smith Barney.


Archbishop Samuel, 87, Primate Of the Syrian Orthodox Church
Archbishop Mar Athanasius Yeshue Samuel, the primate of the Syrian Orthodox Church of the United States and the man who obtained the first of the 2,000-year-old Dead Sea Scrolls and brought them to world attention, died last Sunday at his residence in Lodi, N.J.
He was 87.
The cause was a heart attack, church leaders said.


Biker Traffic on the Fast Lane


The Oil Broker
Those who buy and sell oil have watched the fall of the dollar from the corner of their eye.
"When you're trading in oil you're not watching the dollar, you're watching the oil fundamentals," said James T. Colburn, vice president of energy options at ED &amp; F Man International Inc., which acts as a broker for big oil companies, Wall Street firms and large commodity funds that trade oil contracts.


The Central Banker
Persio Arida is the rare central banker who is quietly pleased about the dollar's recent fall.
"From the point of view of Brazil's trade balance, the fall of the dollar is beneficial," Mr.
Arida, Brazil's central bank president, said in an interview from his Sao Paulo home on Friday.


Bridge
One of the most irritating experiences in bridge is to push one's opponents into game and then discover that there is no way to defeat it.
On the diagramed deal from a Regional Women's Pairs in Kiamesha Lake, N.Y., last October, it seemed right for East-West to contest the bidding to the four-level.
Four diamonds would have been easy to make since the potential club loser is eventually discarded on the heart jack.
But South, who had been willing to rest in three spades, now persevered to four spades and West gave up.
The opening lead was the heart king, and Joan Dziekanski, the proprietor of the Beverly Club in Manhattan, played neatly as South to make her contract.


Bitterness Over Early Finger-Pointing Toward the Middle East
In much of the Arab world, the news coverage of the Oklahoma City bombing is focusing on the early speculation that it was the work of Middle Eastern terrorists as more evidence of a pervasive anti-Arab bias in Western culture.
While even some of the most radical Arab groups including Hamas, the Palestinian Muslim fundamentalists, and Hezbollah, the Lebanese Shiite pro-Iranian party in Lebanon, condemned the bombing, expressions of sympathy by Arabs for the victims turned to bitter criticism of the Western media as soon as white American extremists became the suspects.


Umpires Hope a Law Might Be on Their Side
A crew of locked-out major league umpires plans to be in Toronto on Wednesday, either to work or to picket.
Richie Phillips, the umpires' lawyer, said yesterday that he believes if the Ontario Labor Board rules that replacement umpires are barred by provincial law from working Toronto Blue Jays games, the leagues will be forced to end their lockout.
In that event, Phillips said, the umpires will be on hand to work the Blue Jays' night game against the Oakland Athletics.


CLASSICAL MUSIC
An Ensemble Indeed, But Not Graven in Stone Chamber Music Society of Lincoln Center Alice Tully Hall
Joan Tower's "Turning Points" for clarinet and string quartet on Friday night was notable in part for what it did not do: namely, ride bandwagons or exploit stylistic fashions.
Ms.
Tower has given us chamber-music argument that is clear, literate and heartfelt.
The clarinet part, played here very well by David Shifrin, is complex but not virtuosic for effect.
Stepwise patterns in different configurations form a fabric for the 15-minute work.
Altered rhythmic patterns keep ears alert; eccentricities of movement, however, make sense on their own terms.


Arizona Neighbors Recall a Man's Love of Weaponry and 'Poor Attitude'
Timothy J. McVeigh liked to wear camouflage Army fatigue pants tucked into black combat boots, drink beer, play acid-rock music real loud and drive fast.
But above all, he liked to shoot guns.
"Just about any free time, he'd be walking down there, or across the railroad tracks and firing his guns," said Marilyn Hart, nodding at the landscape of canyons and mesas around the Canyon West trailer park here that is one of the last known addresses of the man arrested for bombing the Oklahoma City Federal building.
"He just plain didn't care.  Didn't matter the time of day or night, he'd be out there shooting."


Right-Wing Movements Around the Country
Here are the principal centers of political organizing and training for the right-wing Patriot Movement, an umbrella movement for a loose confederation of militant right-wing groups that believe the Federal Government is seeking to control its citizens. 1.
Harbor Springs, Mich.: Headquarters for the Michigan Militia Corps, a paramilitary organization with "brigades" in 73 of the state's 83 counties.
The militia's leaders said on Saturday that James and Terry Nichols, who are in custody, attended a brigade meeting in Sanilac County and were asked to leave after urging militia members to tear up their driver's licenses and Social Security cards, to stop paying their taxes and to take other steps to defy the Government.
The Michigan Militia claims 12,000 members but that cannot be verified. 2.
Dexter, Mich.: Home base for Mark Koernke, 37, a building maintenance worker at the University of Michigan, and one of the nation's most militant militia leaders.
Koernke has an hourlong radio show, "The Intelligence Report," broadcast nationally five-nights a week on WWCR, a short-wave station in Nashville that broadcasts neo-Nazi and white supremicist programs. 3.
Adrian, Mich.: Base of the Proclaim Liberty Ministry, which operates a telephone line for militia organizers and sells has more than 50 videotapes for sale on militia activities and other written militia materials.
Accepts only gold or cash for payment. 4.
Hillsboro, W.Va.: Headquarters of the National Alliance and home of William Pierce, a white supremacist and author of "The Turner Diaries," a 1979 novel that describes a white supremacy takeover of the United States, including the fertilizer and fuel oil car bombing of the F.B.I. building in Washington.
Pierce's radio program, "American Dissident Voices," frequently includes interviews with militia organizers and is heard on nine AM and three FM radio stations in nine states, and on a short-wave radio station in New Orleans. 5.
Indianapolis: Headquarters of Linda Thompson's American Justice Federation, which markets aggressively anti-Government books, videotapes and radio programs.
Thompson, a former civil liberties lawyer, operates a public relations company and has a program on AM and short-wave radio.
She almost single-handedly made the siege of the Branch Davidian compound in Waco, Tex., a rallying cry for resistance against the Government.
She produced two documentaries in 1993, "Waco, the Big Lie," and "Waco, the Big Lie Continues," that accused the Government of used flame throwers to start the fire that destroyed the compound.
She also called on militias to stage an armed march on Washington on Sept. 19, 1994.
It was canceled after militia leaders said it was too radical. 6.
Noxon, Mont.: Headquarters of the Militia of Montana, one of the largest such groups.
Founded by John Trochmann, 51, his brother, David, 48, and Randy Trochmann, 27, a nephew.
John and David Trochmann, who once operated a snowmobile parts company in Minnesota, run a communications and sales operation for militia videos, books and other materials.
They train militia members from other states and have helped hundreds of these groups get started.  7.
Kamiah, Idaho: Base of James (Bo) Gritz, a former Green Beret commander in Vietnam and founder of Almost Heaven a Christian Covenant Community, which holds that white people are the masters of the earth and are preparing for possible confrontation with the Government.
Gritz's paramilitary training has been copied by other militias.
Gritz was instrumental in protests that followed the killing of the wife and son of Randy Weaver, a white supremacist, during a Federal siege of Weaver's Idaho home in 1992.
He ran for President in 1992.  8.
Blackfoot, Idaho: Base of the influential United States Militia Association and its founder, Samuel Sherwood.
Sherwood advocates that militias become prepared for civil war and has trained militia leaders in eight states.
His public statements have been extreme.
"Civil War could be coming and with it the need to shoot Idaho legislators," he said at a militia meeting on March 2. (Sources: The Coalition for Human Dignity, the Center for Democratic Renewal, the Anti-Defamation League of B'nai Brith, the Southern Poverty Law Center, The Pennsylvania Human Rights Commission, Political Research Associates.)


No Headline
"Today we have our neighbors -- more than three million Oklahomans, and never have we drawn so close together. There is something special about our wonderful state. We have always known that. Now America does. Now the world does." -- GOV.
FRANK KEATING of Oklahoma.  [ B8:4. ]


A Twisted Rage
Can the Oklahoma bombing be the product of a rage against the Federal Government so paranoid and demented that those in its grip thought to strike a blow for freedom by demolishing a Federal building, killing scores of innocent individuals inside?
As the nationwide manhunt for the killers moved forward yesterday, it was not yet clear how many individuals were involved or what their motivation was.
But investigators have increasingly come to believe this was a domestic act of terrorism against the Government, perhaps in retaliation for Government raids on fringe groups or individuals.


Autos Weave in and Out of U.S.-Japan Relations; Made in America
To the Editor:
Thomas L. Friedman (column, April 16) refers to statistics that indicate roughly 25 percent of cars sold in the United States today carry the nameplate of a Japanese manufacturer, whereas only 1.5 percent of the cars sold in Japan carry the nameplate of an American manufacturer.
Many "Japanese cars" sold in America are often actually made in America, by American workers, and with largely American parts.


Bears' Faith in Salaam Should Be Rewarded
A lot of people think that the only way Rashaan Salaam will be successful in the National Football League is if a team lines him up deep in the I-formation, puts linemen in front of him like the old Redskins Hogs and pitches him the ball the way Eric Dickerson used to get it in his glory days with the Rams.
A lot of people think that Salaam's hands aren't as good as Ki-Jana Carter's (the No. 1 draft pick over all), that he is not as strong as Tyrone Wheatley (No. 17), that he is not as fast as Napoleon Kaufman (No. 18) and that he is not as nifty in the open field as James Stewart (No. 19).
So, 20 teams passed on Salaam in the N.F.L. draft over the weekend, and all four of those backs were chosen before Salaam was selected at No. 21 by the Chicago Bears.


1-2-3-4, Dodgers' Rodriguez Clouts Mets
Rico Brogna thought he had a big game this past Thursday, when he hit three home runs off the Dodgers' Chan Ho Park here at Holman Stadium.
Henry Rodriguez did him one better this afternoon.


The Draft Stresses Runners, Secondary
Through the first three rounds of the 1995 National Football League college draft -- the rounds that should contain the most can't-miss prospects -- the three most popular positions were offensive lineman, with 18 selected, defensive back (17) and running back (13).
So what can be surmised from this?
Perhaps on a defensive level, teams are more concerned with stopping the passing game, which flourished last year with liberalized rules designed to enhance scoring.
On the offensive side, teams might be trying to find ways to complement their passing games.


Hope Creek's Alarm Too Slow
It took personnel at Hope Creek Generating Station 14 hours to discover contamination from the release of radioactive particles on April 5.
That's too long, Federal regulators say, even if the release didn't reach dangerous levels.


Autos Weave in and Out of U.S.-Japan Relations
To the Editor:
Thomas L. Friedman's impatience toward the Japanese intransigence in opening up auto and auto-parts markets is understandable (column, April 16).
One need not be a "Japan basher" to be exasperated by the glacial speed of progress in solving what is a mutual problem in Japan-United States bilateral relations: the massive imbalance of trade between the two countries.
Whatever may be the cause of this problem, the lack of timely cooperation from Tokyo has not helped.
Though the Japanese Government has made much progress in liberalizing and globalizing Japan's economy, not inconsequential vestiges of the "developmental state" abound in many sectors.
However, in the automotive sector, the short-term perspective of American entrepreneurial capitalism is as much to blame as the Japanese Government's industrial policy.


CHRONICLE
It's William Shakespeare's birthday this week, his 431st (the actual date is in some dispute), and the Theater for a New Audience will mark the occasion with a celebration at the Supper Club on West 47th Street tonight.
CALVIN TRILLIN , who will be the master of ceremonies, contemplated what he would not say in his remarks the other day.


A Drink Before They Droop


Some See Threat to Public Safety In District of Columbia Police Cuts
A headlight on Detective Trevor Hewick's patrol car has been broken for three months.
With the District of Columbia facing a $722 million budget deficit, he said, the Metropolitan Police Department has no money to buy a replacement.
Patrolman Hiram Rosario said stopping someone at night for a routine traffic violation has begun to make him nervous.
Because of a change in scheduling to eliminate overtime, fewer officers are working night shifts, he said, "and I don't know if I could get a backup unit if I needed one."


The Investors
Jimmy Sher, an executive with Hewlett-Packard, is starting to look over his shoulder at the growing investment by Japanese competitors.
With China's currency, the renminbi, virtually unchanged against the dollar in recent months, Mr.
Sher says his sales of laser and dot matrix printers are growing steadily, unaffected by the currency turmoil.
But the future concerns him.


Goodbye to Garden, Hello to More Trouble
The numerical damage from today's defeat can be tabulated in the National Hockey League standings, where the Rangers are barely clinging to a playoff berth.
The physical damage could be found in the trainer's room, where Kevin Lowe arrived early with a "nerve burner" in his neck that put him out of the game.
But what about the psychic damage the defending Stanley Cup champions suffered when they fell, 5-4, to the Bruins today at Boston Garden?


CHRONICLE
The singer LESLEY GORE surveyed the crowd in the Grand Hyatt Hotel where she had come for a reunion and said, "I felt like this was family from the day I arrived. This is an extended family, one that doesn't ever go away."
If so, it was a mighty big family that assembled Saturday afternoon to celebrate the 75th anniversary of Camp Scatico, a children's summer camp in Elizaville, N.Y., that counted among its more renowned campers and counselors Carole Bayer Sager, Cornel Wilde, Marvin Davis and Senator Paul S. Sarbanes.


U.S. Trying to Hold 2 Witnesses in Jail
Two brothers held as witnesses in the Oklahoma City bombing are likely to be charged with unrelated weapons and explosives offenses after intensive weekend searches of their properties in Michigan and Kansas, law-enforcement officials said today.
Terry Lynn Nichols and his brother, James Douglas Nichols, jailed after the bombing as material witnesses, have not been accused of any offense.
But Federal prosecutors are trying to persuade Federal judges in Michigan and Kansas to keep them jailed until they testify before a grand jury.
The Government's effort to keep them from being released would be strengthened if they faced criminal charges.


Diluting Day Care
In 1990 Congress enacted child care legislation that was both a boon to the working poor and a long-overdue response to the new realities of American life.
Less than five years later, a new Congress is busily ripping it apart -- at a time when, more than ever, Americans are in desperate need of decent, affordable day care for their children.
Consider women who are receiving Aid to Families With Dependent Children.
Americans want to see them off the dole and into independence.
But the version of welfare reform passed by the House of Representatives recently, which requires states to push recipients into jobs more quickly and cut off their cash benefits after five years, does not provide one extra cent for child care.
Instead it cuts funding for all child care by 13 percent over the next five years.
Furthermore, it eliminates the guarantee, set during the Reagan Administration, that mothers who leave welfare or participate in work or training programs will be assured of child care assistance for at least one year.


Seeking Joy (and Crowds) in Mudville Inc.
After an eight-month absence, major league baseball returns this week, hoping all is forgiven.
But just in case it isn't, the 28 teams are offering mea culpas, cut-rate tickets, free yearbooks, snappy slogans, car giveaways and European vacations.
All this largesse -- a virtual crazy-quilt of promotion -- is intended to win back disgruntled fans and revive ticket sales that have been hammered by the 234-day players' strike, the longest in sports labor history.


CLASSICAL MUSIC
Assessing the Prospects Of a 16-Year-Old Russian Dmitri Sokolov, pianist Alice Tully Hall
The race is evidently on in Russia to produce the next Yevgeny Kissin.
Handlers of Dmitri Sokolov, a 16-year-old from St.
Petersburg, have shopped him around the United States on earlier visits, and on Saturday evening, Mr.
Sokolov stormed New York.


Bates USA Fills Executive Vacancy
The Bates USA unit of Bates Worldwide in New York, part of Cordiant P.L.C., has named Michael B. Robertson as executive vice president and executive creative director, a position that had been vacant since Andrew Cracknell, who was also worldwide executive creative director of Bates Worldwide, left in October.
Mr.
Robertson, 47, was previously one of four executive vice presidents and creative directors at Bates USA, 2 of whom were among the 53 laid off last month after Bates Worldwide lost the Mars Inc. account.
He also formerly served as chairman, chief executive and chief creative officer of McCaffrey &amp; McCall, which was absorbed by Bates USA in February 1994.


Dividend Meetings
Following is a partial list of dividend meetings this week:  MONDAY  Alex.


In Blast's Aftermath, Many Oklahoma City Companies Struggle to Survive
The worst terrorist attack on American soil has left many of the 25,000 people who work downtown here thankful that they escaped with their lives but struggling to save their livelihoods.
Last week, business in the heart of this neat city of almost half a million residents virtually ceased.
Many companies far removed from the 50-square-block area that police cordoned off around the shattered hulk of the Alfred P. Murrah Federal Building decided to abandon any pretense of business as usual.


Treasury Sale Calendar Offers Bills and Notes
The Treasury's schedule of financings this week is confined to the bills and notes markets, beginning with today's regular weekly auction of three- and six-month bills.
On Tuesday, the Treasury will auction two-year notes, followed by five-year notes on Wednesday and one-year bills on Thursday.
Government agency issues being priced this week include a financing by the Federal Farm Credit Banks Funding Corporation.
The three-part issue of consolidated systemwide bonds totals $2.475 billion.


Rangers' Cushion Disappears Into Bruins' Hat
Nearly all of the answers had been left on the littered ice of Boston Garden, amid the dozens of hats -- and even some shoes -- that had flown out of the jammed stands in celebration.
The hats were an instantaneous tribute to Cam Neely's third goal in a 5-4 Bruin victory that damaged the Rangers' playoff chances just when they had appeared to gain some strength.
The answers were far more difficult to spot, and there were few to be gained anywhere else.


Kotite's Quick Overhaul of Jets Is Nearly Complete
The transformation of the Jets in Rich Kotite's rookie season as their coach was nearly completed today, wrapping up as wild a weekend as the team has ever experienced.
When it was over, they had traded still another starter, acquired one from the Giants, of all people, and drafted at least two players who are virtually certain to become starters.


Foreman Gets Last Laugh, and He Knows It
If George Foreman had hair, it would be standing on end.
His left eye was slammed shut; the tent that he calls boxing trunks was tugged low and his knuckles begged for ice.
The MGM Grand's switchboard was fielding indignant phone calls from fight fans demanding a recount, and one gentleman caller shouted loud enough to be heard in Reno, "I didn't know boxing was still fixed."


New Ballet Troupe Formed in Los Angeles
John Clifford has announced the formation of the Los Angeles Ballet, which is to perform a new production of George Balanchine's staging of "The Nutcracker" in Anaheim, Calif., and Los Angeles in the winter.
Mr.
Clifford, a former principal in the New York City Ballet, founded and directed a previous company, also called the Los Angeles Ballet, from 1974 to 1985.
He is currently a ballet master for the Balanchine Trust, which licenses and oversees productions of Balanchine ballets.


On Staten Island, Anger at Plan to Cut Youth Program
The thump of basketballs can be heard most nights from outside Public School 42 in the quiet Eltingville neighborhood on Staten Island.
Inside, teen-agers play a fierce game in the gymnasium while a smaller group of boys and girls work on arts and crafts on cafeteria tables.
But this program of evening basketball, craft making and tutoring, along with other after-school programs, would be shelved under Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani's budget for the fiscal year that begins in July.
The plan would eliminate the programs at the end of the fiscal year.


Jennings Takes On U.N. Over Abuses in Bosnia
In his third and strongest hourlong report from Bosnia, Peter Jennings takes aim at Lieut.
Gen.
Sir Michael Rose, the former commander of the United Nations forces in that battered land.
The specific charge of "The Peacekeepers: How the United Nations Failed in Bosnia" is that having declared the towns of Gorazde and Bihac to be safe havens, the United Nations, represented in the field by General Rose, allowed the Serbian aggressors to get away with murder.
General Rose, in the critical view of relief workers and military officers, played down the Serbian attacks and responded feebly or not at all despite his ability to direct NATO air power against the aggressors.
General Rose's explanation, under the tough questioning of Mr.
Jennings, that the United Nations and NATO are on a peacekeeping mission not a war mission, seems weak and evasive, especially when his words are accompanied by scenes of besieged civilians under incessant attack.


Patents; A Doctor's Search For A Solution to Sudden Infant Death Syndrome Leads to an Air Filter for Cribs
CREATING gadgets that make life easier and safer has always been a popular goal for inventors, and still is, as several recent patents make clear.
Dr.
Theodore M. Hale plans to give away 5,000 of his newly patented air filter for cribs.
The device is intended to fight sudden infant death syndrome, or SIDS, and Dr.
Hale and a group of colleagues want parents to test the filter so they can be sure it really helps combat the syndrome.


Harold Ross Biography Disputes the Earlier Ones
GENIUS IN DISGUISE Harold Ross of The New Yorker  By Thomas Kunkel  Illustrated. 497 pages.
Random House. $25.
At the end of his captivating new biography, "Genius in Disguise: Harold Ross of The New Yorker," Thomas Kunkel accurately sums up the impression of Harold Ross left by previous books about The New Yorker magazine and its founder.
Among them are "Ross and The New Yorker," by Dale Kramer (1951); "The Years With Ross," by James Thurber (1959); "Ross, The New Yorker and Me," by Jane Grant (1968), and "Here at The New Yorker," by Brendan Gill (1975).


INSIDE
Senator Stennis, 93, Dies
John C. Stennis, the Mississippi Democrat who served in the Senate for 41 years, died in Jackson, Miss.
He was 93 years old.
Page B11.
Assassination in Tokyo
As police and reporters looked on, a senior official of the sect suspected in the Tokyo subway nerve gas attack was fatally stabbed.
Page A3.
Tracking the Dollar
In the global web of entwined financial markets, currency trading is conducted round-the-clock.
Friday was a typical day.
Pages D6-7.
Balls, Strikes, Promotions
Major league baseball teams and players are working hard to win back the fans' goodwill, pulling out the stops promotionally.
Page D1.


As Many as 2,000 Are Reported Dead in Rwanda
Kibeho was a scene of carnage and desolation today, a place where death had swept through with the intensity well known to Rwanda.
An estimated 2,000 members of the Hutu ethnic group were killed here on Saturday and more than 600 wounded, senior United Nations military officials said, shot by Rwandan Government troops or trampled to death in the ensuing panic.
The Government said 300 people had been killed.


Attacker Fatally Stabs High Official of Japanese Sect
A top official of the religious sect suspected in last month's subway nerve gas attack was fatally stabbed in the stomach Sunday night as he walked through a phalanx of television cameras outside the sect's offices.
The victim, Hideo Murai, 36, chief of the sect's "Science and Technology Agency," collapsed on the ground and was taken to a hospital.
The doctors who operated on Mr.
Murai had told reporters that he lost large amounts of blood and suffered damage to his liver and kidneys.
He died early today, several hours after surgery, officials said.


The Price Slovaks Pay For Nationalism
To the Editor:
Prof.
Stanley B. Winters in "Slovakia's Side" (letter, April 17) is wrong in concluding that "If Slovakia was 'enslaved' by Germany, it was a willing servitude."


Miscellany
*
Avon Products, New York, has agreed to become the cosmetics, skin care and fragrance sponsor of the 1996 Summer Olympics in Atlanta.
The terms of the company's Olympics sponsorship, its first, were not disclosed. *
Publishers Information Bureau, New York, reported that magazine advertising pages rose 10.4 percent in March, to 18,435, from March 1994.
For the first three months of 1995, ad pages gained 9.9 percent, to 47,909, from the corresponding period a year earlier.


Skaters Suffering In Silence
The battle over the macadam of Dead Road started with boom boxes, escalated to conga drums and settled into an edgy stalemate with an a capella version of "The Star-Spangled Banner."
Doo-wop was the next weapon in the uneasy conflict, which pits an entrenched group of dancing roller skaters against the police and park officials.
They are determined to silence an informal disco rink that rolls to life weekly on Central's Park Dead Road, on the eastern edge of Sheep Meadow.


The Traders
Hiroyuki Mizoguchi jumped up and reached across a row of colorful flashing screens to grab a blue order slip from a colleague.
As traders in New York arrived home and dealers in London were fast asleep, Mr.
Mizoguchi was starting his trading day.
He had just sold $3.6 million to a customer at 83.37 yen to the dollar and made a slim profit for the First National Bank of Chicago, where he buys and sells currencies.


Conservatives Show Strength In Italy's Regional Elections
Italy's center-right parties, which last year produced victory for the coalition led by Silvio Berlusconi, the owner of a media empire, held their own in regional elections today, exit polls indicated.
Italy had been awaiting the results of the local elections -- held in 15 regions, several major cities and thousands of municipalities -- to gauge whether Mr.
Berlusconi and his allies had the support they claimed as they pressed for national elections in June.


Rutgers Professors Highly Paid
Professors at Rutgers University are among the highest paid in the country.
According to a survey of 2,200 schools by the American Association of University Professors, full professors at the Rutgers Newark Campus earn an average of $99,300 a year, the fourth highest in the United States.
At the New Brunswick campus, the average is $93,600, the seventh-highest, and at Camden, $93,500, the eighth-highest.
Harvard ranked first, with an average of $104,000.
Princeton ranked fifth, at $98,200.
The national average for all college professors is $49,490.


A Desinger Helps Get Books Off Retail Shelves
In the fall of 1991, a new novel by Cormac McCarthy arrived on Chip Kidd's drafting table with some serious history to overcome.
Despite spectacular reviews, none of Mr.
McCarthy's previous books, all published by Random House, had ever sold more than 2,600 copies.
So Mr.
McCarthy decided to try his luck with Alfred A. Knopf, Random House's sister publisher at Advance Publications.


The Shoppers
Richard Chen, looking crisp in his blue suit, white shirt and subdued tie, glanced at a computer screen in a corner of his jewelry shop inside the exclusive Mandarin Oriental Hotel in Hong Kong.
"Well, the dollar's at 83.5," he said.
"Of course Japanese customers can buy more now, but I don't see many Japanese these days."


No One Deserves It
To the Editor:
The horror in Oklahoma City is beyond words.
Terrorist activity always is.
The family members of the victims are just beginning the incredibly difficult journey after the loss of a loved one to such a tragedy.
My heart goes out to them.
I lost my stepson under tragic circumstances, and I am still on that road.


Confident Knicks Send The Magic A Message
The Knicks did not have anything to gain in the standings.
They did not have Patrick Ewing or Derek Harper.
But the Knicks still had their pride.
Ending a long, grueling regular season on an upbeat note, New York rolled past the Orlando Magic, 113-99, yesterday afternoon at Madison Square Garden.
New York (55-27) could face the Magic (57-25) for the Eastern Conference championship, and while the Magic won the season series (3-2) and the Atlantic Division title, the Knicks wanted to keep the Magic from winning in New York.


Howard Cosell, Outspoken Sportscaster On Television and Radio, Is Dead at 77
Howard Cosell, who delighted and infuriated listeners during a 30-year career as the nation's best-known and most outspoken sports broadcaster, died yesterday at the Hospital for Joint Diseases in Manhattan.
He was 77.
Mr.
Cosell, who had been in failing health, died of a heart embolism, said his grandson, Justin Cohane.
He had undergone surgery in June 1991 for the removal of a cancerous chest tumor.


Muslims Continue to Feel Apprehensive
Suhair Al Mosawi was playing on the floor with her young brother and 2-year-old daughter on Thursday morning when she heard the screech of car brakes and the sound of breaking glass as her living-room window shattered several feet away.
"I thought that someone was shooting and I got very scared and took the babies to the bathroom," said Mrs.
Al Mosawi, 26, a Shiite Muslim and a refugee from Iraq.
As she crouched in fear behind a locked door, Mrs.
Al Mosawi, who was almost 7 months pregnant, felt a terrible pain in her abdomen.
She began bleeding uncontrollably.
Several hours later at Mercy Hospital she delivered a stillborn boy.


Bomb Scare Sets Off Airport Evacuation
The USAir terminal at La Guardia Airport was evacuated yesterday after a propane tank, thought to be a bomb, was found inside a men's room, the Port Authority police said.
Both the upper and lower levels of the terminal and roadways leading to it were cleared, said Officer Steven Pambello, a Port Authority spokesman.
He said he could not estimate how many people were in the building at the time.


TRIBUNAL TO CITE BOSNIA SERB CHIEF AS WAR CRIMINAL
The International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia will formally identify the Bosnian Serb leader Radovan Karadzic as a suspected war criminal on Monday, a decisive step in the court's preparation to indict him.
Officials close to the tribunal said Gen.
Ratko Mladic, the commander of the Bosnian Serb army, will also be identified as a suspect by the court's chief prosecutor, Judge Richard Goldstone of South Africa.


DANCE
Stamina and Gusto In an American Premiere  Elisa Monte Dance Joyce Theater
Elisa Monte Dance is a company blessed with stamina and gusto.
That was certainly clear on Friday night.
Yet the excitement sometimes seemed superficial because it appeared to spring from no solid emotional or formal base.
The dancers simply kept moving.


G.O.P. Lawmakers on Recess Find Their Welcome Home a Little Cool
Last November, this bedrock conservative community became a bellwether of national politics when voters turned out the Speaker of the House in favor of George Nethercutt, a political neophyte who spouted promises from a little known document called the Contract With America.
After 100 of the busiest days in the history of the House, devoted almost exclusively to pushing through the legislation contained in the Republican contract, Representative Nethercutt returned home exhausted, but flushed with victory.


G.O.P.'s 2 Problems: Promises and Voters
The Republican majority in Congress breezed through its first 100 days with a string of votes promising a broad mix of tax cuts and budget reductions.
But when the lawmakers went home for their recess they found that the voters were at best confused and at worst indifferent about exactly what the Republicans had done.


As Grief Replaces Shock, Families Mourn Four Victims of Plant Explosion
James Wilbur Gourdine was a fussy man, said his wife, Eleanor, so neat that he would fold his clothes right away when he undressed at night.
At work, she said, he was fussy about safety, no small consideration in a factory that mixed treacherous chemicals for the pharmaceutical industry.
When he joined Napp Technologies three years ago as maintenance supervisor at its chemical plant in Lodi, N.J., his family said, he tightened company policy by insisting that workers protect themselves with proper clothing and equipment, and that all power be shut off before anyone entered the giant vats where the chemicals were mixed.


TV Town
Even the most committed New Yorkers need positive reinforcement once in a while, a little feel-good feedback.
This fall they are going to get it by the screenful.
After a trip home in a subway they cannot take a deep breath in and sitting down in a room they cannot swing a cat in, they are going to turn on the TV and re-enter the world they just left.
Only this one will probably be shined to the nines.
How long any of the 11 TV series and pilots for series being shot in the city this spring are going to last is anybody's guess.
But their premieres are certain to attract a full house -- or couch -- in all five boroughs.
Of course New Yorkers will want to see the duplex on "Central Park West" in which resides Mariel Hemingway, who is making big bucks in the magazine business, and the newsroom of "New York News," where Mary Tyler Moore, some years out of Minneapolis, is ordering around her editors.
They will want to see the fast-living, fast-talking garmentos on "Seventh Avenue," and boy! will they want to see the Staten Island of "The Pastor's Wife," wherein lives a Lutheran minister whose spouse aspires to Stephen Kinghood.


The Executive Computer
IT'S a time-honored tradition that helps customers and results in better software.
It's a diabolical plot by powerful companies to lock out the competition and confuse consumers.
It's "vaporware," the most misunderstood concept in the software industry.
Generally, vaporware refers to a software product that a company announces long before it is delivered -- if it ever reaches the market at all.
But it is a term whose precise definition is somewhat elusive.
And it is among the topics at issue in the Microsoft Corporation case that the United States Circuit Court of Appeals is scheduled to hear today in Washington.


The Prospectors
Trudi Schifter's office overlooks one of Europe's richest streets, Bockenheimer Landstrasse in Frankfurt, and with the weak dollar it should be a street paved with opportunity for Americans.
Ms.
Schifter is head of the California Office of Trade and Investment, one of more than 30 representative offices run by American states in Europe as shop windows offering business openings back home to German investors.


RESULTS PLUS
N.H.L.
Whalers' Hopes Sinking  Pittsburgh scored three goals within 109 seconds in the second period and Ken Wregget made the lead stand up as the Penguins put a damper on the Whalers' playoff hopes with a 4-2 victory last night at Hartford.
With four games left, the Whalers are tied for eighth place in the Eastern Conference with the Rangers and Montreal, both of whom have a game in hand on Hartford. (AP)


CHRONICLE
ALICE STONE ILCHMAN , president of Sarah Lawrence College since 1981, has been elected chairwoman of the board of trustees of the Rockefeller Foundation, the eighth largest private foundation in the world.
She will succeed JOHN EVANS , chairman of Allelix Biopharmaceuticals and the Torstar Corporation of Canada, who has been the chairman since 1987.
Dr.
Ilchman has been a trustee of the foundation since 1987.


Its Building Is Shattered, But Church Survives
A week ago, the First United Methodist Church was filled with life, the joyous songs and prayers of Easter.
By Wednesday night, it was filled with the dead.
The church had been battered by the bomb that blew apart the nearby Alfred P. Murrah Federal Building.
The stained-glass windows were shattered, and a chandelier crashed into the pews.
The crumbling lobby was then taken over by rescue workers who needed a place to pile bodies and body parts pulled from the mangled office building.


Couple Killed on Prom Night
Two Franklinville teen-agers were on their way home from their senior prom when their car ran out of gas.
As they refilled the tank at the side of the road, they were hit by a car and fatally injured.
The police say the man behind the wheel was a drunken driver.
The prom that Joe Berry and Tanya Mokienko attended before they died was alcohol free.


Women Can Help Make Opportunity Equal
To the Editor:
Affirmative action is not, as Laura A. Ingraham suggests in "Enter, Women" (Op-Ed, April 19), on Take Our Daughters to Work Day, about quotas or turning women into victims.
It is about precisely what she says she favors -- equal opportunity.


Morris's Parting Shot Is a Winner
From the beginning, Chris Morris wanted out. In the end, he finally put it in.
Perhaps the most turbulent season in franchise history -- or was it maybe just in the top 20? -- came to the kind of conclusion one has come to expect from the Nets tonight.
The guy with the longest tenure and droopiest eyes delivered the unthinkable parting shot at Byrne Meadowlands Arena.


Harlem Empowerment Zone Embraces People and Business
To the Editor:
I was disappointed by the Op-Ed article by Mitchell L. Moss ("Empty Promises for Harlem," April 15) on the Upper Manhattan Empowerment Zone.
It unfairly denounced the project as a failure even before a board was seated to determine a final course of action.
It also reflected a misunderstanding of the goals of the creators, including myself.


Pollutants in Delaware River
Arsenic, lead, pesticides and volatile organic compounds these were among 15 pollutants found in significant quantities in a 134-mile stretch of the Delaware River and the Delaware Bay.
The toxic substances were found in fish, in sediment at the river bottom and in treated water pumped into the Delaware, Thomas Fikslin of the Delaware River Basin Commission said.


Court Hearing For Microsoft Set for Today
The Microsoft Corporation is scheduled to return to a Federal courtroom here on Monday, once again trying to fend off critics who say that the software giant stifles competition.
But this time the company will be in step with the same Federal prosecutors who investigated it.
And as debate unfolds before a three-member panel of the Federal Court of Appeals, it will have very little to do with software or computers.


The Tourists
"The mark is like the dollar was in the 70's," said Maria Massa, a friendly dark-haired woman whose family has run the restaurant Dei Musei, across from the bustling Vatican museums, for three generations.
"In those days, the Americans left five-dollar tips, and now it's the Germans," she said.
"Its a return to the good old days."


McCaughey Unveiled, With Gloves Off
The political education of Betsy McCaughey is far from complete.
But the Lieutenant Governor took a major step forward last week, in part by provoking Assembly Speaker Sheldon Silver into wiggling his hips.
Ms.
McCaughey, a once anonymous academic who gained national attention last year with her writings on health care, is perhaps as green a novice as has ever been elected to statewide office in New York.
She was distrusted by many of George E. Pataki's aides during last year's campaign because of her political inexperience, and her naivete is still regularly on display.


The Exporters
When Mitsuo Sugiyama left for work on Friday morning, the dollar was trading at about 83 yen, its highest level in days.
"It's getting better, but only slightly," he said.
Probably few people worry about the dollar-yen exchange rate as much as Mr.
Sugiyama, general manager of the overseas planning office of the Matsushita Electric Industrial Company.
Matsushita helped make Japan an economic powerhouse and its Panasonic brand familiar worldwide.
But the drastic fall of the dollar and the rise of the yen are making Japan's exports less competitive and less profitable, forcing painful changes throughout the nation.


An Appraisal A Tempest Over a Withering Oasis; At I.B.M. Building, Privately Owned Public Space Is at Issue
It does not look like a battlefield.
With its tall, airy bamboo stalks set off by walls of charcoal granite, the atrium of the I.B.M.
Building, at 590 Madison Avenue at 56th Street, resembles a cross between a public park and a corporate lobby.
But a skirmish has broken out over the future of this serene midtown oasis.
The I.B.M. atrium is one of those tense pieces of New York turf, the privately owned public space.
Now the tension has erupted again into a conflict over where the line between public and private should be drawn.
Edward Minskoff, the owner of the I.B.M.
Building, has applied to the City Planning Commission for permission to convert part of the atrium into an exhibition space for sculpture.
The plan has been approved by Community Board 5 but opposed by the Municipal Art Society, a civic group.
Two of the 13-member City Planning Commission, Brenda Levin and Amanda M. Burden, say they oppose the plan.
Joseph Rose, the commission's chairman, said he and Mr.
Minskoff were discussing ways to revise it.


Independence Journal; Hospitality Takes Center Stage at a Town's Festival for Its Native-Son Playwright
In many ways this town of about 12,000 in southeast Kansas has not changed much since the turn of the century.
People still leave their doors unlocked.
Women walk home alone at night.
No one is a stranger.


Getting Out of Vietnam
To the Editor:
Jude Wanniski states (letter, April 14) of the Vietnam War that The Times "supported the war effort in its early stages." By February 1965 -- surely the "early stages" -- The Times had already become highly critical of the escalating war effort.
From a Feb. 9, 1965, editorial (soon followed by many others in the same vein): "The only sane way out is diplomatic . . . not military. A solution will not be found by exchanging harder and harder blows. Surrender is out of the question and 'victory' for either side is impossible." Thirty years later, Robert S. McNamara confirms that view was the correct one, even at such an early stage of the war.
JOHN B. OAKES  New York, April 21, 1995 The writer was editor of the editorial page of The Times, 1961-76.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; The Internet is being used because, as an executive says, everyone wants a connection to what's new.
WHEN G. M. O'Connell, a partner in Modem Media in Westport, Conn., a leading agency in interactive advertising, was asked recently about the appropriateness of marketing in cyberspace, he responded frankly.
While Modem has shepherded advertisers like the AT&amp; T Corporation, the Adolph Coors Company and the J. C. Penney Company onto the worldwide computer network known as the Internet, he told New York Newsday, it probably wouldn't make sense for a company selling a product like toothpaste.


Women Can Help Make Opportunity Equal
To the Editor:
Re "Enter, Women" by Laura A. Ingraham (Op-Ed, April 19): We should never allow numbers to be the final arbiters of women's success in the workplace.
Confident, satisfied career women at all levels are what we should strive for.
Let's give ourselves a hand; we have come a long way.


The Village and the Theater
Joel Grey, Andre Gregory, Sarah Jessica Parker and Ron Rifkin are among the performers to take part in "Greenwich Village Follies," a revue celebrating the history of theater in the Village, tonight at 7:30 at the Joyce Theater, 175 Eighth Avenue, at 19th Street, Chelsea.
The revue -- a benefit for the Greenwich Village Society for Historic Preservation -- will pay homage to Eugene O'Neill, Cole Porter, Judith Malina, Marc Blitzstein, Jose Quintero, Edward Albee and others who first came to attention in the Village.
Tickets are $75 and include a preshow reception at 6:30 P.M.
Reservations: (212) 924-3895.


For Congress, Heavy Lifting Lies Ahead
Remember the drama, the adrenaline-driven debates, the sense of Washington's being upended, for better or worse, that accompanied the first 100 days of this Congress?
Good.
Compared with what is coming, starting this week, that was simple legislative throat clearing.


Socialist Leads In First Round Of French Vote
Lionel Jospin, the Socialist candidate for the French Presidency, outdistanced both of his conservative opponents in the first round of voting today in a major upset not predicted in weeks of public opinion polling.
Mr.
Jospin, a 57-year-old former Education Minister, won more than 23 percent of the vote, based on preliminary results issued by the Government.
He will face a tough battle with Jacques Chirac, 62, the conservative Mayor of Paris, who is making his third try for France's highest elective office, in the decisive runoff on May 7.


Many Flock To New York Just to Leave
It was raining before dawn Wednesday, not a perfect time for a bike ride, when Hart Moss, 13, and his brother, Starr, 8, from Whitefish Bay, Wis., pedaled away from the southeast corner of Central Park, joining the already gathering morning traffic heading south on Fifth Avenue.
With them were their father, David Moss, a doctor, and two sisters, Evan, 11, and Wynne, 7.
On fat-tire bicycles -- all except Wynne, who was snuggled in a small, open trailer pulled by her father -- they were headed for Washington, where they planned to arrive sometime this week.
Hart and Starr would then go on to California, on the same wheels that took them to Washington.
Two kids, two bikes, more than 4,000 miles in about four months.


Playing Craps in a World That's No Game
An air of fatality, as palpable as the ersatz fog that creeps across the stage, hangs over the Harlem of "Dancing on Moonlight," Keith Glover's labored, grimly poetic new drama at the Joseph Papp Public Theater.
Metaphors of "the game" and gambling abound in this tale of numbers runners in 1959 and '60, and there is little question of the outcome.
The dice are as invariably loaded as they are in the disastrous round of craps that begins the play, and the small-time, power-hungry hoods who struggle to control one another are themselves manipulated by social forces they can never escape or fully understand.
Everything that happens, as the audience is reminded time and again, simply "has to be."


Florida's Struggle to Lift Burden of Medicaid Serves as Model, and Warning
Five years into the nation's most ambitious experiment to remake Medicaid by shifting patients into managed care, Florida officials are struggling to crack down on widespread abuses, including fraudulent marketing and lapses in care.
Health officials here say they are still committed to increasing the use of health maintenance organizations's, which they say have succeeded in reining in the soaring costs that have made Medicaid a crushing financial burden for states and the Federal Government.


Yanks Sign McDowell To 1-Year Contract
Jack McDowell, who originally sought a multiyear contract with the Yankees, elected to forgo arbitration today by signing a one-year contract for $5.4 million.
"Basically it means they have a free look this year," McDowell said at Fort Lauderdale Stadium, shortly after he pitched five innings in New York's 12-5 victory over the Atlanta Braves.


The Living Offer Heart and Song to the Dead
In the peal of church bells that rang out over this heartbroken Plains city, the living offered song for the lost today, and for each other, struggling to understand the evil that hit home, but taking solace, at least, that it was answered by goodness.
Standing in a raw wind in a snaking, mile-long queue to attend the memorial service that was arranged to give comfort to the nation, Joe Runson was here, he said, because he wanted and needed to do something.
"And I don't know what else to do," he said, "except cry."


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Television; Should educational programming for children be left in the hands of broadcasters and market forces?
MOST parents like to think they know a good children's television program when they see one.
They may not know whether it is "educational," or directly furthers their children's social, emotional or intellectual development, as Federal law requires.
But they generally know good from bad when they see it.
The trouble is seeing it.
Few parents can sit through hours of programs to pass judgment on which shows their children ought to watch.


One of a Kind in Booth of His Own
HISTORY now has the option on Howard Cosell, who died yesterday.
If it casts him properly he will be remembered not only as the most important sports journalist of the century, but as the only one who was more of a show-business celebrity than his subjects.
That combination alone assured him the resentment of most of his colleagues, easy access to most everyone in sports and an influential voice that cut through SportsWorld like a serrated knife through blue cheese.


Nortek Inc.(NTK,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 1


Accounts
*
Old World Brewing Co., Staten Island, to 2 Guys Who Do Ads, Brooklyn, as the first agency to handle advertising for the brewer of New York Harbor Ale.
The billings have not been determined. *
Grant/Jacoby, Chicago, was awarded two accounts with combined billings estimated at more than $2 million: Wheelabrator Engineered Systems, Naperville, Ill., a unit of WMX Technologies, as the first agency to handle advertising and public relations, and Oil-Dri Corp. of America, Chicago, for the cat litter brands of its consumer products division, previously handled by Schafer Condon, Chicago. *
San Francisco Spiders, an expansion franchise of the International Hockey League, to Hyett, Broadbent &amp; Heimbrodt Advertising, San Francisco, as the team's first agency of record.
The billings were estimated by Adweek at $2 million. *
First Mercury Financial Corp., Southfield, Mich., to the direct response division of W. B. Doner &amp; Co., Southfield, as the first agency to handle direct marketing for its Driver's Direct insurance division.
The billings were not disclosed. *
Dan Lungren, the Attorney General of California, has hired Pacific/ West Communications Group, Los Angeles, for political strategic services; the agency previously handled his re-election advertising.
The billings have not been determined.


Microsoft and Justice Department Defend Settlement Attempt
The Microsoft Corporation and the Justice Department defended their attempt to settle antitrust charges before a Federal appeals court here today as a panel of three judges skeptically questioned the software giant and its opponents.
In a lively session that produced no obvious winners or losers, lawyers for the Justice Department conceded that the agreement was not as tough on Microsoft as it could have been, but they insisted that the deal was within "the reach of the public interest."


Benefit of Standard Low-Fat Diet Is Doubted
ANOTHER given in the health field came under scrutiny yesterday as an expert challenged the notion that a diet consisting of 30 percent fat, a widely promoted goal, would reduce the incidence of heart disease.
The notion has only the flimsiest scientific grounding, the expert, a British cardiologist, said after reviewing the world's medical literature.


USX-Marathon Group (MRO,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Human Ancestors' Earliest Tools Found in Africa
STONE tools found in the desiccated fossil fields of Ethiopia have been dated at 2.6 million years old, making them the earliest known artifacts created by humans or their direct ancestors.
Simple cobbles fractured and flaked for use in scraping and cutting, the tools were made and gripped by hands apparently well evolved toward the hands of humans and conceived by minds somewhat less far along the evolutionary path.
These were toolmakers, though, probably adjusting to new environmental conditions, a cooler climate and changing vegetation, by trying out new means of getting and processing food.
Whoever they were, whatever their needs, they certainly were innovators back near the beginning of the human experience.


Young America Keeps It A 3-Boat Race
In a defense finals that has turned into an America's Cup roulette of winners and losers, Young America scored a critical victory today.
The team, which had lost its past two matches on tactical errors, defeated Stars &amp; Stripes by 52 seconds.
Had Dennis Conner's Stars &amp; Stripes team won, it would have clinched the right to defend the America's Cup against New Zealand's Black Magic.
But Young America's victory kept alive the chances of all three of the yachts competing in the Citizen Cup defenders' trials.


Beckman Instruments Inc.(BEC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Kirby Corp.(KEX,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Jefferson's Love Life Doesn't Equal History; A Colonial Cinderella?
To the Editor:
If you compare Brent Staples's version of "Dashing Sally" Hemings, "admired from Monticello to Paris as a great beauty" (Editorial Notebook, April 18) to the on-the-spot descriptions of her forlorn appearance when she first turned up on Abigail Adams's London doorstep, you have no choice but to congratulate Jefferson's so-called slave mistress for effecting one of the most remarkable make-overs of all time.


London Journal; The Home Front Revisited, and Here's How It Was
Returning to the scene of your childhood is often more complicated than it should be.
But for Muriel Denwell, whose first home was re-created in its entirety and plunked down in the Imperial War Museum here, going home again was so weird as to be almost other-worldly.
"It does seem very strange to be here again," Mrs.
Denwell said the other day in the sitting room of what used to be 135 Kirkwood Road, Peckham, one of tens of thousands of prefab structures built for Londoners whose own homes had been bombed to oblivion in World War II.


Bergen Brunswig Corp.(BBC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


No Headline
"I'm scared. It's just fear. It's just one heck of a fear. I don't know how to explain it. But I know that I am not all right." -- JEFFERY HARDWICK, Oklahoma native.  [ A1:5. ]


Zeroing Out on School Integration
FOR the last 10 years, the schools in Montclair have worked according to the principle that more is better than just enough when it comes to desegregation.
The problem is, they may no longer have enough to do more with.
For 10 years, a widespread community effort has strived to keep Montclair's public schools not just integrated, but actively, purposefully integrated.
It was a decade ago that a Federal court accepted the township's integration plan and told the town to continue on its own.
Since then, the Montclair desegregation program has been a national model, as parents, teachers and administrators struggled to find a way to bridge the racial divide between the heavily minority Fourth Ward in the south from the First Ward in the north -- the section of town where people have added "Upper" to the township name.


Babies Get Changing Space
Ann S. Tremallo, an assistant secretary to the Morris County clerk, thought it was wrong for a mother to have to change her baby's diaper on the floor of the ladies' room in the lobby of the County Administration and Records building.
So she wrote that in an employees' suggestion form.
The county agreed and went one better.
The Suggestion Award Committee decided to install changing tables in both the men's and women's rooms.


Peco Energy Co.(PE,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Albermarle Corp.(ALB,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


USX Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Williams Cos.(WMB,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


A Rwandan Slaughter's Aftermath


Robert Half Int'l.(RHI,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Trimas Corp.(TMS,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Vulcan Materials Co.(VMC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Emphesys Financial Group Inc.(EFG,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Express Scripts Inc.(ESRX,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Market Place; Wall Street is unimpressed with Louis Dreyfus Natural Gas.
"LOUIS DREYFUS NATURAL GAS," reads the lettering on the frosted glass doorway to an office suite on the urban fringe here, out where cattle and subdivisions go side by side.
The executives behind that doorway confirm that, yes, they are in the business of finding, producing and marketing natural gas.
But they insist they have fully protected their shareholders from natural gas's greatest risk: prices as volatile as the substance itself, having gone from $3 a thousand cubic feet in January 1994 to about $1.25 a year later then back to almost $1.70 now.
Dreyfus, they say, is a commodity company but not a commodity play.


Mood Grim At Camp In Rwanda
Little remained of Kibeho today beyond a lifeless trail of belongings.
Most of the dead had been buried, the wounded moved out, the orphans taken away and the first aid center pulled down.
The smell of dirt, excrement and death permeated the air.
About 500 ethnic Hutu were still holed up in a brick compound here, the survivors of the mass panic and shooting by Government troops on Saturday that left an estimated 2,000 dead -- shot, hacked by machetes and trampled -- and hundreds wounded, the United Nations said.


No Progress on Umpires
Telephone conversations between negotiators for locked-out umpires and their employers, the National and American leagues, produced no progress yesterday, making it virtually certain that the baseball season will open tonight in Florida with replacement umpires.
The league presidents, Leonard Coleman of the National and Gene Budig of the American, said in a statement that the umpires' economic demands "in a normal year would be insupportable" and in "this year of heavy industry losses" were unrealistic.


Rangers Hang Onto Lead and a Piece of 8th Place
The Rangers just don't make it easy on themselves or their fans.
Not when they take a four-goal lead, as they did last night.
Not when they drive the other team's starting goalie from the net.
Not when a top opposing player leaves with an injury.
Not even when the officiating prompts the opposing coach to stand up on the boards and get penalized for protesting.
Yes, the Rangers had all that in their favor last night at Madison Square Garden, and still they had to hang on for a 5-4 victory over the Washington Capitals.
The game ended with the Capitals firing shots at goalie Mike Richter and Ranger players mauling Capital attackers without fear of penalty from Referee Bill McCreary.


Kerkorian Bid For Chrysler Is Rejected
Accusing Kirk Kerkorian of threatening to cripple the company, the directors of the Chrysler Corporation rejected his takeover offer for the auto maker today, while dangling the prospect that they would buy back more stock or increase the dividend to mollify other investors.
In a peppery letter to Mr.
Kerkorian, scorning his financial strategy for the buyout, Chrysler's chairman and chief executive, Robert J. Eaton, wrote that "our directors do not have any interest in gambling with Chrysler's future."


McGwire Joins Dolphins as Backup Passer
In a move from the redwood forests to the Gulf Stream waters, quarterback DAN MCGWIRE, a 1991 first-round draft choice of the Seattle Seahawks, signed a two-year contract yesterday with the Miami Dolphins.
The 6-foot-8-inch McGwire played in seven games with three starts at Seattle last year before becoming a free agent.
He has thrown just two touchdown passes in four seasons and will back up DAN MARINO and BERNIE KOSAR. (AP)


Wyle Electronics (WYL,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


South Jersey Industries(SJI,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Chess
A suitable title for Anatoly Karpov's next book would be, "How to Succeed at Chess Without Really Trying." The world champion recognized by the International Chess Federation wins on the basis of advantages so slight that they seem not to exist.
His chief rival, Gary Kasparov, recognized as world champion by the Professional Chess Association, has called him a minimalist for using the least amount of effort to win his games.
Indeed, Kasparov believes that Karpov's play is anti-creative, that Karpov does not reach out for the grand stroke of imagination that reveals the true adventure of the game.
That may be so, but nevertheless Karpov has the imagination to turn a scarcely seen ripple into a victory unforeseen by others.
His game against Aleksandr Khalifman in Round 7 of the Linares International Tournament, which took place in the Spanish city last month, shows his winning methods.


Lloyd's Says It's Optimistic for Long Term
Faced with renewed questions about its financial viability, the Lloyd's of London insurance market said today that it would come under severe strain this year but that its long-term outlook was cautiously optimistic.
Lloyd's was responding to a spate of news reports here in recent days suggesting that the venerable insurer would not be able to meet British Government requirements for financial strength later this year and could be put out of business.


Cafeteria Cuisine Goes Nouvelle


For Games, Old Wine In New Bottles
OLD games never die, unless the computers they were written for disappear; they are just repackaged.
You would have to conduct a major search these days to find a game for the Commodore 64, the Amiga, the Kaypro or even the Apple II.
But for PC's running Microsoft Windows and DOS, or the Macintosh, a few of the classics are still alive.
Here are some packages for such computers.
Playing Solitaire
The Five-Game Super Pak, from Mosque Publishing of Englewood, Colo., puts together Solitaire Antics, Chessnet 3, Video Poker, Caribbean Stud Poker and Blackjack for machines running Windows 3.1.


Crane Co. (CR,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Alexander &amp; Alexander Services Inc.(ALL,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Honors
*
Mike Hughes, vice chairman and creative director at the Martin Agency, Richmond, a unit of the Interpublic Group of Cos., has been inducted into the Virginia Communications Hall of Fame. *
David M. Grant, president of LVM Group Inc., New York, was named president of the New York chapter of the Public Relations Society of America, succeeding Philip G. Ryan, president of Philip G. Ryan Inc., New York. *
Richard Smith, president and editor in chief of Newsweek magazine in New York, a publication of the Washington Post Company, was named the 1995 Communicator of the Year by the New York chapter of the Business Marketing Association. *
Gerald McGee, executive vice president and managing director at Ogilvy &amp; Mather Los Angeles, a unit of the WPP Group, was named Leader of the Year by the Western States Advertising Agencies Association.


Timberland Co.(TBL,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


LOBBYIST IS KILLED IN LETTER BOMBING TIED TO 15 OTHERS
A mail bomb exploded today in the offices of a forest-products trade group, killing the chief lobbyist, the authorities said.
Federal investigators said tonight that it appeared to be the work of the serial bomber in the Unabom case.
"The similarities observed strongly indicate this is the work of the Unabomer," Richard Ross, the head of the Federal Bureau of Investigation office in Sacramento, said at a news conference late tonight.


7 Rich Nations Meet for Talks In Bitter Mood
For years, the world's three most powerful economies -- the United States, Germany and Japan -- have maintained at least the pretense of cooperation and civility when it comes to managing the world's most vital currencies.
Even when vitriolic in private, they always issued soothing statements in public, vaguely promising "coordination" in hopes that a magic word would soothe the markets.
But as the finance ministers of the world's seven wealthiest nations began to gather here today for an annual meeting, they have rarely sounded more divided or bitter.


St. Jude Medical Inc.(STJM,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


CHRONICLE
ELLEN TAAFFE ZWILICH, the first woman to win a Pulitzer Prize for music, in 1983, is about to undertake another pioneering venture.
She holds the first appointment to the Carnegie Hall Composer's Chair, and she gave a news conference yesterday to discuss her new tasks, which include composing a string quartet for the Emerson Quartet.
"I will also start a video archive that will be conversations with composers," she said in a telephone interview.
"I will begin next season with Elliott Carter and Morton Gould."


Manville Corp.(MVL,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


St. Raymond Star Decides on UMass
CHARLTON CLARKE, a first-team all-state selection at St.
Raymond High School in the Bronx, yesterday chose to attend the University of Massachusetts, this fall.
The 6-foot-2-inch guard passed up Georgia Tech, Florida Texas and Connecticut.
Clarke, who averaged 24.6 points for the Ravens last season, said that he decided on UMass because of its lack of depth in the backcourt.
EDGAR PADILLA and CARMELO TRAVIESO are the only returners at guard.
At UMass Clarke will join another St.
Raymond product, DANA DINGLE, a senior forward.


N.B.A. EASTERN CONFERENCE PLAYOFFS
Orlando Magic, 57-25, First Place, Atlantic Division vs.
Boston Celtics, 35-47, Fourth Place, Atlantic Division Key Players Orlando: Shaquille O'Neal and Anfernee Hardaway represent the preeminent point guard-center tandem in the league. combine that with Dennis Scott's and Nick Anderson's shooting and Horace Grant's rebounding.
They need to avoid going to the line.
Key Players Boston: Eric Montross has been known to get under Shaq's skin and Dino Radja will Grant honest on defense, but the backcourt of Dee Brown and Sherman Douglas is the main keys to shaking down the Magic.
Season Review Orlando: Magic ran away with the league's best record until fading down the stretch.
Never mind the 39-2 mark at the O-rena; Shaq and friends were a very unFinalslike 18-23 on the road.
They lost 6 of their last 10.
Season Review Boston: After an abysmal start, the Celtics played through distractions and finished strong.
They beat Orlando twice in the regular season, but were only 20-21 at Boston Garden.
Prediction: Too much Shaq, never mind season series, Orlando in four.
New York Knicks, 55-27, Second place, Atlantic Division vs.
Cleveland Cavaliers, 43-39, Fourth place, Central Division Key Players Knicks: Patrick Ewing should have monster series, but Knicks need consistency from John Starks and Hubert Davis from perimeter.
Derek Harper's job?
Harass Mark Price.
With Cavs' decimated frontline, Charles Oakley should dominate.
Key Players Cavaliers: Cavs are still thin at guard even though price is back, he would have to average 30 points to stop the Knicks.
Michael Cage and Greg Dreiling are merely too immobile to stop Ewing, Oakley and Anthony Mason.
Season Review Knicks: A year after their championship run, they again found a way to overcome distractions, injuries and an offense that took the holidays off.
Mentally, Pat Riley has them poised for a return trip.
Season Review Cavaliers: Only the Democratic Party lost more starters than the Cavaliers this season.
Coach Mike Fratello somehow found a way to milk 43 victories out of a team wrecked by injury.
Recent slide does not bode well for playoffs.
Prediction: Cavs simply don't have firepower.
Knicks in 3.
Charlotte Hornets, 50-32, Second place, Central Division vs.
Chicago Bulls, 47-35, Third place, Central Division Key Players Charlotte: Larry Johnson and Alonzo Mourning represent the main obstacle in Chicago's path.
Muggsy Bogues's ability to run the half-court set is important, but Del Curry's scoring role off the bench cannot be overlooked.
Key Players Chicago: The Hornets need to treat No. 45 like an infectious disease, and quarantine him.
For all Scottie Pippen's contributions, the series may come down to how hard B.J.
Armstrong hits the open jumper.
Season Review Charlotte: Re-emergence of L.J. and 'Zo helped them dash memories of last season's lottery-bound bunch.
Scott Burrell is out for the season, though, and that hurts.
Allan Bristow's job was saved by his players, can they save him again in the playoffs?
Season Review Chicago: Scottie Pippen wanted out, the new United Center was no place like their old home and the Bulls were talking Urban Renewal Project.
Re-enter Jordan, and all is well again.
Prediction: Hornets have home-court advantage, but Michael Fever prevails.
Bulls in 5.
Indiana Pacers, 52-30, First Place, Central Division vs.
Atlanta Hawks, 42-40, Fifth Place, Central Division Key Players Pacers: Reggie Miller is priming for another run at the Knicks and Rik Smits has been playing better than at any time in his career.
Dale Davis and Antonio Davis are too strong inside for Grant Long and Antonio Lang to handle.
Key Players Hawks: Stacie Augmon (sprained left ankle, probable) and Mookie Blaylock will try and rattle Mark Jackson in the foreourt.
Craig Ehlo can still create his own shot, but Steve Smith from beyond the arc is key component.
Season Review Pacers: Despite their perceived dominance, Indiana is only 19-22 on the road.
Sure, Jackson has been a catalyst at the point, but the Pacers still rely too much on Miller to come off screens to save them in the crunch.
Season Review Hawks: Lenny Wilkens overtook Red Auerbach, but that was it for milestones.
The Hawks are 21-13 since Feb. 6 and have won 5 of their last 7, but they are clearly not the team Indiana beat in 6 games in the second round a year ago.
Prediction: Miller may be contained, but not stopped.
Indiana in 4.


Hanna (M.A.) Co. (MAH,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Elting E. Morison, Historian, Is Dead at 85
Elting E. Morison, an educator, historian and author of two biographies of military leaders, died last Thursday at the Pheasant Wood Nursing Home in Peterborough, N.H.
He was 85.
Mr.
Morison died after a long illness, said Daniel Keaveny, a spokesman for the Jellison Funeral Home in Peterborough.


Affirmative Action Case Embroils Clinton
Provoking deep resentment among some of its strongest supporters, the Administration has decided to bypass a highly qualified white lawyer in order to appoint a less experienced lawyer as the first black United States Attorney in the history of Mississippi.
Administration officials say President Clinton has settled on Buck Buchanan, a junior Federal prosecutor, to be the next United States Attorney for the Northern District of Mississippi.
In doing so, the White House denied the post to the Justice Department's original choice for the job in 1993, Josh Bogen, a white lawyer with stronger political and civil rights credentials.


Patterns
New Vivienne Tam Entry
Today, as in the 1970's, a host of designers including Vivienne Tam, Anna Sui, Byron Lars and Mark Eisen have brought the gloss of "designer" to their names despite prices as much as 50 percent below "designer" merchandise.


Don't Legislate in Haste
With the sorrow deep and the anger still raw from Oklahoma City, Americans share President Clinton's fierce commitment to "purge ourselves of the dark forces which gave rise to this evil." But in honoring that pledge in the coming days, Mr.
Clinton and Congress must not knock the nation loose from its constitutional moorings.
This time of national trauma is not the moment to rewrite American law.
The temptations will be too great to curtail liberty in the effort to extinguish terrorism, and to give law enforcement agencies more intrusive powers than they need or have ever shown the ability to manage without trampling on citizens' rights.
The political response to the Oklahoma City bombing has already created competition to see which party can produce more powers for the Federal Bureau of Investigation and other agencies responsible for combating terrorism.
There is a danger that the fervor of the moment will produce new laws or procedures reversing two decades of progress in controlling an F.B.I. that has a weak history of curbing its own excesses.


Chiron to Acquire a Gene Therapy Concern for $95 Million
The Chiron Corporation said today that it would acquire the Viagene Corporation, a leading gene therapy company, at a 67 percent premium over Viagene's closing stock price on Friday, in a deal valued at about $95 million.
Analysts said the deal provided another example of a large drug company, or in this case an established biotechnology concern, perceiving value in companies that are in the early stage of development and have lost the interest of investors.


Coping With Shock of Blast: Lingering Fear and Anguish
The flashbacks come in jumbled, confusing succession, mixing recollection and pure fright: a headless body on the street, the sight of bloodied children and an image -- set indelibly in his memory -- of the television he was watching suddenly blown across the room.
As Jeffrey Hardwick dressed for work last Wednesday, the explosion in the Alfred P. Murrah Building across the street from the room he rented in the Y.M.C.A. shook his life to shreds.
Now he sits in borrowed clothing, in a shelter at the St.
Luke's United Methodist Church, twisting a paper napkin between fingers that will not be still.
The city he once loved is a place he can hardly recognize, a shard-filled danger zone.


Loss of Materials and Files Threaten Prosecution of Cases
Criminal cases involving everything from food stamp fraud to drug dealing might be a casualty of the bombing of the Federal building, which obliterated offices where the Drug Enforcement Agency and several other Federal investigative units stored evidence and case files.
"I have several, shall we say, wholesale pharmaceutical clients, who may have dodged a bullet," said Jack Dempsey Pointer, a defense lawyer.
"If you don't have the dope, you don't have the deal, though how many cases will be dismissed, I don't know."


Assembly Democrats Sidestep Budget Decisions
The Democrats who control the State Assembly introduced a bill today outlining their vision of how much the state should spend on construction projects in the coming year.
But on this the 24th day after the state budget deadline, they avoided taking a public position on the meat of the budget: how much they want to spend on politically charged items like welfare, Medicaid and aid to schools and local governments.


Borrowing and Taxing to Protect Water
The State Legislature created two new municipal agencies in the spring of 1984 to make it easier for New York City to borrow money to complete a new water tunnel and repair old water and sewer lines.
One, the New York City Municipal Water Finance Authority, was set up to borrow money by selling bonds to pay for the multibillion-dollar effort to finish the new water tunnel and renovate the water and sewer systems.
The other, the New York City Water Board, was created to set water and sewer rates.
Revenues from the fees are used to pay off the bonds.


Congress Asks, Is Nature Worth More Than a Shopping Mall?
INCREASINGLY over the last few years, Federal regulators have been criticized on the ground that they spent billions of dollars to attack environmental and health threats without adequately considering whether the benefits justified the costs.
In cleaning up toxic waste, for example, is it really worth the expense to make the site as spotless as a kitchen?
Might some of the money be better spent on another problem?


United Technologies Corp.(UTX,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Minds of Young Are Left in Turmoil
When 4-year-old Carisa Douglas was told about the bombing of the Alfred P. Murrah Federal Building, the shy little girl went to her mother with tears in her eyes.
"I have to see the building, Mom," she said.
"I just can't believe someone would hurt my friend."


RESULTS PLUS
N.H.L.
Whalers Edge Canadiens  Geoff Sanderson's second goal of the final period powered the Hartford Whalers to a 4-3 victory over the Canadiens in Montreal last night, enabling the Whalers to hold on to a share of the eighth and final playoff spot in the Eastern Conference with the Rangers at 43 points.
The Canadiens, beaten at home for only the fourth time this season, dropped to 10th with four games to go and are in danger of missing the playoffs for the first time in 25 years. (AP) SABRES 3, LIGHTNING 1: Alexander Mogilny's power-play goal with 15:04 remaining broke a 1-1 tie and led the visiting Buffalo Sabres to a 3-1 victory over the Tampa Bay Lightning.
The goal, Mogilny's 15th of the season, came with the Sabres skating at a two-man advantage.
Buffalo (19-18-6) won for only the third time in 10 games, but retained its hold on the seventh spot in the East with 44 points. (AP) PANTHERS 5, SENATORS 1: Scott Mellanby's goal 31 seconds into the second period snapped a tie and led visiting Florida to a 5-1 victory over Ottawa.


Giuliani To Offer Plan For Selling Of Water System
In a move intended to make New York City's water system more efficient and also to give the city an infusion of cash, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani this week will propose selling the entire system -- reservoirs, pipes and sewers -- to the New York Water Board, a quasi-independent city agency, a top aide said yesterday.
Marc V. Shaw, the city's budget director, said the $2.3 billion sale would provide about $800 million in cash the city can use for long-term construction spending over the next four years.
Most of the rest of the proceeds would be used to pay off the city's long-term water and sewer bonds.
He said the move would also put a long-term damper on rising water rates, although some independent analysts were skeptical of that claim.


Mets' Harnisch Suddenly Finds Himself, Just in Time for Opening Day
Pete Harnisch had no one to catch him as he sat through the 234-day baseball strike, so the only throwing the Met right-hander did was into a net in the backyard of his new Lake Mary, Fla., home.
So when Harnisch arrived here for the abbreviated spring training with his new team, he didn't know what to expect.


Islanders Thrive On Youth
Already eliminated from playoff contention in what has been a dismal season, the Islanders took a happy glimpse into their future tonight as they defeated the Boston Bruins, 5-3, before 10,657 spectators at Nassau Coliseum.
"All the kids played well," said Islander Coach Lorne Henning.
"We're using these remaining games for this year and next year to see how guys react. Some of the old guys haven't stepped it up, but I'm very pleased with the young guys."


On My Mind; Stand Pat and Die
Maybe something good will come from something bad.
After the services in Oklahoma City a mourner said that was her hope.
And isn't that exactly what the whole country is now praying for -- some real idea of how to deal with terrorism, homegrown and foreign?


West Point Stevens Inc.(WPSN,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


METRO DIGEST
MAYOR TO PROPOSE SELLING WATER SYSTEM
In a move intended to make New York City's water system more efficient and also give a city an infusion of cash, Mayor Giuliani this week will propose selling the entire system -- tunnels, pipes and sewers -- to the New York Water Board, a quasi-independent city agency, a key aide said.
A1.
The State Legislature created two new municipal agencies in the spring of 1984 to make it easier for New York City to borrow money to complete a new water tunnel and repair old water and sewer lines.
B2.
NEW YORK CITY  POLICE BRUTALITY IS FOCUS OF INQUIRY
The Queens District Attorney's office will investigate allegations that at least four police officers from the 112th Precinct handcuffed, beat and kicked a store clerk whom they had mistaken for a suspect during a Saturday night robbery of a Forest Hills supermarket, a spokeswoman for the District Attorney's office said.
B2.
BUSINESS AID FOR JERSEY CITY REJECTED
Facing criticism that it might help lure business away from New York City, the Grand Central Partnership will not assist in the creation of a new business improvement district in Jersey City, the partnership's top official said.
The chairman, Peter L. Malkin, said that his staff would not accept a $210,000 contract to act as consultants to the proposed district.
B2.
SECURITY COMPANY ROBBED OF $1 MILLION
At least two masked gunmen entered the office of a security company in Queens Village, Queens, tied up five workers and got away with about $1 million, a police spokesman said.
B3.
On the first day after spring break, school buses carried students without incident and city officials continued to negotiate with bus company owners and union bus drivers, after the drivers called off a strike.
B4.
REGION  FOCUSING ON DESEGREGATION
For the last 10 years, the schools in Montclair, N.J., have worked according to the principle that more is better than just enough when it comes to desegregation.
The problem is, they may no longer have enough to do more with.
Our Towns by Iver Peterson.
B6.
IMPROVEMENT LAGS AFTER TAKEOVERS
New Jersey's Commissioner of Education acknowledged that academic improvement had not met expectations in the two urban school districts that were taken over by the state.
B6.
FROM D'AMATO, A LECTURE ON BAD JOKES
Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato, in his first public appearance since he was hospitalized overnight for chest pains two weeks ago, said that it felt great to be back.
"This has been a rather tumultuous period in my rather serene political career," Mr.
D'Amato joked.
B6.
NO CUT IN BOND FOR MAN AFTER 5 KILLED
A North Carolina judge refused to reduce bond for a man arrested there after five people were found shot to death at a home he owned in Redding, Conn.
B6.
ASSEMBLY DEMOCRATS SIDESTEP BUDGET
The Democrats who control the State Assembly introduced a bill outlining their vision of how much the state should spend on construction projects in the coming year.
B4.
Chronicle B4


An Endless Spring Is Finally Finished
The longest spring training in baseball history ended for the Yankees tonight in a game that was not a preview of the 1995 World Series.
The game, which Atlanta won, 12-4, was not a preview because the Yankees and the Braves, while popular picks to win the pennants, are not guaranteed post-season spots, because there's no guarantee the 1995 World Series will even be played (remember the 1994 World Series?) and because this was an exhibition game, the 41st and last for the Yankees.


On Not Seeing 'Priest'
To the Editor:
Frank Rich (column, April 20) rebukes Senator Bob Dole for objecting to "Priest" without having first seen it.
If everyone who might find the premise of this film offensive and who objects to its distribution must see it first, Miramax and the Walt Disney Company will succeed in their goal, to earn money despite the film's content.
THOMAS J. INFURNA  Scarsdale, N.Y., April 20, 1995


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-11  FINANCE MINISTERS DIVIDED  As the finance ministers of seven leading industrialized nations gathered in Washington for an annual meeting, they sounded divided and bitter over the weak dollar, in contrast to past public stances of cooperation.
A1


Quebecor Printing Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Premark Int'l.(PMI,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 1


Ernst &amp; Young Plans Deal With Leventhal
Ernst &amp; Young, the big accounting firm, said today that it was forming one of the industry's largest real estate accounting practices by merging with Kenneth Leventhal &amp; Company of Los Angeles.
Kenneth Leventhal is a niche firm specializing in accounting and consulting to the real estate industry.
Kenneth Leventhal, which has annual revenues of about $195 million, will be combined with the Ernst &amp; Young real estate group.


New England Electric Sys.  (NES,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Drug Ring Broken, Agents Say
Federal agents call the drug "euphoria." The high was strictly theirs yesterday after a six-month investigation paid off with the arrest of three men, the seizure of 12 pounds of the so-called designer drug and the discovery of a drug-making lab in Pennsylvania, they said.
In the culmination of the undercover operation by Federal and local authorities, Stephen A. Weiss of East Brunswick, and his son, William Weiss of Metuchen, were accused of selling the drug.
Stephen's brother, Anthony Weiss of Upper Black Eddy, Pa., was charged with manufacturing euphoria, a methamphetamine.


COMPANY BRIEFS
BOEING DEFENSE &amp; SPACE GROUP, Seattle, received a four-year $110 million subcontract from Rockwell International Corporation to enhance the B-1B bomber's offensive avionics system and improve its conventional weapons capability.
HOMELAND STORES INC., Oklahoma City, a supermarket chain, completed the sale of 29 stores and its warehouse complex to Associated Wholesale Grocers for $45 million, plus the value of inventory in the warehouses.
KIMBERLY-CLARK CORP., Dallas, a maker of health care products, announced that it would hire Schneider National Carriers Inc. to take over its trucking operations in a move that could affect up to 700 Kimberly-Clark employees.


Minerals Technologies Inc.(MTX,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 2


Britain Says It Is Willing to Upgrade Talks With I.R.A.
The Government announced today that it was willing to upgrade talks with Sinn Fein, the political wing of the Irish Republican Army, to the ministerial level.
Until now the British Government has been represented at the lower level of civil servants during the half-dozen sessions it has held with Sinn Fein.
It is careful to characterize the talks on how to achieve peace in Northern Ireland as "exploratory."


INSIDE
Court Avoids Suicide Issue
The United States Supreme Court refused to consider the first two cases to reach it involving the legality of assisted suicide.
Page A17.
Contradiction in Bosnia
The United Nations is pursuing as war criminals the Bosnian Serbs on whom its peacekeeping forces depend.
News analysis, page A3.
Stock Prices Set Records
Robust corporate earnings buoyed stocks, lifting the Dow Jones industrial average by 33.89 points to another record, 4,303.98.
Page D1.
Truce in Budget-Ad War
The Governor and Assembly Speaker called a halt to their ad war, saying it may be hindering a budget agreement for New York.
Page B1.
Beethoven Wasn't Neat
A messy Beethoven score is part of a trove of manuscripts whose ownership is being contested by Poland and Germany.
Page C15.


Tempers Flare as Fossil Theft and Claim-Jumping Are Charged
WHATEVER use early human ancestors had for the stone tools of the Gona River region of Ethiopia, now dated as the oldest such implements ever found, some archeologists and other scientists are wielding them as cudgels in a war of words resounding with charges of claim-jumping, fossil theft and neocolonialism.
The battle pits Ethiopian archeologists, backed by American allies, against the Institute of Human Origins in Berkeley, Calif., home base of Dr.
Donald C. Johanson, discoverer of the famous Lucy fossils and one of the world's most prominent paleoanthropologists.
Over the last year, the institute has been beset by troubles, including internal dissension and the loss of a major source of financial support.


Immaculata Cuomo, 92, Governor's Mother
Immaculata Cuomo, the mother of former Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo, died on Sunday at North Shore Extended Care Facility in Manhasset, L.I.
She was 92 and lived in Hollis, Queens.
To New Yorkers who followed politics, Mrs.
Cuomo was a familiar part of her son's public life.
On Jan. 1, 1983, when Mr.
Cuomo was sworn in for the first of three terms as Governor, he spoke of his father, Andrea, and his mother, the former Immaculata Giordano, as "the magnificent immigrant couple who came here with nothing but aspirations and a willingness to work hard."


Gerry Adams Applauds the British Move
Gerry Adams, the political leader of the Irish Republican Army, said today that he welcomed the British decision to assign a minister to talks about the disarmament of the I.R.A.'s arsenal, estimated at 100 tons of weapons, including explosives.
The three-month delay in agreeing to such talks had snagged the Northern Ireland peace effort and raised fears that it could lead to a break in the I.R.A. cease-fire, now in its eighth month.


Corrections
A report in the Styles pages on Sunday about the wedding of Deirdre Gibson Michalopoulos and Christopher James Vlasto referred incorrectly to the bridegroom's grandfather Solon G. Vlasto.
He is not "the late."


Lawyers Ask to Drop Out of Bombing Case
The court-appointed lawyers for the man accused of the Oklahoma City bombing, Timothy J. McVeigh, said today that they had asked to be removed from the case because they knew people killed in the blast.
"Someone in as much trouble as Mr. McVeigh is entitled to 100 percent commitment from his lawyer," said John W. Coyle 3d, a local lawyer appointed by a judge to defend Mr.
McVeigh.
"I personally witnessed the carnage. I had a friend die in the explosion."


Anheuser Resolution Concerns Marketing
Some social advocacy organizations that own stock in the Anheuser-Busch Companies have sponsored a resolution that would require the company to begin assessing the extent and impact of its advertising and marketing efforts on underage drinkers.
The resolution, to be voted on at the company's annual shareholders meeting tomorrow in Williamsburg, Va., was introduced by a group of shareholders including several orders of Catholic nuns and groups supported by the American Academy of Pediatrics.
Passage of the resolution is unlikely, but the shareholders hope to compel Anheuser-Busch to consider their contention that its advertising is a strong factor in generating the sale of beer to minors.


The Explosion Echoes in Cyberspace
Almost before the boom of the explosion that devastated the Federal building had stopped reverberating across downtown Oklahoma City, cyberspace was alive with commentary.
It proved to be an illustration of the global web of computer networks at its best and its worst: some people asked what they could do to help and reached out to succor the victims, while others transmitted tasteless jokes and some people applauded the destruction of the Alfred P. Murrah Federal Building in a truck bombing last Wednesday.


Blindness With AIDS Prevented By Drug
A NEW treatment that involves injecting tiny amounts of an antiviral drug directly into the eye appears to control an infection that blinds many AIDS patients, researchers say.
Preliminary results of tests conducted at the University of California at San Diego Medical School indicate that the new therapy provides long-term, effective control of retinal destruction caused by cytomegalovirus, or CMV, with relatively few adverse effects.


Observer; The Security Puzzle
One result of Oklahoma City will almost certainly be more security measures.
That is the usual response nowadays to outrageous eruptions of civil violence.
More security.
It is tempting to put sarcastic quotation marks around the word -- "security" -- because the history of the past 30 years is persuasive on the subject: The more security we pay for, the less secure we are and, what's worse, the less secure we feel.


Great Lakes ChemicalCorp.(GLK,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Cardinal Health (CAH,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Marsh &amp; McLennan Cos.(MMC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


BUSINESS DIGEST
As Finance Ministers Meet, Harmony Stays at Home Public harmony was notably absent as finance ministers of seven of the world's leading industrial nations met in Washington.
A coordinated response to the world's currency roller coaster is "not acceptable," Chancellor Helmut Kohl of Germany has said; the Japanese see a weak dollar as an American problem that America should deal with, and Michel Camdessus, the I.M.F.'s managing director, blamed the Federal Reserve for failing to raise interest rates even more.
The discord has economists worried.
A1.
Stronger international financial institutions were proposed by Treasury Secretary Robert E. Rubin and Mr.
Camdessus to avert Mexican-style crises.
D7.
Boeing: Profit Off, Stock Up  Boeing earnings dropped 38 percent, to $181 million, or 53 cents a share, mainly because of fewer deliveries -- 59 commercial jets, down from 82 in 1994's first quarter.
But Wall Street was expecting an even worse performance, and the company's stock touched a 52-week high.
D8.
Hillhaven Takes Vencor Bid  Hillhaven accepted a $1.4 billion buyout offer from Vencor, a much smaller hospital chain.
Hillhaven, the big nursing home chain, had just turned away another bidder.
D2.
Lloyd's: Down, Not Out  Lloyd's of London will survive, it said, responding to news reports of its possible demise.
This year looks bleak, but it has "utter confidence" for the long haul.
D10.
Phar-Mor, With or Without Haft  Phar-Mor offered two blueprints for emerging from bankruptcy.
One would involve Robert Haft, former Dart Group president, but the company filed a separate reorganization plan in case talks with Mr.
Haft fall through.
D2.
Microsoft Defends Antitrust Deal  Microsoft and the Justice Department defended their antitrust settlement in a Federal court, while opponents of the deal said a judge was right to strike it down.
D4.
Chiron Bets on Gene Therapy  Chiron will acquire Viagene in a $95 million deal, placing a big bet on a gene therapy company the market had abandoned.
D4.
Weather Lets Nynex Down  Nynex's earnings rose less than expected, and it said one culprit was the weather.
A year ago, pinned inside by an exceptionally cold winter, people talked and talked.
This year's mild winter meant mild earnings.
D7.
Urging 'Brand' Appeal For Newspapers  Newspapers should build brand identities and imitate the way American auto makers rebuilt their good names, the president of the Newspaper Association of America said at its New Orleans convention.
The problem: even though newspapers' revenue is high, their share of ad dollars keeps shrinking and just 62 percent of American adults are daily readers, down from 78 percent in 1970.
D4.
The Risks of Playing It Safe  For a natural gas company, it's an odd way to operate.
Louis Dreyfus Natural Gas protects itself from volatile prices by hedging heavily -- which is fine if prices fall, but it'll lose out if prices rise.
Investors are not impressed.
Market Place.
D12.
Times Square Learns Chinese  Times Square has many unusual features, but one thing it lacks is a billboard from a Chinese marketer.
That's about to change, with a huge sign for China's largest drug company.
Stuart Elliott: Advertising.
D11.


Zeroing Out on School Integration
FOR the last 10 years, the schools in Montclair have worked according to the principle that more is better than just enough when it comes to desegregation.
The problem is, they may no longer have enough to do more with.
For 10 years, a widespread community effort has strived to keep Montclair's public schools not just integrated, but actively, purposefully integrated.
It was a decade ago that a Federal court accepted the township's integration plan and told the town to continue on its own.
Since then, the Montclair desegregation program has been a national model, as parents, teachers and administrators struggled to find a way to bridge the racial divide between the heavily minority Fourth Ward in the south from the First Ward in the north -- the section of town where people have added "Upper" to the township name.


On the Day After, All Is Quiet in the Nets' Front Office
The Nets cleared out their clubhouse cubicles this afternoon and met with Coach Butch Beard for the final time this season.
A few hours later, the franchise's seven owners hashed out finances at the club's offices, and decided nothing in the way of personnel.
The day after completing a season that included 52 losses and no playoff games, all was quiet for the Nets, whose owners may take some time to decide on their next course of action.


Zeroing Out on School Integration
FOR the last 10 years, the schools in Montclair have worked according to the principle that more is better than just enough when it comes to desegregation.
The problem is, they may no longer have enough to do more with.
For 10 years, a widespread community effort has strived to keep Montclair's public schools not just integrated, but actively, purposefully integrated.
It was a decade ago that a Federal court accepted the township's integration plan and told the town to continue on its own.
Since then, the Montclair desegregation program has been a national model, as parents, teachers and administrators struggled to find a way to bridge the racial divide between the heavily minority Fourth Ward in the south from the First Ward in the north -- the section of town where people have added "Upper" to the township name.


A Pathmark for East Harlem
When it comes to milk for their babies and food for their tables, New Yorkers who live in poor neighborhoods tend to pay more for less.
Poor areas lack large supermarkets that buy and sell high-quality goods at a discount.
The neighborhoods are instead held captive by smaller stores with limited stock.
Mindful of crime and an uncertain business climate, big supermarket chains have been hesitant to invest without inducements from Government and not-for-profit groups.
In upper Manhattan, a feisty not-for-profit called the Community Association of East Harlem Triangle has toiled for years to bring a Pathmark supermarket to 125th Street and Third Avenue, using private investment combined with tax breaks and low-interest loans.


Businesses Buzz to Life, But Nothing Is the Same
Workers in business suits once again were riding elevators up and down office buildings.
They were shuffling papers and answering phones.
On the streets, delivery trucks double-parked and smokers huddled outside doorways.
Pedestrians strolled.
It looked, in most ways, like an ordinary work day.
But it certainly did not feel that way.


Citgo Petroleum Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Welch Cut by A's After He Plays Along
Even after agreeing to a huge pay cut and signing a minor league contract, BOB WELCH was unable to stay with the Oakland Athletics.
Welch, who won the 1990 American League Cy Young award with a 27-6 record, was released late Sunday night by the A's as part of a series of moves that trimmed the roster to the opening-day limit of 28.


Champion Of Wildlife; Zoological Society at 100
Exactly 100 years ago this week, Teddy Roosevelt and fellow wealthy hunters in the Boone and Crockett Club formed the New York Zoological Society with the idea of creating a zoological park to protect large North American animals.
Theirs was an early view of conservation: in addition to live animals, their park, the Bronx Zoo, also had a Hall of Heads and Horns lined floor to ceiling with glassy-eyed moose and delicate antelope antlers, like their own hunting lodges.
But the hunters had lofty aspirations.
In little more than a decade after the society was chartered, on April 26, 1895, the society fulfilled the founders' promise: it began to restock the American West with bison, whose numbers had dwindled to 1,000.


Security Company in Queens Is Robbed of About $1 Million
At least two masked gunmen entered the office of a security company in Queens Village, Queens, early yesterday, tied up five workers and got away with about $1 million, a police spokesman said.
The men entered the office of the Trans Am Security Corporation through the roof about 1:30 A.M., said the spokesman, Detective Bernard Gillespie of Detective Borough Queens North.


Liz Claiborne Inc.(LIZ,N) reports earnings for 13wks to Apr 1


Mexican Talks Break Off Until May With No Accord
After four tense days filled with brinkmanship and bravado, Government negotiators flew back to Mexico City today and Indian rebels returned to their forest refuge after peace talks in the southern state of Chiapas were recessed late Sunday night without reaching any significant agreements.
As they left San Andres Larrainzar, the Indian town in Chiapas where the talks were held, both sides made it clear that peace efforts had not broken down.
They agreed to meet again in the same place on May 12 to resume the difficult, testy negotiations to end the uprising that began almost 16 months ago.


Steinbrenner's Family Buys a Track
The family of GEORGE STEINBRENNER, majority owner of the Yankees, has bought a piece of the 125-year-old Red Mile harness track at Lexington, Ky.
Track officials called it a "substantial investment," but did not say how much was involved nor why the Steinbrenner family made it.
The minimum investment is $25,000 a person.
Red Mile's president, JOHN CASHMAN, said Steinbrenner's wife, JOAN, his two daughters, JESSICA MOLLOY and JENNIFER SWINDAL, and his son-in-law STEVE SWINDAL bought the stock.


Safeco Corp.(SAFC,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


CHRONICLE
MARY GORDON, the novelist, teaches writing to elderly people at the Morningside Gardens Senior Center on the Upper West Side and to undergraduates at Barnard College, where she is the Millicent McIntosh Professor of English.
This evening, she will bring both groups together at the college to read from their works.
How would she compare the groups?
"You don't have to push people in their 70's or older or discipline them because someday what they're writing might pay off," in terms of a career, she said, adding, "You get the feeling that they know a lot more than you do about some things."


Court Won't Hear Appeal In Case of Assisted Suicide
The Supreme Court today refused to consider whether there is a constitutional right to assisted suicide and whether someone who helps another person commit suicide can be prosecuted for murder.
The Court turned down two challenges, one of them by Dr.
Jack Kevorkian, to a Michigan court's ruling that the Constitution does not protect assisted suicide.
The cases were the first on the subject to reach the Court, but they will almost certainly not be the last.
The Justices made no comment in refusing to hear the appeals, and their refusal does not set a precedent.


Let the Public, Not the Planners, Decide Future of Superstores
To the Editor:
"Megastores Mean Lost New York Jobs" (Op-Ed, April 18) is the typical planner's accumulation of misconceptions.


Torchmark Corp.(TMK,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Volume Controls
Q.  How does the volume control work on a stereo or radio?
A.
The volume control acts like the valve on a water tap, stopping the total volume of current from flowing.
In the case of sound equipment, it does this by adding a resistive network that can gradually be removed to let more and more electric current through.
Each manufacturer does this with a slightly different mechanism.


St. Paul Cos.(SPC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Immigrant Elderly Deserve S.S.I. Benefit
To the Editor:
Your headline "For Elderly Immigrants, a Retirement Plan in U.S." (front page, April 16) leaves the impression that thousands of immigrants enter the United States each year for the purpose of obtaining Supplemental Security Income benefits, adding fuel to the hysteria raging about whether or not immigrants should receive Government benefits.


Texaco Inc.(TX,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


User-Friendliness: Book vs. Disk
"MATERIAL WORLD: A GLOBAL FAMILY PORTRAIT" (Sierra Club Books) is a fascinating volume of photographs, essays and statistics about the way people live around the globe.
Conceived by the photographer Peter Menzel, the book portrays the worldly goods and daily life of 30 representative families, along with statistics and commentaries about the countries they inhabit.
"Material World" from Starpress Multimedia, phone (800) 782-7944, is also a CD-ROM that, according to the book's jacket flap, "brings even greater life to the subject with spectacular video, breathtaking photography, and stereo sound." If these claims were true, books in general, and this book in particular, would seem to be endangered species.
A comparison between bound volume and CD-ROM should help reveal whether reports of the death of the book are greatly exaggerated.


U.S. Condemns Bosnian Serbs for Curbing Envoy
The State Department angrily criticized the Bosnian Serbs today for imposing severe restrictions on an American diplomat who was seeking to meet in Sarajevo with officials from Bosnia's Muslim-led Government.
After the Bosnian Serbs sought to limit the amount of time the American diplomat could spend with Bosnian officials, the Clinton Administration asked the United Nations to insist that the Bosnian Serbs abandon efforts to dictate what people who fly into Sarajevo airport can or cannot do.


School Buses Run as Union Talks Continue
Yesterday, the first day after spring break, school buses carried students without incident and city officials continued to negotiate with bus company owners and union bus drivers.
The drivers had called off a strike that was to have begun yesterday.


Is Montana Preparing to Shift Gears?
One week after retiring from football, JOE MONTANA will become the latest former National Football League star to buy into an auto racing team, sources told The Associated Press yesterday.


U.S. Bond Prices Mixed As Group of Seven Gathers
Prices of Treasury securities ended mixed yesterday with many investors on the sidelines, apprehensive over today's meeting of leading industrialized nations about the plight of the dollar.
In addition, with a lack of economic news yesterday, few investors had reason to place any large bets.


Plan to Aid New Business District Rejected
Facing criticism that it might help lure business away from New York City, the Grand Central Partnership will not help to create a new business improvement district in Jersey City, the partnership's top official said yesterday.
The chairman, Peter L. Malkin, said that his staff would not accept a one-year, $210,000 contract to act as consultants to the proposed district, which would encompass Journal Square and the surrounding blocks of Jersey City.


Anjelica Huston Savors An Adventurous Part She Was 'Born to Play'
Anjelica Huston's connection to the CBS mini-series "Buffalo Girls" started long before the producers bought the rights to Larry McMurtry's 1990 best-selling novel.
In fact, it started even before the book was published.
"I heard he was doing a book about Calamity Jane," Ms.
Huston said.
"I was instantly interested."


American Brands Inc.(AMB,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


U.S. Home Corp.(UH,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Capturing the Energy and Beauty of Style
The Miller study, where daughter Alexandra is waiting with her fiance, Alexander Von Furstenberg, feels a bit like the drawing room in an Edith Wharton novel.
But the arrival of Joe Eula, the artist, turns it quite suddenly into a Noel Coward play.
Mr.
Eula has been asked to draw the couple, in one of his typical vibrant line portraits, for an engagement party invitation.
What was meant to be a preliminary meeting before a sitting is slowly being manipulated into something else.
Could he possibly draw from a Polaroid of the couple instead?
Could he use some paints on hand instead of his own?


Shifting Debate to the Political Climate, Clinton Condemns 'Promoters of Paranoia'
President Clinton today denounced "promoters of paranoia" for spreading hate on the public airwaves and promptly found himself in a confrontation with conservative radio talk show hosts, whom he had not named but who interpreted his remarks as attacks on themselves.
After days of measured statements of grief and outrage over the Oklahoma City bombing, Mr.
Clinton edged today into a new discussion of the civic and political climate that might have encouraged it.
As soon as he finished speaking, senior White House aides became concerned that his remarks would be interpreted as an attack on radio hosts like Rush Limbaugh and rushed to insist that the President had only been urging Americans to protect free speech by speaking out against hatred.


Oklahoma Bombing Plotted for Months, Officials Say
Less than a week after the Oklahoma City bombing, Federal investigators have pieced together a circumstantial case against Timothy J. McVeigh based on his identification by witnesses, forensic evidence and correspondence in which he vented his rage at the Government over the deaths of members of a sect in Waco, Tex., law-enforcement officials said today.
Mr.
McVeigh himself has refused to cooperate with investigators, meeting their entreaties to answer questions with a rigid, stone-faced silence, the officials said.
One investigator said that Mr.
McVeigh had displayed no reaction even when he had been shown photographs of maimed and dead children being taken from the Alfred P. Murrah Federal Building.


Guilford Mills Inc.(GFD,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 2


CHRONICLE
In 1970, JOHN FILO, a student at Kent State University, snapped a photograph of an anguished MARY ANN VECCHIO kneeling over the body of one of four students killed by the National Guard during demonstrations there.
The photo won a Pulitzer Prize for Mr.
Filo and became the emblem of the anti-Vietnam War movement, but the photographer and the subject never met until Sunday.
They were brought together at a conference at Emerson College in Boston commemorating the 25th anniversary of the uprisings at Kent State University in Kent, Ohio, and Jackson State University in Jackson, Miss., over the United States bombing of Cambodia.


Improvement Lags After School Takeovers, State Says
New Jersey's Commissioner of Education acknowledged today that academic improvement had not met expectations in the two urban school districts that were taken over by the state.
The Commissioner, Dr.
Leo F. Klagholz, told the Senate Appropriations Committee that while there had been some improvement in student test scores in Paterson and Jersey City, "it is not as high as we hoped."


Boulez Reinvents a Modern Tradition
During two remarkable weekend concerts at Carnegie Hall, Pierre Boulez made Webern sound like Mahler, Stravinsky sound like Messaien, Berg sound like Ravel, and Boulez sound like a combination of them all.
The result was revelatory.
Mr.
Boulez's conducting of the London Symphony Orchestra on Saturday night and Sunday afternoon actually created a sort of self-portrait. (The third and final concert was last night.) Disparate pieces seemed to share a common voice, glistening with refined intelligence, reflecting new light on one another and on their interpreter.
There were some magnificent performances, some startling juxtapositions and a sense that one was hearing part of Mr.
Boulez's personal canon on display.


Pataki and Silver Declare Cease-Fire in Ad War Over the Budget
Gov.
George E. Pataki and Assembly Speaker Sheldon Silver have agreed to a seven-day cease-fire in their bitter advertising war over the state budget, a reflection of their concern that their relentless combat may be so poisoning the air that it is hindering efforts to reach an agreement.
The truce is a recognition that the new use of campaign-style advertising to influence legislation can be counterproductive.
While it can be quite effective in killing legislation, as it was in turning public opinion against President Clinton's health care plan last year, New York's leaders are finding that the ads may make it more difficult to reach necessary compromises on issues like a budget.


Amerada Hess (AHC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Shopping Purgatory, or Paradise; Northeast's Supermarkets Outclassed by Sun Belt's
So what was it like, one recent evening in supermarket purgatory?
Shoppers squeezed their carts through aisles cluttered with towers of unpacked boxes that blocked the goods on the shelves.
Whole shelves yawned emptily, unstocked.
Customers waited in lines as checkout clerks doubled as baggers.
Spilled milk by the dairy cooler had not been cleaned up.
The floors were littered with flattened vegetables and packing materials.


Hot Vents in the Sea Floor May Drive El Nino
EL NINO, the climatic disturbance that brings droughts to Australia, famines to Africa, and floods to California, is a global visitation of mysterious origin.
It occurs every two to seven years and normally lasts one or two years, in which time it can kill hundreds of people and destroy many billions of dollars in crops, fisheries and property.
Teams of scientists find new kinds of damage from El Nino all the time but have made only marginal progress in understanding its genesis.
This is why there has been only modest success at global warnings and predictions.


Free Ride on New Jersey Transit
Girls 15 or under and accompanied by an adult will get a free ride in a program participating in the national "Take Our Daughters to Work" day.
On Thursday, New Jersey Transit will offer free fares for girls who use its train, bus and subway systems. (Passengers boarding at New York stations on the Port Jervis and Pascack Valley lines are not eligible.)


Lyondell Petrochemical Co.  (LYO,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Corrections
A picture caption yesterday with a pop music review about a Brazilian show at the Supper Club on Friday reversed the names of the two featured performers.
Margareth Menezes was at the left, and Elba Ramalho at the right.


Carl Whitaker, 83, Therapist Who Focused on Family Life
Dr.
Carl A. Whitaker, a psychotherapist who overturned prevailing orthodoxy by focusing on the family rather than the individual in therapy, died on Friday at his home in Nashotah, Wis.
He was 83.
The cause was complications from a stroke, said his daughter, Nancy Whitaker-Emrich of Portland, Ore.


Eastman Chemical Co.  (EMN,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Federal Uniforms Become Target Of Wave of Threats and Violence
Three weeks before the explosion in Oklahoma City, a bomb blew out windows and ripped open a hole inside the Forest Service office in Carson City, Nev.
That same week in Montana, a self-styled citizen's militia leader directed threats at several public officials, saying, "There cannot be a cleansing without the shedding of blood." At least two judges say they now fear for their lives.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article yesterday about the growing visibility of Lieut.
Gov.
Betsy McCaughey in New York misstated her salary.
It is $110,000, not $100,000.


Detroit Edison Co. (DTE,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Jefferson's Love Life Doesn't Equal History
To the Editor:
Re Brent Staples's "Thomas Jefferson and 'Dashing Sally' " (Editorial Notebook, April 18):


Cheer and Economy In Baring the Soul
"If you can't have a laugh and a drink on a Saturday night, when can you?" announces a character in "Ecstasy," Mike Leigh's devastating portrait of four working-class English friends carousing in a shabby furnished room in northwest London.
Over the course of the party, which consumes the play's second act, nothing much happens except that the characters drink a lot of beer, smoke a lot of cigarettes, become sloppily sentimental and sing songs.
But through a wealth of casually dispensed personal detail and naturalistic ensemble acting of astonishing intensity and nuance, "Ecstasy" cheerily bares the soul of a society on a precipice.


Stone Container Corp.(STO,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Still a Champ: Foreman and HBO Is a Match Made on Madison Ave.
In eulogies for Howard Cosell, his call of George Foreman's devastating knockout of Joe Frazier in 1973 received near-constant repetition: "Down goes Frazier. Down goes Frazier. Down goes Frazier."
If there were a Dow Jones-like measure of George Foreman after generous judging awarded him a majority decision over Axel Schulz last Saturday night, it would read: "Down goes Foreman. Down goes Foreman. Down goes Foreman."


The Solzhenitsyns Take a Long Way Home
Aleksandr I. Solzhenitsyn, the Russian talk-show host, returned to his native land about a year ago, after 20 years in Vermont.
He landed in Magadan, on the Sea of Okhotsk and began a three-month journey by rail to Moscow, across the Gulag Archipelago, the vast Stalinist prison that he exposed in the 1973 work that brought him arrest and exile.
In his years in Vermont, the Nobel Prize winner kept the cameras away with the determined help of his wife, Natalya, shown tonight still protecting him and berating the crush of reporters at the airport: "You are journalists, the world's second oldest profession." But the family allowed a BBC television crew on the train to Moscow, and "The Homecoming" is the result.


Oil Giants Register Big First-Quarter Profit Gains
The nation's largest oil companies, buoyed by rising oil prices and big upturns in their chemical businesses, surprised analysts and delighted Wall Street yesterday by reporting higher-than-expected profits.
Exxon, Mobil, Texaco, Amoco and ARCO all registered upturns in their first-quarter earnings.


Cominco Ltd. (CLT,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Scana Corp.(SCG,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Let the Public, Not the Planners, Decide Future of Superstores; Can't Ignore the Car
To the Editor:
In "Megastores Mean Lost New York Jobs" (Op-Ed, April 18), Tom Angotti and Ron Shiffman call for these proposed shopping giants to be situated "near mass transit while eliminating parking."


Viking Office Products (VKNG,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Rollins Inc.(ROL,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Reporters Jockeying For Space
Two blocks north of the Alfred P. Murrah Federal Building, where Federal agents and rescue workers sift through the rubble trying to find bodies and clues, another small army of people go about their even more familiar business -- delivering the news to their viewers, listeners and readers around the country and across the world.
The sea of vans, trucks, satellite dishes and Winnebagos covers more than two square blocks.
Television networks are broadcasting from the roofs of buildings and vans, from makeshift platforms and from cherry-pickers that telescope up to capture a wider view of the wreckage.


Clinton Plan Would Broaden F.B.I. Powers
Under a proposal being considered by the Clinton Administration, the Federal Bureau of Investigation would be able to compile information on potentially menacing organizations like right-wing paramilitary groups even when there is no evidence they are involved in criminal activity, Government officials said today.
Under current guidelines, the F.B.I. is forbidden from investigating such groups unless there is a "reasonable indication" that they are trying to achieve their goals through violence and explicit violations of the criminal laws.
Following the Oklahoma City bombing, law-enforcement officials have complained privately that those guidelines hamper them from gathering the kind of information needed to prevent such tragedies.
Under the proposal being considered, the F.B.I. could infiltrate such organizations or use informers to keep track of their activities.


Tracor Inc.(TTRR,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Foreman Might Face Mandatory Rematch
George Foreman, 46 years old, $10 million richer and planning to continue fighting, could be forced by the International Boxing Federation to defend his title again against Axel Schulz, the man who nearly took it from him Saturday night.
Bob Lee, head of the I.B.F., said yesterday that he had received many complaints about the decision from people in the boxing community and expects it to be reviewed by a special committee next week.


From D'Amato, a Lecture on Bad Jokes
Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato, in his first public appearance since he was hospitalized overnight for chest pains two weeks ago, said today that it felt great to be back.
"This has been a rather tumultuous period in my rather serene political career," Mr.
D'Amato said, joking with students on the C. W. Post campus of Long Island University about his health and recent verbal gaffes involving Judge Lance Ito, who is presiding in the O. J. Simpson trial.


More Is Told About C.I.A. In Guatemala
The Central Intelligence Agency's station chief in Guatemala, who was removed from his post in February for failing to disclose the agency's ties to a Guatemalan colonel linked to the killing of an American, had been formally reprimanded for similar silences nine months earlier, Government officials said today.
The C.I.A.'s inspector general accused the station chief of suppressing reports of human rights violations by the Guatemalan military, according to Government officials familiar with the inspector general's report.


Prevention of Mexican-Style Crisis Sought
Treasury Secretary Robert E. Rubin and the managing director of the International Monetary Fund, Michel Camdessus, proposed today the strengthening of international financial institutions to help prevent another Mexican-style financial crisis.
The proposals, which will be discussed at this week's annual spring round of meetings among world finance ministers here, underscored the financial leaders' continuing preoccupation with the fallout from Mexico's botched devaluation last December and the destabilizing shockwaves it sent through financial markets around the world.


Fund-Raiser For the G.O.P. Is Indicted
A real estate executive who has been a major Republican fund-raiser was charged in an indictment unsealed yesterday with illegally demanding political contributions from tenants and brokers for several Republican causes, including Rudolph W. Giuliani's two mayoral campaigns.
In return for the donations, the indictment said, rental apartments were made available.


After Rejection by Harvard, Questions in Mother's Death
For weeks after sheriff's deputies arrested 14-year-old Gina Grant for bludgeoning her alcoholic mother to death in 1990, she offered conflicting accounts of how the crime happened.
It was intruders, she said at first; then, her mother stabbed herself, injuring her head as she fell down the stairs to the first floor.
Finally, Ms.
Grant swore to investigators that it was her boyfriend, Jack Hook, who did the deed.
"I saw him come running up and he had a candlestick in his hand," Ms.
Grant said.
"I saw him hit her in the back of the head, and then I just turned away and screamed."


American Business Products Inc.(ABP,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Cox Planning Sports Offerings
Cox Communications, the nation's fourth-largest cable operator, with three million subscribers, is planning to start two new cable sports services, according to several people close to the company.
The services are to be offered to subscribers in Cox's own systems and other systems later this year.
A spokesman for the company declined to comment.
But Cox, a unit of Cox Enterprises, is said to be spending close to $100 million to create the two advertiser-supported services that will include fitness-outdoor programming and a service aimed at aficionados of motor sports, including cars, planes and boats.


Mobil Corp.(MOB,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Knicks are at Camp for Playoff Cram Course
This is playoff week, which means it is time for Camp Riley.
For the fourth consecutive year, the Knicks have traveled to the College of Charleston to prepare for the playoffs.
And regardless of how anyone feels about Riley's regimen, it is hard to argue with the success.


This Label Knows How To Party
Blue Note Records celebrated the 10th anniversary of its rebirth with a concert at the Beacon Theater on Sunday night bringing together some of its biggest acts: the singers Rachelle Ferrell, Bobby McFerrin and Cassandra Wilson and the pianist Jacky Terrasson.
Besides being a statement on how important singers are in jazz, the show also commented on jazz's relationship to black culture.
In the performances of Ms.
Ferrell, Ms.
Wilson and Mr.
McFerrin, the concert argued that different facets of black culture are generating their own kinds of jazz.


Fight Among Cat Lovers Ends
Irene B. Brounstein of Montville, a breeder of champion show cats who accused the American Cat Fanciers Association of revoking her judging license because she is Jewish, reached a settlement with the organization after two days of testimony in Federal Court.
Under the agreement, she accepted $15,000.
The organization, based in Point Lookout, Mo., reinstated her license, and Mrs.
Brounstein then relinquished it.
The agreement says that while board members did make remarks about Mrs.
Brounstein's religion, those comments did not influence the revocation of her license and the board denied any violation of law in revoking her credentials.


Arco (ARC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Low-Wage Fathers and the Welfare Debate
When his son was born out of wedlock nine years ago, Moses Woodruff Jr. was 19 years old, a high school dropout and working at a fast-food restaurant, earning the minimum wage.
Given the situation, Mr.
Woodruff said, the child's mother had little choice but to go on welfare.
"I was not able to take care of a family," Mr.
Woodruff said by telephone from his home in Cleveland.
"The minimum wage was $3.25 an hour, and inflation was steady on the rise. My situation didn't allow me to be the provider I needed to be."


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball American League  BOSTON RED SOX -- Placed Roger Clemens and Stan Belinda, pitchers, on the 15-day disabled list.
Agreed to terms with Mo Vaughn, first baseman, on a one-year contract.
Purchased the contracts of Derek Lilliquist and Alejandro Pena, pitchers, from Pawtucket of the International League.
Optioned Greg Blosser, Jose Malave and Glenn Murray, outfielders; Randy Brown, shortstop; Scott Hatteberg, catcher; and Mike Sullivan, Joel Bennett and Gar Finnvold, pitchers, to Pawtucket.
Sent Pat Lennon, outfielder, and Bill Wertz, pitcher, outright to Pawtucket and Bill Selby, pitcher, outright to Trenton of the Eastern League.
Designated Eric Wedge, catcher, for assignment.
Optioned Ron Mahay, outfielder, and Joe Hudson, pitcher, to Trenton.
Optioned Chris Howard, pitcher, to Sarasota of the Florida State League.


'Love! Valour!' Recoups 6 Weeks After Opening
Broadway's first hit under a cost-cutting deal between labor and management has turned a profit only six weeks after opening, a record for Broadway plays.
Terrence McNally's "Love! Valour! Compassion!" was a sellout at the Manhattan Theater Club last fall and moved to the Walter Kerr Theater in February under the auspices of the Broadway Alliance.
It earned back its everything it had spent of $750,000 capitalization by March 26, the Manhattan Theater Club's managing director, Barry Grove, said yesterday.


Newspapers Are Advised to Build Their Brand Identities
Newspaper publishers should build their publications' brand identities with the public to compete in a new media marketplace, a national gathering of publishers was told here today.
That prescription for coping with new electronic competition came from Cathleen Black, the president of the Newspaper Association of America, the national publishers group, which is holding its annual convention here.
The association represents publishers of more than 1,500 daily newspapers in the United States and Canada.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
9.00
9.00
6.75
DISCOUNT RATE
5.25
5.25
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
5.94
5.93
3.78
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.66
5.60
3.85
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.75
5.69
4.25
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.98
6.99
6.86
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.31
7.33
7.15
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.13
8.18
7.94
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.23
6.22
6.30
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills 8


International Briefs; In Brief
*
AXA S.A., France's second-largest insurer, said yesterday that it planned to begin a car insurance business in Germany, Europe's largest insurance market.
AXA said the unit would be operated through its German subsidiary, AXA Direkt Versicherung.
AXA owns 60 percent of the Equitable Companies. *
Motorola Inc. signed a multimillion dollar contract yesterday with the Indian Government to create that nation's largest cellular phone system, in New Delhi.
Financial details were not disclosed.
Motorola, based in Schaumburg, Ill., will design and install equipment to build a system to support 100,000 cellular phone subscribers, the company said. *
British Petroleum's chemical division plans to invest $:20 million ($32.2 million) to expand production of ethylene by about 25 percent at its site in Grangemouth, Scotland, company officials said.


Asarco Inc.(AR,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Charge of Police Brutality at Supermarket
The Queens District Attorney's office will investigate allegations that at least four police officers from the 112th Precinct handcuffed, beat and kicked a store clerk whom they had mistaken for a suspect during a Saturday night robbery of a Forest Hills supermarket, a spokeswoman for the District Attorney's office said.
The store clerk, Marcos Maldonado, 26, said that while he was handcuffed and lying on the floor of the store's basement, one police officer put a gun into his mouth, used an ethnic slur and said: "You know you're going to die tonight. I'm going to blow your head off."


Why Anthony Lake Kept Silent in '70
To the Editor:
Anthony Lewis rightly excoriates Robert S. McNamara for not speaking out early against the Vietnam War (column, April 17) but takes a step too far in criticizing Anthony Lake for not making public his reasons for resigning from Henry Kissinger's National Security Council in 1970.


Oswald and Mailer: The Eternal Basic Questions
OSWALD'S TALE An American Mystery  By Norman Mailer  828 pages. Random House. $30.
Even though more than 2,000 books have already been written about the assassination of President John F. Kennedy, the prospect of reading a new one about Lee Harvey Oswald seems intriguing -- if the author is Norman Mailer.
The topic, after all, looks like the perfect magnet for all the author's talents and preoccupations.
What Mr.
Mailer calls "the greatest mountain of mystery in the 20th century" not only offers him another opportunity to fulfill what he once called his need "to speak to one's time," but also serves as a dark mirror of the themes he has addressed throughout his 47-year-long career: the confluence of psychic and social disorder, the anarchic consequences of violence, and the relationship between a self-declared outlaw and the status quo.


Tires Are Expected to Burn On Through the Week


Man in the News; The Tortoise In Paris Race -- Lionel Robert Jospin
Lionel Jospin, who came from behind on Sunday to win a place as standardbearer of the left in France's presidential runoff next month, was born in the Paris suburb of Meudon, "like Rabelais," he likes to say.
Rabelaisian is the last word most people would use to describe the 57-year-old former Education Minister, the son of a French Protestant education official.
With his frameless spectacles, tousled gray hair and rapid-fire speech, he seems more like the university professor he has been in Paris and Grenoble than a gregarious politician.


Shaw Industries(SHX,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 1


U.N. in Bosnia: Black Robes Clash With Blue Hats
How many hats can the United Nations wear in its dealings with Bosnia?
This question was framed sharply today by the decision of the United Nations tribunal for the former Yugoslavia to identify the Bosnian Serbs' leader, Radovan Karadzic, and their military commander, Ratko Mladic, as suspected war criminals.


After 22 Years, the Goose Goes Home
Sixteen and a half years ago, Rich Gossage stood on the mound at Boston's Fenway Park on a crisp October afternoon and had what the relief pitcher describes as a "hell of a conversation" with himself as he prepared to face the legendary Carl Yastrzemski.
Yastrzemski's Red Sox, taking their last swings at preventing one of the greatest collapses in sports history, trailed their hated rivals from New York City by 5-4 in a sudden-death playoff game, only the second in American League history.
The Sox needed Yaz to gobble up the Goose and reverse the good fortune brought the Yankees' way by a long march back from a 14-game deficit that summer and a dramatic Bucky Dent home run that afternoon.


Met Opera Winners' Concert
The promising news from Sunday's concert of National Council Winners at the Met was that this year's 10 winners include two promising tenors and at least one opera-ready dramatic soprano.
Gregory Turay, only 22, sang Gounod's "Salut! demeure" with a lovely young technique and Weill's "Lonely House" with engaging naturalness.
Jon Villars's singing of Massenet and Puccini revealed a promising French-tenor sound but occasional technical imperfections to go with it.
He is 31 and the oldest of the 10.
Sondra Radvanovsky stood out: an opera singer surrounded largely by singers singing opera.
There is a difference.
In familiar arias from "Aida" and "La Wally," Ms.
Radvanovsky's dark soprano communicated the true passion of her medium, something most of her colleagues, bright and attractive as they were, never quite managed.


Boeing Reports 38% Drop in Profit, But Its Stock Gains
The Boeing Company reported a 38 percent drop in first-quarter earnings yesterday, but the results exceeded Wall Street analysts' expectations a few cents and sent the company's stock to a 52-week high of $57 on the New York Stock Exchange, before it closed at $56.875, up $1.125.
But a drop in the company's tax rate accounted for most of the difference, and analysts said there were few surprises in the quarter.


Italian Voters Give Boost to Leftist Parties in Regional Elections
Italians, voting in regional and local elections on Sunday, revealed a country almost evenly divided between the right and the left, a result that is almost certain to hold off national elections for another six months.
The results dimmed the hopes of former Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi and his center-right bloc to force elections for a new Parliament in June.
Incomplete results based on 75 percent of the vote indicated today that the Party of the Democratic Left, the former Communist Party and the main leftist group in Italy, had made unexpected gains.


Dow Advances 33.89 Points, Topping 4,300
Barreling through its third century mark in a month, the Dow Jones industrial average yesterday surged 33.89 points, to 4,303.98, its third consecutive session to record a closing high.
Broader market measures also gained, paced by a strong rally in semiconductor stocks and continued euphoria over robust corporate earnings reports.
The Standard &amp; Poor's index of 500 stocks jumped 4.40 points, or 0.87 percent, to 512.89, also a record and the day's biggest percentage gain among the major market yardsticks.
The Nasdaq composite index, heavy with technology shares, rose 5.47 points, to 828.91.


Corrections
An article in Business Day on Friday about the guilty plea of Steven Hoffenberg, the New York financier, in a criminal fraud case referred incorrectly to the legal status of the accountants who he contended had issued false statements while working for his company, Towers Financial Corporation.
In fact, one accountant -- Marvin Basson, the outside auditor for Towers -- indeed faced a criminal charge.
He pleaded guilty in December to having falsified the company's financial status and lied to the Securities and Exchange Commission.


Corrections
The Parent and Child column in The Home Section on Thursday, about therapists who advise couples in troubled marriages to stay together, misstated the name of a therapist who is about to publish a book on the subject, "Soul Searching: Why Psychotherapy Must Promote Moral Responsibility" (Basic Books).
He is Dr.
William Doherty, not Dr.
Walter Dorherty.


John McGovern, 87, Developer Of Processes in Paper Making
John N. McGovern, an innovator in the pulp and paper field and professor emeritus of forestry at the University of Wisconsin, Madison, died on March 21 in a nursing home in Madison.
He was 87 and was a longtime resident of the city.
The cause was cancer, his family said.


Governor Plans Welfare Talks
Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman, reacting to criticism of her remarks about young black men making a game of out-of-wedlock pregnancy, announced plans yesterday for a series of meetings to discuss changes in welfare.
"If I struck a nerve, I think it's a nerve that needed to be struck," she said at a news conference.


Lubrizol (LZ,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


First-Quarter Profit at Nynex Does Not Reach Expectations
The Nynex Corporation reported weaker-than-expected first-quarter earnings yesterday and said that the mild winter and higher interest rates had contributed to the results.
Excluding a charge for employee buyouts, net income at Nynex rose a modest 4.6 percent, to $304 million, or 72 cents a share, in the quarter.
Analysts had expected earnings closer to $316 million, or 75 cents a share.
Revenue increased 2.5 percent, to $3.35 billion.


Reports on Sapp Get N.C.A.A.'s Attention
In the wake of reports that defensive tackle WARREN SAPP failed seven drug tests, the University of Miami's drug-testing program could fall under National Collegiate Athletic Association scrutiny.
FRANK URYASZ, head of the N.C.A.A.'s drug-testing program, said no school is required to have a drug-testing rule, but if it does, it's a violation of N.C.A.A. rules for a school to fail to follow its policies.
That may have happened in the case of Sapp, who was drafted 12th last Saturday by Tampa Bay.


The U.S. Is Still No. 1
Thirty years ago, the dollar was worth four marks; today, it is one-third as much.
Then, Americans could travel across Europe on $5 a day; now, $50 won't pay for bed and bratwurst.
Have the mighty fallen?
Have Japan and Germany, with their swollen currencies, muscled aside Uncle Sam?
Hardly.
It is Washington that orchestrates the Middle East peace process.
America, not Germany or Japan, leads the drive against the spread of the Bomb, coaxes North Korea and confronts Iraq.
When the U.S. went into Somalia, the others followed; when it bolted, the others did, too.
And who defines the relationship with Russia?


Violinist Is Replaced
The violinist Gil Shaham has canceled his appearance with the Westchester Symphony Orchestra on Saturday at the Performing Arts Center at the State University College at Purchase because of the death of his father.
He is to be replaced by Cho-Liang Lin, who will be the soloist in Mozart's Violin Concerto No. 4.
Anthony Aibel is to conduct the program, which includes Tchaikovsky's Fourth Symphony and the premiere of Lowell Liebermann's "Revelry." Information: (914) 251-6200.


Bone Weary, Rescue Crews Are Keeping Hopes Alive
Weary rescue workers burrowed into the dusty epicenter of last week's bombing today, making more grim discoveries but still a day away from recovering the crushed remains of victims trapped in the day-care center and Social Security offices of the Federal building.
Around daybreak, rescuers removed the body of a uniformed marine recruiting officer from the streetside rubble, his body bag draped in an American flag.
As his corpse was carried away, rescue workers doffed their grimy hard hats while others snapped to salute.


Russian Minister Opposing U.S. Missile Plan
Two weeks before a summit meeting in Moscow between Presidents Clinton and Boris N. Yeltsin, Russia's Foreign Minister today cautioned the Administration and Congress against pursuing plans for a new short-range missile defense system.
He said moving ahead with such plans could slow progress on disarmament agreements and undermine a fragile new Russian-American partnership.
The missile defense system has been the subject of several recent meetings between the two sides in which American officials have tried to meet some Russian concerns before the summit meeting takes place.


On the Outside, Looking Back; Gooden Ponders His Troubles, the Game and His Return
It had the dusky, surreal atmosphere of a dream state.
In that uncertain period between light and dark, the sun had set beyond the trees and the lights of the small ball park had been turned on.
From the young ballplayers came noises, more like chirps, that rose in the warm, thick air.
Nearby, there was the smell of hot dogs being grilled.
This was last week, springtime in Florida, an unlikely and unquestionably grave time for one of those involved in the game.


Minnesota Mining &amp; Manufacturing Co.(MMM,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Arizona Trailer Park Owner Remembered the Wrong Man
The man described by trailer park residents here to investigators and news reporters as Timothy J. McVeigh was apparently not the man arrested in the bombing of the Federal building in Oklahoma City, but another man, the park owner said tonight.
Compounding the confusion, the park owner said that a Tim McVeigh had indeed lived for a time at the trailer park some months earlier.


Ref Gets the Rangers' Seventh-Man Award
From a Ranger fan's perspective, Referee Bill McCreary could have been named one of the three stars of last night's game.
And if the New Yorkers indeed make the playoffs, McCreary might just deserve an assist, as well.
In another must-win situation for the Rangers, it was a McCreary non-call that not only enraged Washington Coach Jim Schoenfeld, but also allowed the Rangers to score their second goal.
McCreary noticed Schoenfeld complaining, however, and assessed the Capitals a two-minute bench infraction.
Forty-six seconds later, the Rangers had a power-play goal, and a 3-0 lead at 6 minutes 25 seconds of the first period.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; The world-class sign-scape of Times Square attracts its first Chinese marketer.
TIMES SQUARE will soon add another language to the many tongues used to pitch products from the colorful cacophony of its oversized outdoor posters: Chinese.
The San Jiu Enterprise Group, a powerful Chinese company with Western investors and ties to the Chinese military, has signed a yearlong contract to sponsor a billboard atop two buildings at the southeast corner of Seventh Avenue and 48th Street.
The sign will promote a drug company owned by San Jiu (pronounced San JOE), the 999 Pharmaceutical Company, which describes itself as China's largest.


Raptors Found to Track Prey's Ultraviolet Trail
BECAUSE kestrels, as they hover above open land, can see in the ultraviolet light range, they are apparently able to spot the highways of voles and other small mammals and swoop on their prey, according to a Finnish study.
The birds can see the trails from far overhead because the voles, like other mammals such as mice, dogs and wolves, mark their trails and territory with urine or feces.
The waste material is not only tagged with the odor of their species but also marks their highways because it absorbs ultraviolet light.


Crews Near Center Of Explosion Rubble
Rescue workers burrowed toward the center of the bombed Federal building in Oklahoma City yesterday and hope to reach the collapsed floors that contained the day-care center and Social Security offices today.
As friends and family members gathered for the first of the funerals, the body of a marine recruiter was discovered in the rubble, raising the death toll to 80, with about 100 people still unaccounted for.


Fritz Cos. (FRTZ,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


By Design; Westward Ho!
A hint of the Wild West wafted through several fall collections.
The gamblers' fancy vests and striped coats can wait until the cool weather, but spring and summer are the right times for cowboy shirts and jeans.
Bloomingdale's is going for a sophisticated take on western wear by concentrating on satin for a dressed-up weekend look, whether the destination is Westhampton or West Broadway.


Hershey Foods Corp.(HSY,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 2


Picking Up the Pieces


Hillhaven Agrees to Vencor's Buyout Offer
The Hillhaven Corporation, the nation's second-largest chain of nursing homes, accepted a buyout offer valued at $1.4 billion today from the much smaller Vencor Inc., a specialized hospital chain, just a month after turning away another bidder in a campaign to stay independent.
The deal would be the latest in a wave of mergers that has swept the medical industry.
But many on Wall Street took the view that if the merger went through, Vencor would turn from a small, rapidly growing company into a large, sluggish one.
While shares of Hillhaven rose $3.875, to $28.375, on the New York Stock Exchange, Vencor stock plunged $4.375, to $32.625, nearing the $31.75 limit that allows Hillhaven to pull out of the deal.


Halliburton Co. (HAL,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


American Express Names Ad Executive
John D. Hayes, a longtime agency executive, was named yesterday to the new position of executive vice president for global advertising at the American Express Company, handling duties that will range from managing the company's agency relationships to overseeing development of the creative parts of campaigns.
Mr.
Hayes, 40, will assume responsibilities previously handled by Aldo Papone, who has been a senior adviser for advertising.
Mr.
Papone, 62, will continue serving American Express as a marketing adviser.


USX-Delhi Group (DGP,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Insteel Industries (III,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


The Speaker's Secret Money
Americans are entitled to know who is bankrolling House Speaker Newt Gingrich.
He seemed to recognize that principle last November when he pledged that his political action committee, Gopac, would disclose future donors, though he declined, inexcusably, to extend this new openness to past gifts that helped finance his climb to power.
But five months later, secrecy still prevails even for new gifts.
The organization refuses to identify its corporate donors, and the group's recently released list of 1,700 individual donors does not provide business affiliations essential for understanding which special interests are investing in Mr.
Gingrich, and how much.
The


Exxon Corp.(XON,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


SOCCER REPORT
United States
Carlos Queiroz of Portugal is the leading candidate to replace Bora Milutinovic as coach of the national team, according to Hank Steinbrecher, the secretary general of the United States Soccer Federation.


EG&amp;G Inc.(EGG,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 2


Sports of The Times; Strawberry's Tax Felony Is 'Nothing'
DARRYL STRAWBERRY was wearing stripes, surely an omen.
Muted stripes in his shiny bluish-gray suit, burgundy stripes in his white shirt.
He was about to be sentenced in room 41 of United States District Court yesterday for having pleaded guilty to failure to pay about $100,000 in income taxes on money earned at various card shows.
He had agreed to a three-month prison term.
"The United States of America," the court clerk announced, "versus Darryl Strawberry."


2 Indicted in Kickback Scheme
Two former loan officers of banks in southern New Jersey have been indicted in a kickback scheme.
Louis A. Nemeth, 46, of Columbus, a former vice president of United Jersey Bank South in Vineland, and Edward Grieb, 54, of Vincentown, a former vice president of the failed Security Savings Bank in Vineland, were named by a Federal grand jury.
Mr.
Nemeth was accused of taking $144,000 from three borrowers, and Mr.
Grieb, $2,500.


Open Wounds in Rwanda
Rwanda's Tutsi-led army massacred as many as 2,000 Rwandan Hutu refugees Saturday in a grim reminder that the horrendous ethnic slaughter that began last spring is not yet over.
The extremist Hutu militias that incited last year's mass murder of Tutsi this time appear to have forced their fellow Hutu to charge suicidally into the ranks of waiting army troops.
The two ethnic armed forces share the blame for this latest tragedy, though not in equal measure.
The army's legitimate goal is to close down refugee camps that have become seedbeds of violence and get Hutu to return to their villages.
The Hutu militias, which control most of these refugee camps, simply want to resume the civil war.
But the right way to empty the camps is by persuasion, not deadly force.
Now it will be even harder to persuade Hutu they can safely return home.


Ashland Inc.(ASH,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


New Technique Provides Biopsies Much Faster and More Accurately
WORRY was written all over the woman's face when she entered the New York radiologist's office.
There were at least four lumps in her breast that she could feel.
Were they simply benign manifestations of her chronic fibrocystic breast disease, or did one or more of the lumps harbor cancer?
Ordinarily, getting the answer would have required a series of large needle punctures and a tissue analysis that would take one or two days.
But the patient would have an answer in 20 minutes.
With an ultrasound machine providing a periscopic view of the inside of the breast, the radiologist, Dr.
Doreen Liebeskind, inserted a very thin hollow needle into one lump at a time, extracted cells from each lump, placed them on slides and handed them to Dr.
Grace Yang, a cytopathologist, for staining.
The radiologist repeated these fine-needle aspirations of the woman's lumps until Dr.
Yang was sure of the diagnosis.


Don't Forget Cairo
To the Editor:
In "Have You Heard?" (column, April 12), Thomas L. Friedman discusses the tragic assassination of Malcolm Kerr when he was president of the American University of Beirut, as well as the necessity for the United States to continue supporting educational institutions overseas that encourage American ideals and interests.


Vencor Inc.(VC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


A Clash Over a Trove of Original Scores
Hundreds of original manuscripts that include symphonies by Beethoven in his helter-skelter scrawl and operas by Mozart in his neat penmanship are the subject of one of the most politically charged cultural-heritage cases in Europe.
The extraordinary collection of 400 scores, which some musicologists say is the single most valuable batch of music manuscripts, worth perhaps hundreds of millions of dollars, was once the centerpiece of the Prussian State Library in Berlin.


Left-Right Battle Shapes Up In French Election Runoff
Mayor Jacques Chirac of Paris, the conservative candidate for the French presidency, and Lionel Jospin, his Socialist opponent, began mapping conflicting strategies today for winning a majority of voters in the May 7 runoff between them.
Mr.
Jospin's surprise first-place showing in the first round of voting on Sunday, with 23.3 percent to only 20.8 percent for Mr.
Chirac, the presumed front-runner, lifted the Socialists' hopes of holding on to the presidency next month after the two-term Socialist President, Francois Mitterrand, leaves office, and set up a classic French left-right confrontation in the second round.


Apogee Enterprises Inc.(APOG,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 25


Less Crime on the Boardwalk
The safest street in the nation?
Police Chief Nicholas Rifice says it is the Boardwalk here.
His evidence: State Police figures released yesterday by city officials that say crime in the gambling resort dropped 18.7 percent last year and 42.6 since 1991.


Amoco Corp.(AN,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Omnicare Inc.(OCR,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Rochester Gas &amp; Electric Corp.(RGS,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


President Is Criticized By Oklahoma Senators
The debate over whether provocative free speech has fostered domestic terrorism sharpened today as Oklahoma's two Senators criticized some of President Clinton's remarks in the aftermath of the Oklahoma City bombing.
"This incident wasn't caused by Rush Limbaugh; this incident wasn't caused by people who think government is too big," Senator Don Nickles of Oklahoma declared.
He said the President's remarks on Monday against "promoters of paranoia" on the airwaves were vague and "inappropriate."


Only a Scant Increase in Employee-Benefit Costs
After years of absorbing hefty increases in what they pay for health care and other fringe benefits, the nation's employers seem to have regained control of this prominent business expense.
Benefit costs edged up only two-tenths of 1 percent in the first quarter of 1995, the Labor Department reported today, the smallest rise in eight years.


Hospitality Franchise Systems Inc.(HFS,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Judge Prohibits City From Evicting East Village Squatters
A state judge yesterday prohibited New York City from evicting squatters from three dilapidated city-owned buildings that city officials said were dangerous.
Instead, the judge ordered the city to come up with a plan for repairs to insure that the buildings were safe to occupy.
Justice Elliott Wilk of State Supreme Court rejected the city's request to remove the squatters immediately from three buildings on East 13th Street in Manhattan, which officials say are so rundown they present "imminent danger" to their occupants.


Some Swing Into Spring


No Headline
"The law is keeping up with social change: the stereotype of the divorced father as just a deadbeat dad is breaking down. It is true that some fathers just want to pay less child support, but others are splendid and nurturing." ELLEN J. EFFRON, former head of the custody committee of the A.B.A.  [ A1:2. ]


2 College Students Plead Guilty In Cross-Burning Outside Home
Two college students have pleaded guilty to Federal civil rights charges in the burning of a cross in the front yard of a black family in Dutchess County last year, Mary Jo White, the United States Attorney for the Southern District of New York, announced today.
The authorities said the students, Dennis Stafford and Robert Hemmer Jr., both 20, plotted the cross-burning at a party in the tiny community of Poughquag.
A third student, Adam Scheider, also 20, is expected to plead guilty on Thursday, the authorities said.


Sale of Forest Is Seen as Threat to Songbird Haven
Standing perfectly still with his eyes closed, surrounded by oak trees and tulip poplars more than 140 feet tall and nearly 300 years old, Hobson Calhoun shot out his right arm and pointed.
"Over there. An ovenbird." Then his left arm extended.
"A wood thrush." In the next few minutes, he heard chickadees, cardinals, vireos and, way over there, a tufted titmouse.
But delightful as they were, the chirps and whirrs from songbirds in the Belt Woods National Environmental Area here in the Washington suburbs were ever-present reminders of an effort that conservationists say could scatter their voices elsewhere.


Newsprint Producers Hear Publishers' Price Troubles
More newspapers are likely to close or consolidate editions because of sharply rising newsprint prices, newspaper publishers meeting here said today.
At this year's convention of the Newspaper Association of America, the publishers trade group, no topic is more urgent than the cost of newsprint, which has climbed by as much as 40 percent in recent months.
The price rise has been cited as the reason for a series of newspaper cuts nationwide, for the closing last week of The Houston Post and for the recent consolidation of The Milwaukee Journal and Sentinel.


Muted Joy in Mudville, but Big League Ball Is Back
At least on this day, the dark clouds hovering overhead were only in the sky.
After a labor-fueled, 256-day hiatus that included 234 days of a players' strike, major league baseball teams played baseball tonight.
Batters, not negotiators, determined the outcome.
Indeed, unlike the labor dispute, there was an outcome, and some outcome it was.


Ewing May Be Taking Final Shot At Elusive N.B.A. Championship
Last Friday in Boston, Patrick Ewing left his seat on the bench during a timeout to shake hands with Bill Russell.
Was that a good omen for the Knicks, that Ewing acknowledged a player who personifies winning championships?
Will Ewing finally get one after 10 seasons in the National Basketball Association, or will he be denied a championship again?


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-13  VOW, BUT NO PLAN ON DOLLAR  The United States and its main economic allies ended a meeting with a vague vow to "strengthen their efforts" in both short-term tactics and long-term strategy to support the beleaguered dollar.
A1  RWANDA AID IN QUESTION  The killing of 2,000 Hutu by Rwandan troops is a major setback to efforts to bring international aid to that African nation.
A3  SOVIET HISTORY REVISITED  The reams of documents that have emerged from once-inaccessible Soviet archives have produced dramatic revelations, but also much frustration.
A10  THE OTHER SERBS  To Bosnian Serb nationalists, Serbs who have chosen to remain in Bosnia's capital, Sarajevo, are deeply disturbing.
A8  MORATORIUM IN CHECHNYA  Concerned that Russia's V-E Day celebration could turn into a public relations fiasco, President Boris N. Yeltsin suspended combat in Chechnya starting Friday.
A8  TURKISH PULLBACK IN IRAQ  Turkey has withdrawn 20,000 of its troops from northern Iraq, leaving 12,000 to continue operations against rebel Kurds.
A12  PALESTINIAN'S DEATH  A Palestinian prisoner's death, days after his arrest, prompted an investigation into possible abuses by his Israeli interrogators.
A12  ARGENTINE ARMY ADMITS KILLINGS  Argentina's Army Chief has admitted that the military persecuted and killed political opponents during the "dirty war" against leftists and dissidents from 1976 to 1983.
A13  NUCLEAR STANDOFF IN JAPAN  A Japanese Governor temporarily barred a ship carrying highly radioactive nuclear waste from unloading its cargo.
A13  Rio Verde Journal: American finds riches in Brazil's farmland.
A4  National A14-23  BROTHERS CHARGED IN BOMBING  Two brothers held as witnesses in the bombing of the Oklahoma City Federal building were charged with joining an ex-Army sergeant in a bomb-building conspiracy.
A1  WHY BOMB OKLAHOMA CITY?
Investigators are trying to determine why the bombers chose Oklahoma City as their target, but so far no clear answer has emerged.
A1  THE TACTICS OF HATE GROUPS  Whoever blew up the Federal building used tactics similar to those urged by anti-Government advocates of "leaderless resistance," civil liberties experts say.
A22  CONFLICT OVER NEW POWERS  Differences between two Federal agencies are hampering the Administration's effort to obtain new powers to combat terrorism.
A23  What part do politics play in the Oklahoma City bombing?
A23  LETTER FROM A SERIAL BOMBER  Federal officials said that the serial bomber in the Unabom case sent two letters to the East Coast, shortly before a package bomb killed a timber trade group executive in California.A1  QUESTIONS OVER BOMB'S TARGET  Federal officials said the bomb that killed the executive was apparently intended for the former head of the organization.
A16  PRISTINE LAND MAY BE AT RISK  More than 500 acres of untouched land in Maryland may not remain so much longer.
St.
Barnabas Episcopal Church wants to sell the land to a developer for $9.4 million.
A14  NEW 'CREW-PAIRING' RULES  The F.A.A. now requires airlines to stop matching inexperienced pilots with inexperienced co-pilots.
A14  HIGH COURT HEARS PARADE CASE  The Supreme Court heard arguments on whether the organizers of Boston's St.
Patrick's Day parade can exclude gay marchers.
A15  HOW TO LOBBY EFFECTIVELY  Special Pleaders: Georgia Pacific, a wood products company, set out to use new legislation to derail a pending Federal inquiry.
A18  Education Page B8  H. Patrick Swygert returns to Howard University as its new president.
Term papers get a new-age look (and sound) with CD-ROMs.
Metro Digest B1  DEEPER SPENDING CUTS PREDICTED  As Mayor Giuliani put final details on the second budget of his tenure, administration officials said that the city now faces a budget gap of nearly $3.1 billion, forcing still deeper spending cuts.
A1  RETHINKING FATHERS' RIGHTS  Courts and legislatures are rethinking some tenets of divorce law with fathers' rights in mind.
By and large the changes aim to give fathers more access to their children and sometimes to reduce their child support payments.
A1  Sports B9-15  Living Section C1-8  Health Page C9  Arts/Entertainment C11-18  Business Digest D1  Obituaries D24-25  Editorials/Op-Ed A24-25  Editorials  Adult behavior in Albany.
France votes for action.
Mr.
Rubin says no.
What the court guards guard.
Letters  Bob Herbert: The longest wait.
Thomas L. Friedman: The cold peace.
Ingo Hasselbach: Extremism -- a global network.
Chronicle B2  Crossword C17


A Bombing Foretold, In Extreme-Right 'Bible'
The scene is eerily familiar: a rented truck filled with ammonium nitrate fertilizer blows up in front of a Federal Government building shortly after 9 A.M., killing hundreds of people.
But before it happened in Oklahoma City, it happened in a book called "The Turner Diaries," an explicitly racist and anti-Semitic work of political fiction that Federal officials have called the Bible of the extremist right.


Class Notes; Children, culture, learning: Harvard tutor-mentors engage minds through shared heritage.
Steve Lissaint, a sixth grader, used to drag his backpack and jacket down the hallways of the Louis Agassiz School, not really interested in class.
He averted his eyes.
He would not smile.
But in recent months, something has changed.
Now, twice a week, he races happily down the stairs to the basement cafeteria with about two dozen others to a mentoring and tutoring program called Basics.


Aviation Agency Issues Rule to Insure Experience in the Cockpit
The Federal Aviation Administration yesterday issued a rule requiring airlines to stop matching inexperienced pilots with inexperienced co-pilots.
Among the many other provisions of this new "crew-pairing rule," which takes effect in four months, is one requiring that if the co-pilot is new in the job, then the pilot must assume control on all takeoffs and landings in bad weather.


Armco Inc.(AS,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Classic Dishes, Simple and Colorful, for a Spring Evening
WITH the arrival of longer, warmer days, my wife and I again look forward to casual dinners with friends on our screened-in porch.
On a mild spring weekend afternoon after a game of petanque, the French equivalent of boccie, on our back lawn, the menu of choice is often a bowl of soup and a tray of open-face sandwiches in the style of the Danish smorrebrod.
Evenings are still cool, so I usually serve a hearty, warming soup like the rutabaga bisque in today's menu.
The sandwiches -- each consisting of several colorful and complementary tidbits of food layered on a single slice of bread, toast or a cracker -- can be prepared ahead and are easy and inexpensive to make, providing you select toppings from what you have on hand.


Airborne Freight Corp.(ABF,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Israel Begins Inquiry on Death Of Palestinian Held for 3 Days
A Palestinian prisoner died today in an Israeli hospital three days after his arrest, prompting an investigation by the Justice Ministry into possible abuses by his interrogators.
Andre Rosenthal, a lawyer for the family, said the prisoner, Abd al-Samed Hreizat, 30, had suffered severe brain damage.


Doctor Caused Doris Duke's Death With Overdoses, Report Says
A court-appointed investigator looking into the death of Doris Duke, the billionaire tobacco heiress, has concluded that her doctor caused her death with a fatal overdose of morphine and that the principal executor of her estate had squandered hundreds of thousands of dollars since she died.
In a report unsealed in Surrogate Court yesterday, the investigator, Richard H. Kuh, said that although Miss Duke was terminally ill, her death was intentionally hastened by the repeated and increasing doses of morphine that her doctor administered.


G.M. to Sponsor AIDS Supplement
The General Motors Corporation has agreed for the first time to be the sole sponsor of a special magazine advertising supplement promoting the annual "Seventh on Sale" AIDS benefit.
General Motors will spend about $150,000 to sponsor the 48-page supplement, which will accompany the 250,000 copies of the May issue of Vogue magazine to be distributed in the New York metropolitan area.


Dieting, Bite by Sound Bite
DR.
STEPHEN GULLO has spent the last 20 years talking excess poundage off the rich and famous.
His is an interdisciplinary approach: one part common sense, one part cognitive psychology, one part fire-and-brimstone diet coaching.
"Molly," he said at our first meeting four weeks ago when I met him and began his diet program.
"You haven't come this far in life to take orders from a bowl of starch called pasta, from a bag of fat called potato chips, from a glass of sugar called wine!"


Rio Verde Journal; Americans Home on the Booming Range, in Brazil
Out here in Brazil's big sky country, where the cows outnumber people and the billboards tout weed killers, Douglas Ferrell looks through the window of his air-conditioned tractor cab and sees dollar signs stretching to the horizon.
"I buy new land every year -- you can make 40 percent on your investment out here," said the 40-year-old soy and cotton farmer from Pennsylvania.
Starting with a 1,200-acre farm a little over a decade ago, Mr.
Ferrell has increased his holdings fivefold, bought 1,100 head of cattle and the latest in tractors and combines, and started construction on the tallest farmhouse -- two stories -- and the biggest grain silos ever seen in these parts.


Not Giving in to Terrorism
A young New Jersey woman is going back to Israel, where her sister died in a terrorist bombing April 9.
The woman's father, Stephen Flatow, said he was not worried about his 18-year-old daughter, Gail, resuming her studies in the land where 20-year-old Alisa was killed.
"The message is, you don't give in to terrorism," he said.


Yeltsin Orders 3-Week Halt To War on Chechen Rebels
Clearly nervous that Russia's World War II victory celebration could turn into a public relations fiasco, President Boris N. Yeltsin has decreed a halt to all combat in the breakaway region of Chechnya, beginning Friday, while dozens of Western leaders are in Moscow for V-E Day.
The four-month-old war, which many critics in Russia and abroad have called needlessly brutal and prolonged, has practically leveled the regional capital of Grozny, and several other Chechen cities and towns.
President Clinton, although at first hesitant to condemn the Russian military action in Chechnya, almost decided not to participate in the ceremonies in Moscow marking the Allied victory in Europe in May because he did not want to seem supportive of the Russian action.


White House Nod for Pageant
Miss America contestants performed 226,237 hours of community service last year.
That was enough to win the equivalent of an honorable mention in the Presidents Service Award program.


A-Waste Ship, Briefly Barred, Reaches Japan
In an embarrassing mix-up for Japan's sensitive plutonium-based energy program, a Japanese Governor on Tuesday temporarily barred a ship carrying highly radioactive nuclear waste from docking and unloading its cargo.
The Governor, Morio Kimura of Aomori Prefecture in northern Japan, eventually relented after receiving written assurances from the national Government that his province would not become the permanent storage site for the waste.


In America; The Longest Wait
Everyone's eyes, except those of the very small children, are melancholy.
The very small children think it is all a game, like cowboys and Indians, and soon the dead will get up, brush themselves off and have a good hearty laugh at all the excitement they caused.
Everyone else is locked into the terrible, searing reality that one woman described as a "nightmare far beyond hell." Even the weather has been perverse.
Until yesterday it was depressingly cold and dank, with periods of lightning, dangerously high winds, rain and sleet.


Metropolitan Diary
IRA RICHER would drop by the Flavor-Cup in Greenwich Village after taking his kids to school.
The coffee store, established in 1903, had, he said, a filtered, special Hopperlike light, unique in New York.
Sylvia Carter, a food writer, had her U.P.S. packages delivered there and, with a few other coffee aficionados, would often sit on the bags of unroasted coffee beans and talk with Ron Bowen, who had worked in the store since his early teens.
"He was a gentle, caring man," Ms.
Carter said of Mr.
Bowen.
A few weeks ago, he died of a heart attack at age 51.
Since then, bouquets of dried flowers and notes of affection have been pushed through the door gates.


What the Court Guards Really Guard
Courtroom guards are deployed to protect juries that are sequestered in sensational cases, as all avid watchers of the O. J. Simpson trial well know.
But in New York State they also guard their own interests and plunder the system for overtime pay.
Uniquely in the United States, the criminal courts of New York are obliged, whether the case is sensational or ordinary, to sequester juries whenever they deliberate, watching over them at mealtimes and keeping them overnight in hotels.
Some sequestering is obviously needed, but unnecessary mandatory sequestration costs taxpayers $2 million to $4 million each year.
The State Legislature knows this is a galling waste of tax dollars solely to keep the guards' union supplied with bountiful overtime.
This year, when every dollar has heavy claims, when the state is cutting so many services, when the money could be better used to pay for proposed jury reforms, the Legislature's intransigence is especially unacceptable.


Brooklyn's Indiana Jones Unearths Rail Treasure
ROBERT DIAMOND pried open a manhole cover in the middle of Atlantic Avenue at Court Street in Brooklyn and led the way down to his 151-year-old railroad tunnel.
"Look, there it is," he said, pointing into impenetrable darkness.
Technically speaking, Mr.
Diamond, a 35-year-old trolley and urban transportation consultant, does not really own the half-mile-long tunnel any more than the archaeologist Howard Carter owned Tutankhamen's tomb, which he found in 1922, or Columbus owned the Western Hemisphere.
But like these men, Mr.
Diamond can claim the title that comes with discovery and, unquestionably, were it not for him, no one would know that the old tunnel was there.
And nobody loves the tunnel the way he does.


Where Traffic School Is a Laugh a Minute
THE dozen people gathered in a small room at the Marriott Hotel here appeared to have little in common, apart from their grim expressions and the Problem.
A man in tennis clothes shuffled up front to confess his crime.
"I'm Dave Yobs," he said, "and I did not come to a complete stop at a stop sign."
The ritual, which would continue over the next four hours, was part of AAA Comic Relief Traffic School, the answer for speeders, rolling stoppers and U-turn lovers who, by attending its classes, can legally conceal a traffic violation from their insurance companies.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article on April 17 about the backlog of civil cases in Federal courts in New York referred incorrectly at one point to the court of Judge I. Leo Glasser.
His court, the United States District Court for the Eastern District of New York, is part of the Second Circuit; it is not part of the Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit.
A map with the article misidentified the circuit that includes Puerto Rico.
It is the First, not the Second.


MICHIGAN FARMER AND BROTHER TIED TO BOMB SUSPECT
Two brothers jailed as witnesses in the Oklahoma City bombing were charged today with engaging in a bomb-building conspiracy in Michigan with the former Army sergeant who is accused of setting the blast.
The criminal complaint filed in a Federal District Court in Michigan did not link the two directly to the Oklahoma bombing.
But it said the brothers, James D. Nichols, 41, an organic farmer in Decker, Mich., and Terry Nichols, 40, built "bottle bombs" and experimented with other explosives in 1992 and 1994 with Timothy J. McVeigh, who has been accused of planting the Oklahoma City bomb.


Magnetek Inc.(MAG,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Why Driving Prostitutes Out Doesn't Work
To the Editor:
In your April 18 news article on prostitution on Jerome Avenue in the Bronx, you mischaracterize me as "bluntly dismissive" of the citizens who are hostile to prostitutes and to the presence of our care van, which offers sex workers condoms, sandwiches and social services.


Maxicare Health Plans (MAXI,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Borg Warner Security Corp.(BOR,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


A Boy's Long Brush With Death; A Toddler Survives After Hours Without Oxygen or a Pulse
In the Pediatric Intensive Care Unit at Montefiore Medical Center in the Bronx, a chunky dark-haired toddler named Jesus Dennis lies strapped to a bed, with an array of tubes delivering pain killers and sedatives into his veins and a thick white liquid for nourishment into his stomach.
But he is alive.
Jesus is here because on Easter, the police say, he splashed water on his stepfather and in response the man held him underwater in the bathtub until he was unconscious.
He arrived in the emergency room of Bronx Municipal Hospital Center without a pulse or blood pressure, apparently dead.


Replacing Rap's Anger With a Sense of Humor
"Friday," a high-energy comedy starring the rap artist Ice Cube, isn't aimed at anyone much over the age of 18, but it would be a mistake for wider audiences to dismiss it.
This is a ruder, cruder version of the hip-hop movie "House Party," and it offers a fascinating glimpse at the way street life enters pop culture.
Like rap and much stand-up comedy, "Friday" is based on opened-eyed acceptance of drug use and guns as part of its characters' lives.
The film, written by Ice Cube and D. J. Pooh, makes fun of those realities and replaces rap's anger with humor.
The action takes place on an ordinary Friday, on a working-class street in Los Angeles that could be out of "Boyz 'n' the Hood," the film that proved Ice Cube could act.
He plays Craig, a 22-year-old who has just lost his job, and he is surrounded by deliberate caricatures: kind-hearted Mama, strait-laced younger sister and a father who is the focus of much toilet humor of the "Dumb and Dumber" kind.
Craig's jealous girlfriend has three-inch red fingernails and a hair weave down to her waist, but he is attracted to the "good" girl in the neighborhood, the one with cute short hair.
The humor is often lame.
But Gary Gray, who has directed music videos for Ice Cube and Queen Latifah, has put together a slick, watchable movie that gets by on the strength of its ensemble acting and the constant, enlivening soundtrack featuring Dr.
Dre, Cypress Hill and many others.


Bond Prices Off on Fear Of Inflation
Prices of Treasury securities dropped yesterday after a higher-than-expected consumer confidence report, which suggested that inflation could accelerate.
The Conference Board's confidence index in April rose to 105.5 from a revised 100.2 in March.
Economists had expected the confidence index to slip to 99.9.


Pass the Puck, Get the Buck
WAYNE GRETZKY, who took a $2.3 million pay cut this season, still drew the top salary in the National Hockey League this season.
In a survey compiled last week by the N.H.L.
Players Association and obtained by The Canadian Press news agency, Gretzky's 1994-95 salary was $6,540,028.
His contract was structured so that he would earn $2.3 million less this season than last.


Accounts
*
Titan Industries Ltd., Bangalore, India, part of the Tata Group, to the Lowe Group, London, a unit of the Interpublic Group of Cos., to handle the introduction in Europe of the company's quartz analog watches.
The billings were estimated at $10 million. *
Anheuser-Busch Inc., St.
Louis, to Heater/Easdon Advertising, Boston, to handle Busch NA, a new non-alcoholic brew.
The billings were not disclosed.


Quartet Inaugurates a Hall
There is an odd dearth of really decent chamber-music venues in New York.
The best-known groups tend to appear at high-profile halls that are truthfully a bit too large or diffuse for the full sound of a string quartet or piano trio to make itself felt.
It is a pleasure to hear a good ensemble in a space like the 92d Street Y or Florence Gould Hall, where acoustics are ideally suited to intimate voices.
Or, one is pleased to add, in the handsome new Lang Recital Hall at Hunter College, which was officially inaugurated with a performance by the Cassatt Quartet on Monday night.
The philanthropist Eugene M. Lang gave money for the renovation of this space in memory of his mother, Ida K. Lang.
It is to be used not only for chamber music and recitals but also for movie screenings and student theater.
On the strength of the Cassatt's performance, the acoustics are superb: warm, close and discreetly resonant.


Rangers Exercise Their Patience as Kovalev Grows Up on the Job
With four games left in the regular season, including Wednesday night against Tampa Bay at Madison Square Garden, the Rangers could still use a little help from anybody not on Mark Messier's top line.
The way Coach Colin Campbell sees it, Aleksei Kovalev is one of those guys.
Despite his marvelous assist Monday night on Sergei Nemchinov's goal in the second period, a goal that proved to be the game-winner in the Rangers' 5-4 victory over the Washington Capitals, Kovalev played little after his blind cross-ice pass.


N.B.A. Western Conference Playoffs
San Antonio, 62-20, First Place, Midwest Division vs.
Denver Nuggets, 41-41, Fourth Place, Midwest Division Key Players San Antonio: David Robinson has had trouble venturing into the Land of Mutombo before, but Dennis Rodman's work underneath has freed him up to score more.
If Chuck Person gets hot off bench, it's over.
Key Players Denver: Mahmoud Abdul-Rauf has missed 5 of last 7 games with bruised right leg and sprained right ankle.
Reggie Williams and Dikembe Mutombo need to step up offensively.
The rookie Jalen Rose has to neutralize Vinny Del Negro.
Season Review San Antonio: Rodman's motorcycle accident notwithstanding, Spurs are unflappable on the road (29-12).
After a slow start they have been on fire, winning their last six and a league-best 62 overall.
Season Review Denver: Moving from the front office back onto the floor after Dan Issel and Gene Littles could not get the Nuggets to perform, Bernie Bickerstaff somehow guided them away from the lottery and into the postseason with a late rush.
Prediction: Spurs won't go down like Seattle a year ago.
Spurs in four.
Phoenix Suns, 59-23, First Place, Pacific Division vs.
Portland Trail Blazers, 44-38, Fourth place, Pacific Division Key players Phoenix: Charles Barkley imposes his will on a series like only Michael Jordan can.
Whether Kevin Johnson can contain Rod Strickland is tantamount.
Dan Majerle needs to find his stroke by the second round, or Suns are in trouble.
Key Players Portland: Cliff Robinson has picked up some of the scoring slack since Clyde Drexler left for Houston.
Otis Thorpe has given them more bulk, but Blazers offense no longer puts a premium on creativity.
Season Review Phoenix: Danny Manning's injury before all-star break cast a pall over a franchise seemingly destined for the finals.
Barkley has carried their hopes for a ring on his shoulders since then.
Who says you can't win the N.B.A. championship without a dominant center?
Detroit and Chicago, from 1989 to 1993, that's who.
Season Review Portland: New coach, new style, but they can't hide the wrinkles.
Terry Porter and Buck Williams are role players now.
The Blazers, once favored and omnipotent in the West, did very well to finish above .500.
Prediction: Rivarly or not, it's a Sir Charles Show.
Phoenix in four.
Utah Jazz, 60-22, Second Place, Midwest Division vs.
Houston Rockets, 47-35, Third Place, Midwest Division  Key Players Utah: League's all-time assist leader (John Stockton) and premier power forward (Karl Malone) in sync like they've never been.
Key to this series, however, is Jeff Hornacek's all-around play.
Key Players Houston: The Drexler Factor is huge.
He can post up Hornacek and create in the open floor.
Worry not for Hakeem Olajuwon, worry for his teammates.
Vernon Maxwell needs to stick the open 3-pointer and Kenny Smith must play with more poise than panache.
Season Review Utah: The Jazz get along on and off the floor like no other team.
Chemistry may not win a title, but it certainly makes up for the lack of an All-Star center.
After a brief lull, they enter playoffs as league's hottest team, having won 7 straight.
Season Review Houston: They began their repeat quest with an amazing November run.
What happened?
Shaky backcourt, Maxwell's temper and general team malaise.
May become first defending champion to get knocked off in first round since Philadelphia in 1984.
Prediction: Great theater, but Utah controls tempo.
Jazz in five.
Seattle SuperSonics, 57-25, Second place, Pacific Division vs.
Los Angeles Lakers, 48-34, Third place, Pacific Division Key Players Seattle: So many starters lingering on the bench, so few minutes.
More important than Shawn Kemp and Gary Payton sparkling in this series is how well Kendall Gill and Sam Perkins defend and shoot from the perimeter.
Key Players Lakers: Cedric Ceballos playing well since his return from injury.
Challenge of Nick Van Exel and Eddie Jones is to break the most-aggressive trapping defense in basketball.
Season Review Seattle: Sonics as dangerous as Orlando when they get on a run, but also as disastrous when they fall apart offensively.
Though Payton's defense and Kemp's power inside compensate, their half-court set is not up to Finals specifications after 82 games.
Season Review Lakers: Jerry West has slowly rebuilt an emerging Western Conference power from the ground up.
It's not Showtime II, but the Lakers may be one player away from title contention again.
Prediction: Sonics lost four of five to Lakers in regular season, but wake up for the playoffs.
Seattle in five.


Kerkorian Seeks Chrysler Vote On Buyout Offer
Despite the Chrysler Corporation's rejection of his $22.8 billion takeover bid, Kirk Kerkorian appears to be far from ending his battle for control of the company.
In an angry letter to Chrysler's chairman yesterday, Mr.
Kerkorian accused the company of thwarting his efforts to obtain financing for his proposal and challenged it to put his $55-a-share bid to a shareholder vote.


Montana Joins Racing Team
JOE MONTANA didn't waste time finding a way to spend his retirement.
A week after leaving the National Football League, Montana announced yesterday that he has become a partner in the Target-Chip Ganassi Racing Team.
The team is based in Indianapolis and is sponsored by Target discount stores based in Minneapolis.


Burdened by Yen, Mazda Will Cut Production Further in Quarter
With the surging yen hindering its car sales in the United States, the Mazda Motor Corporation said today that it would slash production in the current quarter more than twice as much as it had anticipated.
The troubled auto maker, which is based in Hiroshima, said it would close most of its assembly lines in Japan for 6 to 11 days over the next month or two.
It will cut total production for the April-June quarter by 45,000 vehicles, or 22.5 percent.
Earlier this month, Mazda said it would close factories at a pace sufficient to cut production by 20,000 vehicles.


Erickson Cited for D.W.I.
The Seattle Seahawks first-year coach DENNIS ERICKSON was cited April 15 for drunken driving.
Erickson, whose University of Miami teams won two national titles, was stopped on Interstate 5 near Marysville.
His blood-alcohol reading was .23.
A level of .10 is the legal limit in the state.
His arraignment is scheduled for May 3. (AP)


A Verismo 'Giselle' With a Leavening of Passion
If it's "Giselle," it must be spring, or at least time for American Ballet Theater's annual season at the Metropolitan Opera House.
Opting for what seemed a sure bet, the company led off on Monday night with a star-studded partnership in 19th-century ballet's most celebrated tale of remorse and regeneration.
It was certainly a safe choice, without the element of surprise that Ballet Theater is promising over the next six weeks with at least four premieres and a host of highly gifted newcomers.


Foster Wheeler Corp.(FWC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


McNamara Took a Long Step to Heal Our Vietnam Wound
To the Editor:
In "Mr. McNamara's War" (editorial, April 12) you savagely attack Robert S. McNamara's acknowledgment of error in Vietnam as "prime-time apology and stale tears," declaring that he "must not escape the lasting moral condemnation of his countrymen."


From the Soviet Archives, Revelations and Problems
Since the collapse of the Soviet Union in 1991, thousands of documents have emerged from behind the long-impenetrable walls of the Soviet archives.
In an article today, Serge Schmemann reports that the flow has produced sensations and revelations, big and small, but also frustrations.
The most important files remain solidly off-limits.
And after the first wave of openness, American scholars say access is being steadily curtailed, especially for records of the period after Stalin.


Prosecutors Join a Union
All 55 assistant prosecutors in Middlesex County have joined a union.
The reason is money.


Wine Talk
THE wine world has grown exponentially in recent years.
Even mom-and-pop liquor stores sell wines from 20 countries.
And yet, nothing has come along to replace or even to dim the luster of the two most famous wine regions of all, Burgundy and Bordeaux in France.
Chauvinists elsewhere in the world may deny it, but Burgundy and Bordeaux provide the challenges and the inspiration that drive wine makers from Melbourne to Moldavia to do better.


Giants Eye First 1995 Opponent: Their Schedule
The Giants will open the 1995 season the way they closed 1994 -- playing the Dallas Cowboys at Giants Stadium.
After that Monday night game on Sept. 4, the Giants will run through a four-week gantlet of games at Kansas City, at Green Bay, at home against New Orleans and at San Francisco, the Super Bowl champions, on Oct. 1.
With the regular-season finale against the San Diego Chargers, the defending American Football Conference champions, on Dec. 23 at the Meadowlands, three of their last five games will be against opponents who made the playoffs last season.


A 50th Anniversary in Italy Reflects Continuing Divisions
Only blocks from the piazza in Milan where the bodies of Mussolini and his mistress were hanged for public derision after their execution by Italian resistance fighters near the end of World War II, Italian officials today marked the 50th anniversary of Italy's liberation by the Allies.
The commemorations in Milan and Rome reflected the bitter divisions that continue to divide Italy along old political fault lines.
These differences run so deep that the police advised former Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi that they could not guarantee his safety at the Milan ceremonies.


Motel of Ill Repute to Be Razed
For more than a decade, neighbors say, the Lord Stirling Motel was a place where drug pushers and prostitutes plied their trades in the heart of a residential area.
No more.
Last week, the city bought the 22-room motel and immediately shut it.
The motel will be razed soon to help make way for a $100 million redevelopment project.


Russia Revokes Visa Of U.S. Journalist
The Russian Government has revoked the visa of an American journalist in what may be the first such case since the collapse of the Soviet Union.
Steve LeVine, a stringer for Newsweek and The Washington Post, was stopped by immigration officials when he arrived at Vnukovo airport in Moscow on Monday evening from Tbilisi, Georgia, and was informed that his multiple-entry visa had been invalidated.
He was not permitted to leave the airport, and spent the night in the airport's lounge before flying back to Tbilisi this morning.


Microsoft to Sell Software With Computer Associates
Expanding an existing alliance, Computer Associates and the Microsoft Corporation said yesterday that they would jointly market a software package combining their programs for corporate computer systems.
Computer Associates said it had begun shipping a version of its Unicenter software program for Microsoft's Windows NT, a more advanced operating system than its popular Windows that is intended to run the computer networks of a company or institution.
Windows NT is aimed at the so-called enterprise market, as opposed to desktop computing.


American General Corp.(AGC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


National Steel Corp.(NS,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


A Bronx Tale: Yankees' Longest Road Trip Finally Ends
The longest day of more than eight months without real baseball games unraveled for the Yankees in a methodical manner yesterday as they worked out one final time before 6,321 fans on a splendid, sunny day.
Everyone involved with the Yankees wished it were really opening day.
The waiting, even for just one more day, was the hardest part.
The heavy clubhouse door at Yankee Stadium swung open dozens of times, and before it slammed with the familiar thud, the players who paraded through had already started searching for their nameplates above the lockers.
They talked about being excited and thrilled, and even the most ardent skeptics would have probably believed them because they sounded so sincere.


Warrchester's Hub of Ethnic Cuisines
Jorge Ramon travels to Peru five times a year simply to stock up on the parched hominy and dried potatoes he needs to prepare authentic Peruvian dishes at his modest storefront restaurant here.
"I come back with my suitcases full," said Mr.
Ramon, an owner of El Norteno.
"I only serve my customers the real thing."


Foreign Affairs; The Cold Peace
Foreign Minister Andrei Kozyrev of Russia delivered a remarkable speech here the other day on Russian foreign policy -- a speech that was at the same time illuminating, troubling and pathetic.
What was illuminating about Mr.
Kozyrev's address to a U.S.-Japan-Europe conference was that it clarified exactly where the Russian Government stands on the question of NATO expansion.


Soviet Archives: Half-Open, Dirty Window on Past
In early August 1930, Stalin wrote a routine note to his most loyal comrade in the Soviet leadership, Vyacheslav M. Molotov, with 10 directives.
The second one dealt with the hoarding of coins, a problem the Kremlin was trying to deal with.
After venting his rage at the State Bank and the Finance Ministry, Stalin wrote, "Definitely shoot two or three dozen wreckers from these apparats, including several dozen common cashiers."


Freeport-McMoRan Inc.(FTX,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Chief of Hudson River Conservancy Ousted
The president of the agency seeking to create a park system along Manhattan's Hudson River shoreline resigned yesterday under pressure from the Pataki administration, and a corporate real estate manager was named to replace him.
Administration officials said they were determined to insure that the riverfront project include enough commercial development to pay its own maintenance costs, so state financing would not be needed.
They also said they hoped the new president of the agency, the Hudson River Park Conservancy, would bring the administration's frugal approach to the effort.


Legal Aide in Terror Trial Faces Deportation
A paralegal working on the defense of Sheik Omar Abdel Rahman, who is charged with plotting to blow up major New York City buildings, was arrested on Monday as an illegal alien and could be deported, immigration officials said yesterday.
A lawyer for Mr.
Abdel Rahman in his trial in Federal District Court in Manhattan charged that the arrest of the legal assistant, Nasser K. Ahmed, was an effort by the prosecution to strengthen their case against Mr.
Abdel Rahman, a militant Muslim cleric from Egypt who is the most prominent of 11 defendants in the terrorism trial.


Elting E. Morison, 85, Educator Who Wrote Military Biographies
Elting E. Morison, an educator, historian and author of two biographies of military leaders, died last Thursday at the Pheasant Wood Nursing Home in Peterborough, N.H.
He was 85.
Mr.
Morison died after a long illness, said Daniel Keaveny, a spokesman for the Jellison Funeral Home in Peterborough.


Supreme Court Roundup; Gay Group and Parade Backers Battle
A Supreme Court argument today about the right of the organizers of Boston's St.
Patrick's Day parade to exclude homosexual marchers was not the clash of principle that had been expected.
Instead, the case came down to an argument over what message, if any, the marchers would have conveyed had they been permitted to march under their banner identifying them as the Irish-American Gay, Lesbian and Bisexual Group of Boston.
Lawyers for both the gay group and the South Boston Allied War Veterans Council, the parade organizers, who canceled the event last year rather than comply with a state court order to admit the Irish-American homosexuals, agreed that as a matter of the constitutional right of free speech, sponsors of a private parade cannot be required to include a message with which they disagree.


To Vietnam, With Love And a Deep Respect
"Starting Place," Robert Kramer's documentary study of Vietnam two decades after the end of the war, produces a strange, almost nostalgic sense of dislocation.
This impressionistic portrait of a country struggling to build a competitive economy while holding on to its traditions offers the sort of glowingly romantic picture of the Vietnamese as gentle, hard-working, enlightened people that the leftist antiwar protesters who visited the country in the late 1960's brought back to the United States.
Mr.
Kramer, who lives in France, was one visitor.
In 1967, he and a group of politically motivated independent film makers formed a collective called the Newsreel, which produced over 70 films dealing with the civil rights movement and the Vietnam War.
In 1969, the group was invited by North Vietnam to make a film in Hanoi, and a delegation of eight, including Mr.
Kramer, traveled there and made a movie called "People's War." Two years ago, he revisited Vietnam with a film crew.
In "Starting Place," he interviews many of those he met there 24 years earlier.


Homeless Advocates Fault Hartford's Ban on Begging
At the urging of merchants who say panhandlers are hurting their business, the Hartford City Council has passed an ordinance that bans aggressive panhandling.
The measure, believed to be the first of its kind in the state, also bars people from begging within 25 feet of an automatic teller machine and from spinning elaborate tales about sick children or broken-down cars in order to elicit money.
Violators can be fined up to $90 and jailed for up to 30 days.


For Howard, New Chief With a Sense of Balance
H.
Patrick Swygert and his close associates at the State University of New York at Albany, where he has been president since 1990, have a standing joke about who gets blamed when something goes wrong at a college.
"We're going to take out a full-page ad in the campus newspaper showing a picture of all of us with our hands up," one associate recalls Mr.
Swygert saying with a grin.
"And the caption is, 'It's Our Fault!' "


Harsco Corp.(HSC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Clinton Pledges to Defend Farm Subsidies
President Clinton came to corn country today to do a little spring planting: he promised to defend Federal farm subsidies from Republican budget cuts as a way of sowing good will in an important political state where he hopes to stave off any challenge to his renomination.
"I don't believe that we ought to destroy the farm support program if we want to keep the family farm" and preserve gains made in recent international trade agreements, the President declared at a daylong conference on rural America sponsored by the Department of Agriculture and Iowa State University here, and broadcast live on public television around the state and nationwide on C-SPAN.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
9.00
9.00
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
5.25
5.25
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
5.94
5.98
3.42
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.66
5.66
3.87
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.73
5.75
4.24
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.99
6.98
6.82
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.32
7.31
7.10
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.15
8.13
7.93
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.25
6.23
6.29
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Ginger Rogers, Who Danced With Astaire and Won an Oscar for Drama, Dies at 83
Ginger Rogers, the vivacious actress whose supple grace in the arms of Fred Astaire lifted the spirits of Depression-era moviegoers in some of the most elegantly romantic musical films ever made, died yesterday at her home in Rancho Mirage, Calif.
She was 83.
The blond, blue-eyed actress, who came out of Charleston contests and the vaudeville circuits to win notice as a cherub-faced flapper with a piping voice and a sassy air in early musicals like "42d Street" and "Gold Diggers of 1933," went on to win acclaim for her dramatic portrayals and an Academy Award for best actress for her depiction of a lovelorn career woman in the 1940 film "Kitty Foyle."


Pearl R. Twyne, 90; Drew Attention To Horse Abuse
Pearl Rainwater Twyne, an animal rights advocate in the Washington area who helped draw national attention to the plight of the Tennessee Walking Horse, died last Friday in St.
Alphonsus Hospital in Boise, Idaho.
Mrs.
Twyne, a longtime resident of Great Falls, Va., moved to Boise in 1993.
She was 90.
Over the years, horses became her special concern.
She led demonstrations against the exhibition of Tennessee Walking Horses, which were trained to prance in an exaggerated, high-stepping gait, sometimes through the use of caustic chemicals or heavy chains.


Law-Enforcement Agencies Differ on Need for More Power to Spy on Terror Suspects
Sharp differences between the Justice Department and the Treasury Department are hampering the Clinton Administration's campaign for broad new powers to investigate and monitor organizations suspected of plotting terrorist attacks, law-enforcement officials said today.
The Administration is scrambling to flesh out its proposals in time for a Thursday hearing by the Senate Judiciary Committee.


500 Downtown Dwellers Have Lost Their Homes
Moderate rents and a downtown location made the Regency Towers an easy-living community for students, professionals and retirees -- regular folks who enjoyed coming home to a cold beer or a hot meal after a long day.
Convenience turned to catastrophe last week when a body-rattling shock wave hit their building, busting doors, smashing windows and routing tenants onto the street and into an unfamiliar terrain, homelessness.
After the blast a block away at the Alfred P. Murrah Federal Building, the Regency's tenants were left with empty apartments where their cold beds are covered with glass, their pets are gone and their knickknacks, books and family pictures are scattered about.
For those unable to double up with friends or family, their new home for an uncertain duration is a boxy, impersonal motel near Interstate 40.


Don't Make Bill of Rights a Victim of Bombing; For Lower Voices
To the Editor:
The extreme right-wing paranoia that evidently fueled the Oklahoma City bombing did not arise in a vacuum.
On the contrary, the rhetorical fury of the zealots differs only in degree from the anti-government diatribes that are a daily staple of conservative talk-show hosts and their call-in listeners.


Newman in Series on Actors Studio
"Inside the Actors Studio," a new weekly series of interviews, opens on Bravo tonight with Paul Newman, probably the least Actors Studio-ish actor in America.
But Mr.
Newman was president of the Studio from 1982 to 1994, and he obviously has the kind of marquee value needed to begin this project, a collaboration between the Studio and the New School for Social Research.
James Lipton, the moderator, is chairman of the school's new three-year fine arts course.
Founded in 1947, the Actors Studio has fervent supporters who still cling to a cult epitomized by Marlon Brando, and equally fervent detractors who condemn what they call the art of mumbling, memorably realized in the Studio's 1964 Broadway production of "The Three Sisters," which some theatergoers insist could not be heard beyond the second row.
Let's, for the moment, be neutral.


Poulin Is New Coach of Irish
DAVE POULIN, a 12-year National Hockey League veteran and a former Notre Dame star, will become the Irish's new hockey coach.
Poulin will replace RIC SCHAFER, who resigned on March 24 after eight seasons.
Poulin, 36, is retiring as the Washington Capitals' center.
He played for Notre Dame from 1978 to 1982. (AP)


Westinghouse Electric Corp.  (WX,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Out West, Superstars Are Set for A Show
The shift of power began last June with the conference claiming its first title since 1988.
It continued with four teams winning at least 57 games this season.
Today, Hakeem Olajuwon worries not how he will stop Patrick Ewing but, rather, how will he propel the Rockets past the first round.
Not since the Lakers of the 1980's disassembled has the West been this wild, purveying a brand of basketball so frenetic, so geared toward esthetically pleasing dunks and accompanying moves in the open floor that the chore for most teams now is about surviving their own bracket.


Light Winds Drive Nothing but Questions
It was another day of waiting out the weather in the America's Cup trials today, and a further delay in Dennis Conner's final attempt to win the right to defend yachting's premier trophy against New Zealand's Black Magic.
After a two-hour delay in the start of a decisive match between Conner's Stars &amp; Stripes and Mighty Mary, officials postponed the race because of light winds.
The match was rescheduled for Wednesday.
It was the fifth time since the 12-race round-robin series began April 10 that a match has been abandoned.


COMPANY BRIEFS
CHS ELECTRONICS INC., Miami, will acquire four other distributors of computers, computer peripherals and software from Comtrad Inc., one of its big shareholders, in a deal valued at $17.5 million.
KANSAS CITY SOUTHERN INDUSTRIES INC., Kansas City, Mo., a railroad company, said it planned to buy back from investors up to six million of its common shares, partly with the proceeds from the sale of its majority interest in DST Systems Inc.


Wood Products Company Helps Write a Law to Derail an E.P.A. Inquiry
A few weeks ago, some of Washington's top lawyer-lobbyists were closeted in a Senate office building with Republican staff members, reworking a bill by the Senate majority leader, Bob Dole, to limit the powers of Government regulators.
After the lobbyists nipped and tucked at the wording, several key phrases drafted by Georgia-Pacific, the nation's largest wood products company, made it into the measure nearly verbatim.


Dancing on Air


Equitable Resources Inc.(EQT,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Assault on Waco Sect Fuels Extremists' Rage
Until their seven-week standoff with Federal agents near Waco, Tex., in 1993, the Branch Davidians were an obscure and tiny religious sect, one of many in the United States.
But ever since the assault by Federal agents that ended in a catastrophic fire that killed some 80 members of the sect, the ashes of the Davidians' compound have become a dark and violent text for right-wing militants, in which many have read a call to a bitter hostility to the Government.


Madison Avenue Is Throwing Out Its First Pitches
Baseball's delayed return from the living dead marks the start of its remarketing as a viable, breathing organism.
As more games are played, baseball will breathe even easier.
But still, the sport's endemic troubles have not been solved.
A Federal judge reopened the way to a season without replacement players, but the lack of a lasting settlement blocks the path to complete health for a sport that had taken a mallet and beat it early and often upon its own soft head.


Players and the Umpires Present United Stance
As locked-out major league umpires picketed the first game of the season tonight, a game worked by replacement umpires, the heads of the umpires' and players' unions adopted an uncharacteristic joint stance against the owners.
Richie Phillips, the umpires' lawyer, and Donald Fehr, the players' labor leader, issued a joint statement supporting each other in their members' fight against what Phillips called the clubs' "destructive labor policies." In the past, the two unions have sometimes been as much at odds with each other as they have been separately with the owners.


People
Adrienne Cleere was named publisher of House Beautiful magazine, New York, owned by the Hearst Corp., succeeding Carole Ference, who left in February to join Ticketmaster Corp., Los Angeles, as publisher of a magazine scheduled for later this year or early next year.
Ms.
Cleere was previously vice president for international marketing at the Bloomingdale's unit of Federated Department Stores, New York.
She is also a former vice president and publisher of W magazine, owned by Capital Cities/ABC.


Rush-Hour Protest Causes Gridlock
Hundreds of demonstrators blocked two bridges and two tunnels in Manhattan during the height of the rush hour yesterday, causing serious gridlock for over an hour in a coordinated protest of proposed state and city budget cuts and of police brutality.
The demonstrators, who included students and professors from the City University of New York, the homeless, health care workers, AIDS activists, the disabled and families of people killed by the police, blocked the entrances to the Queens-Midtown Tunnel, the Brooklyn-Battery Tunnel, the Brooklyn Bridge and the Manhattan Bridge between 5:30 and 6 P.M., enraging motorists on their way home from work.


Mid-Atlantic Medical Services Inc.(MME,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


U.S. Petroleum Data
In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
Apr 21
Apr 14
Apr 22
1995
1995
1994
Gasoline production, daily
7.6
7.6
7.7
Distillate production, daily
3.3
3.2
3.3
Gasoline stocks
210.7
212.1
216.8
Distillate stocks
114.9
114.4
102.6
Crude imports, daily
8.0
6.5
7.5
Product imports, daily
1.7
1.0
1.8
Crude stocks
339.3
336.0
339.1
Crude production, daily
6.6
6.6
6.7
Refinery utilization (%)
94.0
91.0
94.2
Source: American Petroleum Institute


Income Gap For Sexes Is Seen Wider In Retirement
While women usually earn less than men and are more likely to live in poverty, the economic gap between women and men widens in retirement, according to a new study by the Older Women's League.
Although many more women have entered the work force in recent decades, the study found, the gap between the average Social Security benefits paid to women and those paid to men is growing.


U.S. AND 6 ALLIES VOW NEW EFFORTS TO REVIVE DOLLAR
The United States and six other leading industrial nations declared today that the dollar's decline had gone "beyond the levels justified by underlying economic conditions in the major countries," and they made a vague promise to strengthen both short-term tactics and long-term strategy to reverse its fall.
After days of recriminations among the economic powers over who is responsible for the turmoil in world currency markets, Treasury Secretary Robert E. Rubin hailed the statement -- issued after a meeting of finance ministers and central bank chiefs of the Group of Seven -- as a strong signal of mutual resolve to reverse the dollar's decline.


Kansas City Southern Industries Inc.(KSU,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Working Women Gain Slowly at Best
To the Editor:
In "Enter, Women" (Op-Ed, April 19), Laura A. Ingraham avers that women have made steady, impressive gains in the work force, citing the statistic that 23 percent now hold corporate senior vice president positions, up from 14 percent in 1982.


Bell Atlantic Halts Plan for Video Services
The Bell Atlantic Corporation called an abrupt halt to its scramble into television yesterday.
Saying it wanted to rethink its strategy for upgrading its telephone network, the company asked the Federal Communications Commission to suspend its application to offer video services to as many as three million telephone customers in Philadelphia, Pittsburgh, Baltimore, the District of Columbia, northern New Jersey and parts of Virginia.
The decision by Bell Atlantic surprised many industry experts, who regard the company as a pathfinder for other regional Bells seeking to expand beyond their core business of local phone service.
And it underscores the mounting confusion many telephone executives are feeling as they try to adapt their voice networks to an array of new businesses, like video programming and interactive services.


Tecumseh Products Co.(TECUA,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Corrections
The obituary of the sportscaster Howard Cosell on Monday misidentified the cabinet post held in the 1960's by Dean Rusk, to whom Mr.
Cosell once referred, saying it was appropriate to ask sports figures "the same sort of questions asked of Dean Rusk." Mr.
Rusk was Secretary of State, not Defense.


Tambrands Inc.(TMB,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Mr. Rubin Says No
The dollar has fallen about 10 percent against the German mark and 20 percent against the Japanese yen, frightening German and Japanese exporters who fear their products will be priced out of the huge American market.
It is no surprise, then, that the German and Japanese Finance Ministers -- meeting this week in Washington with their counterparts from five other industrialized powers -- insist that the United States correct the problem by raising interest rates.
It is no surprise, either, that Treasury Secretary Robert Rubin rejects the plea out of hand since raising rates would threaten to end the nation's economic recovery.
The non-specific declaration issued yesterday by the ministers does little to resolve this dispute.


14-Year-Old Tests Positive
A 14-year-old South African runner has tested positive for steroids, making her the youngest track and field competitor anywhere in the world to be accused of using performance enhancers.
BERNARD ROSE, chief executive of Athletics South Africa, said the girl's identity would not be released because she is a minor.
She has been suspended from competition pending a hearing.


The Nobel Laureates on Life
In an event its moderator, Ted Koppel, said was quintessentially American because it was "planned within an inch of its life," eight Nobel laureates in literature gathered here for discussions that covered subjects that seemed anything but planned.
Indeed, if there was a theme to the two days of discussions that ended today, it revolved around the virtues of uncertainty and the unpredictable, which many of these noted writers extolled, as they did the power of myth in both life and art.
"Articulation is about precision, and once you get precise you are uncertain," said the ever-enigmatic and epigrammatic Joseph Brodsky, the Russian-born poet, who now lives in the United States and was the Nobel winner in 1987 and this country's poet laureate in 1991.


RESULTS PLUS
N.H.L.
Chicago Finally Wins  Murray Craven's goal two minutes into overtime last night snapped Chicago's 13-game streak without a victory and lifted the Blackhawks to a 4-3 victory over the visiting Vancouver Canucks.
The Blackhawks were 0-10-3 during their free fall, their worst streak since 1959.
Craven, acquired by the Hawks from Vancouver earlier this year, beat Canucks goaltender Kirk McLean after taking a feed from Sergei Krivokrasov.
Going into the game, the two teams were tied for fifth in the Western Conference playoff race. (AP) BLUES 8, STARS 4: Brendan Shanahan scored twice in St.
Louis's five-goal third period as the Blues spoiled Dallas's regular-season home finale.
Shanahan scored his 16th and 17th goals of the season against the relief goalie Darcy Wakaluk as the Blues scored five goals on eight third-period shots. (AP)


METRO DIGEST
DEEPER CUTS NEEDED TO CLOSE BUDGET GAP
As Mayor Giuliani prepares to present his second city budget, administration officials said that New York City's budget gap now exceeds $3 billion, forcing the Mayor to propose still deeper cuts in spending by the city's agencies.
Officials said the budget gap has widened in part because overtime costs for city workers have exceeded projections.
A1.
DIVORCED FATHERS GAINING MORE RIGHTS
Increasingly, courts and legislatures around the nation are rethinking some tenets of divorce law, with fathers' rights in mind.
By and large, the changes aim to give fathers more access to their children and, under certain circumstances, to reduce their child-support payments.
While the evolution of new rights is being applauded by many, some women's groups and family law experts are questioning its impact on mothers and, often, on the children.
A1.


Need to Mention the Landfill
Developers and real estate agents selling new homes must disclose nearby "physical conditions," such as hazardous waste sites, that might affect property values, the State Supreme Court ruled yesterday.
In the 6-0 decision, the court sided with 150 families who bought new homes in Voorhees Township without knowing they were near the abandoned Buzby Landfill.


Bomb Meant for Predecessor Of Victim, Officials Say
Federal officials said today that a mail bomb that killed the chief lobbyist for a forest-products trade group in Sacramento, Calif., was apparently intended for a retired executive who had headed the group until a year ago.
The package was addressed to William N. Dennison, who served as president and chief executive officer of the California Forestry Association from 1980 to 1994 and was a highly visible figure in a number of contentious environmental issues.


Consolidated Edison Co. of New York (ED,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Hearing Begins in Shooting
Tensions ran high here in February after a white police officer fatally shot an unarmed black teen-ager.
Yesterday a grand jury began hearing testimony to determine what happened.
The police have said that Ronald Cohen's pistol discharged accidentally when 16-year-old Lawrence Meyers resisted arrest during a drug bust; others have said Mr.
Meyers was not struggling with the police when he was shot.


Finally, Strikes Have Connection to Plates
The boy and his father strained against the incline of the ramp, walking past the concession stands toward their seats.
Hand in hand, they were smiling as the noise and the sights and the smells of baseball swirled around them in Joe Robbie Stadium.
They were at the game.
"Here we are, right over here, Christopher," Frank Palmisano said to his 10-year-old son, pointing toward the entrance.
"Just over here."


Many Theories About Choice Of the Target
The date, investigators say, was painstakingly selected. So what about the place?
That question is vexing Federal investigators, who say they are struggling to understand just why Oklahoma City was chosen as the target for the bombing of a Federal building last Wednesday, in part because an answer may yield clues to help track down the killers.


COLLEGE LACROSS REPORT
Johns Hopkins
Hofstra gave the No. 1 team in the land some concern, if not fright, last night before a crowd of 5,348 at Hofstra Stadium.
The Flying Dutchmen outplayed the Blue Jays through the first half and even tied the match, 11-11, in the fourth period.
But Johns Hopkins scored the last four goals to win, 15-11, for its 10th victory this season without a defeat.


Upheaval in China: Real Recollections, False Flashbacks
One legacy of the 1989 uprising in Tiananmen Square was a vision of absolute courage: one man, many tanks and the kind of fierce determination that changes the world.
It is an image of such simple dignity that it haunts "Moving the Mountain," Michael Apted's inexplicably snazzy documentary about China's recent upheaval.
Mr.
Apted (whose documentaries include the "7 Up" series) can be a great listener, a keen observer, a film maker of extraordinary patience and insight.
But his "Moving the Mountain" becomes as busy and artificial as the sight of that lone protester was pure.
Too much of its emphasis is on scattershot tactics, the kind that keep restless, oversaturated rock-video viewers from squirming in their seats.
If this kind of fractured attention span is a sign of the times, it's sobering to realize that today a quietly watchful documentary like "7 Up" might never be made.


Even the Mets' Most Grizzled Hearts Are Aflutter
Todd Hundley admits that he feels a little more anticipation than he has before recent opening days.
John Franco is excited that his fellow bullpen mates are, in his eyes, better than any crew he's had in his seven seasons with the Mets.
And though he rarely shows any emotion, Bobby Jones is visibly thrilled over his first opening day start.
"I'm 24 hours away," Jones said today, after watching the Mets defeat the Blue Jays, 3-1, in their final exhibition game.
"I'm not jumping up in the air or anything like that -- I am a low-key guy -- but I'm excited. I'm anxious for it to get here."


Term Papers on CD-ROM Turn Words Into Virtual Reality
Goodbye, term paper.
Hello, CD-ROM analysis.


Titan Wheel Int'l.(TWI,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


JP Foodservice Inc.(JPFS,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 1


Beneficial Corp.(BNL,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Don't Make Bill of Rights a Victim of Bombing
To the Editor:
The devastated shell of the Alfred P. Murrah building, the horror of graphic video and the photographs of victims have shocked the world.
In our just anger and outrage at the perpetrators of this vile act, may we not succumb to a rush to erode cherished constitutional guarantees that have molded this nation.
A few hours after this despicable crime, I presented a demonstration lesson for area teachers on the Palmer raids of the 1920's, named for President Wilson's attorney general, in which some 6,000 people suspected of being Communists were arrested.
Student readings included excerpts from one of the proposed sedition bills that flooded Congress in 1919, contemporary periodicals and political cartoons that helped galvanize public opinion.
In the lesson I warned students to be careful in drawing analogies to current events.
That evening as I heard interviews with experts on terrorist activities and the countless recommendations from talk radio, I could not help drawing analogies.
I applaud "Precautions After Oklahoma City" (editorial, April 21) and Anthony Lewis's column of the same date, "Faith in Reason." I fear, however, a public demand to enact the omnibus counterterrorism bill will lead our elected representatives to a response without careful consideration of its ramifications.
There is undoubtedly much to be gained by vigilance, by appropriate antiterrorist legislation; but let it come from reasoned debate by our representatives rather than from a political rampage to win public support.
DAVID VIGILANTE  San Diego, April 21, 1995


Personal Health
THE wounds from the Oklahoma City bombing last week are far more than physical ones, for the minds of many of the people directly and indirectly involved have suffered damage that can linger long after injuries to the body heal.
Those who escaped harm and those who took part in rescue and recovery efforts may be as severely affected emotionally as the surviving victims and the families of the dead and injured.
Experts say witnesses to death and destruction, such as rescuers at a disaster site like the Federal building in Oklahoma City, are especially vulnerable to lasting emotional injury when children are harmed and the element of horror is pronounced.


Chevron Corp.(CHV,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Help Sought For World Loan Unit
Representatives of the world's poorest countries stepped into the growing congressional debate about foreign aid today by issuing a strong appeal to the United States and other donor countries to continue supporting the International Development Agency.
The appeal was made after a meeting of finance ministers from 24 developing countries, known as the Group of 24, which sets the third world's economic agenda just as the Group of Seven sets the industrial world's.
The International Development Agency is the unit of the World Bank that tries to encourage development in poor nations by giving them very low-cost loans.


Private Chefs for Busy People Who Like Their Meatloaf
WHEN Stephanie Hersh got her first job as a private chef for a family of four in Milton, Mass., in 1989, she did what she thought private chefs do: she spent each day preparing haute cuisine for dinner.
At the end of the first week, her employer sat her down and said they needed to talk about menus.
As Ms.
Hersh recalled it, her employer was reassuring but firm, telling her: "Not that this hasn't been wonderful -- it's just not the way we eat. We like foods like macaroni and cheese and meatloaf and lasagna." And so, Ms.
Hersh promptly switched gears and began making simpler meals.


France Votes for Action
The old European Socialism of nationalized industries and a cradle-to-grave welfare state is a dying creed.
But French voters, buffeted by persistent double-digit unemployment rates, seem reluctant to give up entirely on activist government.
Lionel Jospin, the candidate of the demoralized, scandal-battered French Socialist Party, finished a surprising first in Sunday's initial round of presidential balloting.
The first-round runner-up, Jacques Chirac of the Gaullist party Rally for the Republic, outpolled his Gaullist rival, Prime Minister Edouard Balladur, with calls for aggressive government action to combat unemployment and other social ills.


Helping Toddlers After a Shock
WHILE the deaths of babies and young children in the day care center in the Federal Building in Oklahoma City is for many the most disturbing aspect of the bombing, there is another group of toddlers who are also victims.
These are the survivors, not only those few in the building who lived through the explosion but the children in buildings nearby, including 50 children who were at a Y.M.C.A. day care across the street.
The thunderous explosion blew in the windows, cutting many of the children, who were then carried out into a scene of fire and smoke and chaos.


Coastal Corp.(CGP,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Book Notes
Edgars and Beyond
Edgar Allan Poe once wrote that for writers "an established name is an estate in tenure, or a throne in possession."
Oddly enough, one of the best ways for mystery writers to establish themselves is to win an award named for the father of detective fiction himself, the Edgar Allan Poe Awards.
The Edgars, the Oscars of the mystery world, will be presented tomorrow night at a ceremony at the Sheraton New York Hotel.


Corrections
An article by The Associated Press in Science Times yesterday about a new way to process hazardous waste misstated the given name of a researcher at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
He is Daniel R. Cohn, not David.


Leftover Players Make Final Pitches at Free-Agent Camp
When the Major League Baseball Players Association training camp for free agents grinds to an unceremonious close Wednesday, the former Met outfielder Vince Coleman knows just one thing: He won't be headed to his home in Arizona.
Coleman, among just 14 players left at the Homestead Sports Complex still auditioning for employment from a pool that reached 57, will either join a major league team or decide between two offers to play at Class AAA.


Young Mother Gets Her Request
For a 17-year-old mother here who decided that three children were enough, the situation seemed a cruel Catch-22: New Jersey's welfare law denies benefits to children born to mothers on public assistance, yet the state's Medicaid program will not pay for voluntary sterilization for women under 21.


United Dominion Industries(UDI,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Bally Entertainment Corp.(BLY,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Southern Pacific Rail Corp.(RSP,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


CHRONICLE
Oops: Gov.
WILLIAM F. WELD of Massachusetts, a rising star in the Republican Party, was given a ticket for speeding on Sunday afternoon on Interstate 84 in New York, The Boston Globe reported yesterday.
The Governor was returning from a vacation in Virginia when he was stopped for going 74 miles per hour in a 55-mile-per-hour zone.
"I was driving along, had a couple of kids in the car and just was not paying attention," he told reporters on Monday.
"I think speeding is serious business and I should have been paying more attention." A court will determine the fine, which could be up to $200.


The Very Soul of Tango, From an Unlikely Source
Who would have thought a Swedish choreographer with an intellectual bent could get to the heart of the tango -- and the personalities of four distinctive dancers -- and come up with a piece as juicy and full of wit as Irene Hultman's "Tango-Babe"?
The new work, performed on Sunday night at St.
Mark's Danspace, is a joy.
Four tango dancers meet, part, and fall in and out of love from near and afar in this suite of tangos.
Lust is in the air, as are deception and desperation.
Even the walls turn pink and purple, and there is whispered flirtation and longing in the wings.
Raul Jaurena's score, performed live by the New York-Buenos Aires Connection on contrabass, violin, piano and bandoneon, even includes a familiar Poulenc organ roll to end things on a note of proper theatrical grandeur.


For Struggling Devils, Goals Are More Modest
Jacques Lemaire stepped off the ice after about 90 minutes of practice this afternoon and went right into his office to study all the playoff possibilities for the Devils in the Eastern Conference.
"I think you'll need 50 points to be guaranteed a spot," Lemaire concluded as he kept looking at a work sheet of all the playoff contenders.
"Maybe you can get in with 49, but you may have to go to a tie breaker."


Uncovered Short Sales Increase 4.3% on Nasdaq
Open positions of short sales on Nasdaq increased 4.3 percent in the most recent period, rising to 811.9 million shares, reflecting trades made in the month ending April 6 and settled April 13, the National Association of Securities Dealers said yesterday.
The increase in uncovered short sales -- in essence a bet that stock prices will fall -- came despite a surge in the stock market in recent weeks.


AT LUNCH WITH: Warren Christopher; Diplomacy Of a Certain Vintage
Dean Rusk drank Scotch with journalists every Friday afternoon.
George P. Shultz liked dry martinis and fireside chats.
Henry A. Kissinger and James A. Baker 3d preferred leaking information to journalists to eating and drinking with them.
Warren Christopher, on the other hand, is a gracious host and devoted chardonnay man -- a Sonoma Valley appellation called MacRostie, vintage 1993, that he buys by the case ($14.99 a bottle) and serves at the State Department.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article on Sunday about a report recommending more versatility in the doctoral training of scientists and engineers misidentified the research institute at which one author, Phillip A. Griffiths, is director.
It is the Institute for Advanced Study based in Princeton, N.J.; it is not the Institute for Advanced Research at Princeton University.
The two institutions are not affiliated.


CHRONICLE
TED KENNEDY JR. rarely talks about losing his right leg to cancer when he was 12, but tonight he will speak at a benefit for a new organization called Cancer Cured Kids.
"This organization is trying to raise awareness of the problems of social isolation children feel when they are treated and then try to integrate themselves back into their previous lives," Mr.
Kennedy said, explaining why he had agreed to speak at the event at Tavern on the Green.


Bomb Echoes Extremists' Tactics
Whoever blew up the Federal building in Oklahoma City used tactics that are strikingly similar to those urged by far-right advocates of "leaderless resistance" against the Government, according to civil liberties experts who keep track of militant groups.
The idea was developed by two former leaders of the Ku Klux Klan and has been promoted by some of the self-styled citizen militias that have sprung up across the county.
"Leaderless resistance" refers to the need to keep the planning of terrorist attacks confined to individuals or very small groups to prevent infiltration by the police.


Amdahl (AMH,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


A Little Lamb Chop Goes a Long Way
LOVERS of meat and potatoes can have low-fat meals if the meat is used in moderation.
This menu of loin lamb chops is filled out by a dish of potatoes, asparagus and peas.
And this is the time to take advantage of the tiny new potatoes that are available in markets.
They cook in no time.
Ginger-Glazed Loin Lamb Chops
4 loin lamb chops, about 3/4 pound total  4 tablespoons ginger marmalade, jalapeno jelly or other hot-sweet preserve.
1. Turn on broiler, if using. Line pan with aluminum foil.
2. Wash and dry chops; trim all excess fat.
3. Prepare stove-top grill, if using.
4.
If grilling, cook chops on one side until brown.
Turn over, and spread some of preserves on browned top.
Continue cooking to brown chop on second side, about 7 minutes for medium rare.
Turn chops once more, spread with remaining preserves and serve.
If broiling, brown chops on each side, and spread each side with preserves when finished cooking.
Yield: 2 servings.
Approximate nutritional analysis per serving: 275 calories, 8 grams fat, 75 milligrams cholesterol, 70 milligrams sodium, 25 grams protein, 30 grams carbohydrate.
Potatoes, Asparagus and Peas Vinaigrette
1 pound tiny new potatoes, preferably red  2 teaspoons olive oil  2 tablespoons balsamic vinegar  1 tablespoon Dijon mustard  Enough dill to yield 2 tablespoons chopped  2 scallions  3/4 pound asparagus  1 bunch arugula  1 cup frozen peas  1/8 teaspoon salt  Freshly ground black pepper to taste.
1.
Scrub potatoes; do not peel.
In medium-size saucepan with water to cover, boil potatoes, covered, 10 to 20 minutes, depending on their overall size.
2. In a large bowl mix the oil, vinegar and mustard.
3.
Wash, dry and chop dill; wash, trim and chop scallions; add dill and scallions to bowl.
4.
Wash and break the asparagus stems at point where the woody part meets the tender part.
Cut the asparagus just below the tips; then, cut the rest of the stem into 1/2-inch pieces.
5.
Break off tough stems from the arugula; discard, and wash remaining arugula thoroughly to get rid of sand.
6.
About 3 minutes before the potatoes have finished cooking, stir in the asparagus and continue cooking.
7. Arrange arugula in flat serving dish.
8. One minute before the potatoes are finished cooking, stir in the frozen peas.
9.
Drain and spoon into bowl with dressing, and mix gently to coat.
Season with salt and pepper, and arrange on arugula.
Yield: 2 servings.
Approximate nutritional analysis per serving: 390 calories, 6 grams fat, 0 milligrams cholesterol, 430 milligrams sodium, 14 grams protein, 75 grams carbohydrate.


USLife Corp.(USH,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Delighting in China's Past, Surviving in Its Present
LIANG AND LIN  Partners in Exploring China's Architectural Past
By Wilma Fairbank
Illustrated. 207 pages. University of Pennsylvania Press. $29.95.
Judging just from its title, "Liang and Lin: Partners in Exploring China's Architectural Past" would seem to be a study of two distinguished scholars of Chinese temples, palaces, pagodas and bridges.
In fact, "Liang and Lin" is the story of a romance and of a heroic struggle against great odds.
In her modest and straightforward way, Wilma Fairbank, who is the only person alive who could have written this story, has created an affecting portrait of the final years of an epoch, when Old China faded away and New China took its place.


Judge Ito Appears Intent: Let's Get the Trial Moving
Judge Lance A. Ito brought down a metaphorical gavel in his courtroom today, unveiling a tougher and testier style that, should it last, might prod lawyers in the O. J. Simpson case into moving more quickly and assure restless jurors that their service is not permanent.
Testimony in the Simpson case resumed after a two-day hiatus in which Judge Ito quelled a mini-rebellion among the jurors.
The dispute, over the judge's decision to reassign three sheriff's deputies accused of fomenting racial discord on the panel, led testimony to be canceled on Friday and Monday.
And, together with the glacial progress of the case, it intensified complaints that Judge Ito had lost control of his courtroom.


Marion Foster, 97, Red Cross Official
Marion Lounsbury Foster, who was for many years a social services administrator with the Disaster Staff of the American Red Cross, specializing in public and private emergencies, died on Thursday at St.
Vincent's Medical Center in Bridgeport, Conn.
She was 97 and a longtime resident of New York City.


True North Expects Loss for the Quarter
True North Communications in Chicago, formerly Foote, Cone &amp; Belding Communications, expects a loss in the first quarter ending March 31 because of a substantial one-time charge against earnings resulting from the restructuring of the Italian operations of Publicis FCB Europe, its joint venture with Publicis S.A. in Paris.
The disclosure of the loss, expected when True North reports its first-quarter results during the week of May 8, was made in the proxy statement accompanying the corporate annual report distributed to shareholders.


Freeport-McMoRan Copper &amp; Gold Inc.(FCX,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Federal Agencies' Priorities Grating as Time Wears On
As the death toll climbed past 100 today in the bombing of the Alfred P. Murrah Federal Building, tensions were rising between the Federal officials who want to comb the bomb site for evidence and leaders of the Government rescue agency who want to continue their painstaking and desperate search for survivors.
In recent days, law-enforcement officials said, top officials from the Federal Bureau of Investigation have complained to senior rescue officials that the search was proceeding too slowly, denying Federal agents complete access to what they regard as a crime scene.
But the rescue agency, the Federal Emergency Management Agency, is moving one brick at a time, fearful of causing a collapse or missing any sign of life.


Ginger Rogers Is Dead at 83


Muted Joy in Mudville, but Big League Ball Is Back
At least on this day, the dark clouds hovering overhead were only in the sky.
After a labor-fueled, 256-day hiatus that included 234 days of a players' strike, major league baseball teams played baseball tonight.
Batters, not negotiators, determined the outcome.
Indeed, unlike the labor dispute, there was an outcome, and some outcome it was.


Washington Post Co.(WPO,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Divorced Fathers Make Gains In Battles to Increase Rights
During the five years that William B. Hess arm-wrestled with his wife in court over the dissolution of their marriage, he compiled a list of complaints about how New Jersey's legal system treated divorced fathers.
Why, for example, could he be forced to pay his sons' college tuition?
If he had stayed married, no one could have compelled him to do so.
That is one of Mr.
Hess's grievances that may soon be redressed.
Last December, the State Assembly passed a bill that would stop judges from ordering divorced fathers to pay child support after their children turn 18.
The bill has yet to come to a vote in the State Senate.


After West's Pressure, Turkey Begins Big Pullout From Iraq
Turkey has withdrawn 20,000 of its troops from northern Iraq, leaving 12,000 behind to continue operations against base camps used by the rebel Kurdistan Workers Party, a military spokesman said today.
The partial withdrawal, shown tonight on national television, was seen as a reaction to strong Western pressure on Ankara to end its five-week-old offensive inside Iraqi territory.
In Washington last week, the Turkish Prime Minister, Tansu Ciller, promised that Turkish forces would pull out of Iraq "very soon," though she set no date.


Big Wheels of DuPont Tour Are Russian and American
On Wednesday night, 84 professional and 28 amateur riders will begin the $200,000 Tour DuPont, the most important bicycle race outside Europe.
Two will be strong favorites.
One is 29-year-old Vyacheslav Yekimov of Russia, last year's winner.
The other is 23-year-old Lance Armstrong of Austin, Tex., the 1993 world champion and the Tour DuPont runner-up the last two years.
Yekimov rides for the new Dutch team, Novell, Armstrong for the American team, Motorola.


Sports of The Times; Fans Await Privilege Of Paying
THE big ball park in the Bronx can look quite empty with a few thousand fans rattling around the left-field and right-field stands.
Why was I expecting a massive welcoming committee yesterday for baseball in Yankee Stadium?
The weather was lovely, and the hot dogs were free, but the legions were surely not streaming off the Deegan to watch the Yanks work out on the green, green grass of home.


Tribute for Ray Johnson
A memorial service for Ray Johnson, an artist whose collages and mail art were exhibited in major museums around the world, is to be held on Saturday at 2 P.M. at the Friends Meeting House, Rutherford Place between 15th and 16th Streets, east of Third Avenue, Gramercy Park.
Mr.
Johnson died on Jan. 13 in Sag Harbor, L.I., at the age of 67.


James M. McHaney Dies at 76; Prosecuted Nazis at Nuremberg
James M. McHaney, the American prosecutor who sent Nazi doctors to the gallows for conducting gruesome medical experiments on concentration camp inmates and others during World War II, died on Thursday at a nursing home in Little Rock, Ark.
He was 76.
His wife, Marilyn, said Mr.
McHaney, who had Alzheimer's disease, died of arterial sclerosis.


Tenneco Inc. (TGT,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Corrections
An article on Friday about the execution of a white supremacist in Arkansas last Wednesday referred imprecisely to one of his murder victims. (The error was repeated in another article on Saturday and in a chronology box on Sunday.) The victim, William Stumpp, was not Jewish, but the convict, Richard Wayne Snell, believed that he was.


Stratus Computer Inc.(SRA,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 2


Adult Behavior in Albany
On esthetic grounds alone, Gov.
George Pataki and the Legislature's Democratic leadership should have long ago pulled their dueling ad campaigns over New York State's budget off the air.
In any event, they have recognized that their commercials accusing each other of trying to destroy the state were undermining the chances of a deal in Albany.
Now that they have suspended the advertising, it is time for Mr.
Pataki and the Assembly Speaker, Sheldon Silver, to make the compromises that everyone knows they will have to make anyway.
Faced with a $5 billion deficit, Mr.
Pataki has proposed the most pitiless cutbacks in state services and programs in modern history, all in furtherance of a campaign commitment to reduce government and enact a tax cut.
He can argue that he was obliged, as the first Republican Governor in New York in a generation, to ask for a fundamental rethinking of programs that have been sacrosanct for years.
But the Democrats have raised entirely legitimate questions about the suffering his budget would inflict on the poor, the mentally disabled, the elderly and students.
They have offered to meet the Governor more than halfway on his cuts, and Mr.
Pataki ought to seize their offer to bargain sensibly.


Midland Co.(MLA,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Met Life in Merger Talks With New England Mutual
The Metropolitan Life Insurance Company and the New England Mutual Insurance Company said yesterday that they are discussing a possible merger.
Both insurers could gain something from a combination.
Met Life's insurance sales to middle-income individuals declined last year and the company, which is based in New York, is eager to expand into the more rapidly growing segment of higher-income households that are New England Mutual's forte.
New England Mutual, which is based in Boston, could benefit from the financial strength of Met Life, which is eight times its size.


Don't Make Bill of Rights a Victim of Bombing; Arabs as Scapegoats
To the Editor:
The moment the bombing of the Federal building in Oklahoma City took place, the national news media pointed the finger at the Middle East, law enforcement agencies started to harass Arab-Americans, and the Arabs as a group were condemned without a shred of evidence.


Food Notes
Fresh Spring Mushrooms
Fresh morels are one of the surest signs of spring.
Shoppers will find the best prices at Agata &amp; Valentina, 1505 First Avenue (at 79th Street), $18 a pound; Dean &amp; DeLuca, 560 Broadway (at Prince Street), $19.50 a pound; Aux Delices des Bois, 4 Leonard Street (at Hudson Street), $21 a pound, and Gourmet Garage, 453 Broome Street (at Mercer Street), $22 a pound.
Fairway, at 2127 Broadway, has morels for $27.96 a pound.
A Butter's New Look
Ronnybrook Farm Dairy has started selling butter in a number of the specialty stores that carry its milk.
Previously the butter was available only at the Union Square Greenmarket, and it was sold in plastic containers while the company waited for paper ones.
The paper package is better because the plastic tended to impart an off flavor to the butter.
In addition to unsalted and very lightly salted butter, the company has also introduced honey butter and maple butter.
As with the salted variety, the flavors are subtle enough not to overwhelm the taste of the butter.
All the butters are about $3 for eight ounces.
Dutch Cookie
Coffee bars are stocking up on a delicious Dutch confection to nibble with coffee: the Stroopwafel, a layer of caramel sandwiched between thin round waffled wafers about three inches in diameter.
The treat is said to have originated in the town of Gouda in the Netherlands more than 200 years ago.
Stroopwafels are placed on top of a cup of coffee or tea so the heat softens the caramel.
They are imported by Nanelle, a company in Manhattan started by Nancie Julian and Ellen Healy Pegg, who discovered the cookies while traveling in Holland.
Coffee bar chains in Manhattan, including Timothy's, Brothers, Oren's Daily Roast and Philip's, sell Stroopwafels for about $1.
They are also available at Java Nation in Sag Harbor, L.I., and in the espresso bars in Nordstom department stores in White Plains and in Menlo Park, Freehold and Paramus, N.J.
Fifty Wines for the Tasting
That there could be more than 50 different wines made on Long Island was impossible to imagine 20 or so years ago.
But on May 9, that number of wines will be poured and matched with food from Long Island restaurants at a tasting from 6 to 8:30 P.M. at Bridgewaters, at the South Street Seaport.
Tickets are $45 from (516) 725-1528.
Hudson Valley Anniversary
A number Hudson Valley wineries will be at North Salem Vineyards, 441 Hardscrabble Road, North Salem, N.Y., on Saturday from noon to 5 P.M. for that winery's 30th anniversary.
There is a tasting fee of $5, which includes a souvenir glass.
There is an extra charge for some of the foods to be served.
For information: (914) 669-5518.
Cooking for Art
On Saturday, 100 or so men who call themselves the Gourmet Gents will cook, as they have done for the last 16 years, at a benefit for the Children's Art Carnival, an educational organization.
Tickets to the event, from 5 to 9 P.M. at the Riverside Church, 490 Riverside Drive (at 122d Street), are $45 if ordered in advance, $50 at the door and $20 for children under 12.
For information: (212) 234-4093.
Off the Menu  Not So Fast . . .
A possible cautionary tale for Andre Soltner, who hung up his toque and apron on April 15 after selling the major interest in Lutece to Ark Restaurants: Two years ago, Jim McMullen arranged for Ark to manage his restaurant, Jim McMullen's, on the Upper East Side, and he retired.
But now he is back in the dining room greeting patrons.
"The customers were like an extended family, and I realized how much I missed them," he said.
"Now, Ark just handles the aggravation and I handle the fun." Rain at a Discount
Just when you were thinking of buying fresh Bain de Soleil for the season, along comes Rain.
Sunday, the new restaurant called Rain, at 100 West 82d Street, will open for a week of previews.
Through May 7, there will be a 20 percent discount on the Pan-Asian food prepared by Taweewat Hurapan, a native of Bangkok, Thailand.
Dressed to Serve
Lucky Cheng's, a restaurant in the East Village that specializes in Pacific Rim cooking served by Asian drag queens, has started a catering company, As You Like It Events.
The company will provide its eclectic fusion fare and arrange for its staff to serve.
For information: (212) 473-0516.
Planning a Reincarnation
Sheldon Tannen, a former president of "21" in Manhattan, has bought the Bowden Square restaurant in Southampton, L.I., and plans to reopen it by Memorial Day as the Bowden Square Club.
Part of the restaurant will be a private dining club.


Caremark International (CK,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Sergio Fenoaltea, Italian Diplomat, 86
Sergio Fenoaltea of Italy, a familiar figure in United States diplomatic, cultural and social circles as Ambassador in the 1960's, died on April 13 at his home in Marino, near Rome.
He was 86.
He suffered a brief illness, his family said.


With Budget Due, Giuliani Faces Gap Of Over $3 Billion
As Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani prepares to present his second city budget tomorrow, administration officials said yesterday that New York City's budget gap now exceeds $3 billion, forcing the Mayor to propose still deeper cuts in spending by the city's agencies.
The gap is now nearly $400 million above the $2.7 billion shortfall the Mayor projected just two months ago.
At $3.1 billion, the gap represents about 10 percent of the budget for the fiscal year that starts in July.


Triangle Pacific (TRIP,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Ingersoll-Rand Co. (IR,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Brooklyn Hails Its Bard, Norman Rosten, May 17
To the Editor:
"Whitman's Brooklyn, Still" (Topics item, April 19), on a potential "competition" for poet laureate of Brooklyn, told only half the story.


N.B.A. Western Conference Playoffs
San Antonio, 62-20, First Place, Midwest Division vs.
Denver Nuggets, 41-41, Fourth Place, Midwest Division Key Players San Antonio: David Robinson has had trouble venturing into the Land of Mutombo before, but Dennis Rodman's work underneath has freed him up to score more.
If Chuck Person gets hot off bench, it's over.
Key Players Denver: Mahmoud Abdul-Rauf has missed 5 of last 7 games with bruised right leg and sprained right ankle.
Reggie Williams and Dikembe Mutombo need to step up offensively.
The rookie Jalen Rose has to neutralize Vinny Del Negro.
Season Review San Antonio: Rodman's motorcycle accident notwithstanding, Spurs are unflappable on the road (29-12).
After a slow start they have been on fire, winning their last six and a league-best 62 overall.
Season Review Denver: Moving from the front office back onto the floor after Dan Issel and Gene Littles could not get the Nuggets to perform, Bernie Bickerstaff somehow guided them away from the lottery and into the postseason with a late rush.
Prediction: Spurs won't go down like Seattle a year ago.
Spurs in four.
Phoenix Suns, 59-23, First Place, Pacific Division vs.
Portland Trail Blazers, 44-38, Fourth place, Pacific Division Key players Phoenix: Charles Barkley imposes his will on a series like only Michael Jordan can.
Whether Kevin Johnson can contain Rod Strickland is tantamount.
Dan Majerle needs to find his stroke by the second round, or Suns are in trouble.
Key Players Portland: Cliff Robinson has picked up some of the scoring slack since Clyde Drexler left for Houston.
Otis Thorpe has given them more bulk, but Blazers offense no longer puts a premium on creativity.
Season Review Phoenix: Danny Manning's injury before all-star break cast a pall over a franchise seemingly destined for the finals.
Barkley has carried their hopes for a ring on his shoulders since then.
Who says you can't win the N.B.A. championship without a dominant center?
Detroit and Chicago, from 1989 to 1993, that's who.
Season Review Portland: New coach, new style, but they can't hide the wrinkles.
Terry Porter and Buck Williams are role players now.
The Blazers, once favored and omnipotent in the West, did very well to finish above .500.
Prediction: Rivarly or not, it's a Sir Charles Show.
Phoenix in four.
Utah Jazz, 60-22, Second Place, Midwest Division vs.
Houston Rockets, 47-35, Third Place, Midwest Division  Key Players Utah: League's all-time assist leader (John Stockton) and premier power forward (Karl Malone) in sync like they've never been.
Key to this series, however, is Jeff Hornacek's all-around play.
Key Players Houston: The Drexler Factor is huge.
He can post up Hornacek and create in the open floor.
Worry not for Hakeem Olajuwon, worry for his teammates.
Vernon Maxwell needs to stick the open 3-pointer and Kenny Smith must play with more poise than panache.
Season Review Utah: The Jazz get along on and off the floor like no other team.
Chemistry may not win a title, but it certainly makes up for the lack of an All-Star center.
After a brief lull, they enter playoffs as league's hottest team, having won 7 straight.
Season Review Houston: They began their repeat quest with an amazing November run.
What happened?
Shaky backcourt, Maxwell's temper and general team malaise.
May become first defending champion to get knocked off in first round since Philadelphia in 1984.
Prediction: Great theater, but Utah controls tempo.
Jazz in five.
Seattle SuperSonics, 57-25, Second place, Pacific Division vs.
Los Angeles Lakers, 48-34, Third place, Pacific Division Key Players Seattle: So many starters lingering on the bench, so few minutes.
More important than Shawn Kemp and Gary Payton sparkling in this series is how well Kendall Gill and Sam Perkins defend and shoot from the perimeter.
Key Players Lakers: Cedric Ceballos playing well since his return from injury.
Challenge of Nick Van Exel and Eddie Jones is to break the most-aggressive trapping defense in basketball.
Season Review Seattle: Sonics as dangerous as Orlando when they get on a run, but also as disastrous when they fall apart offensively.
Though Payton's defense and Kemp's power inside compensate, their half-court set is not up to Finals specifications after 82 games.
Season Review Lakers: Jerry West has slowly rebuilt an emerging Western Conference power from the ground up.
It's not Showtime II, but the Lakers may be one player away from title contention again.
Prediction: Sonics lost four of five to Lakers in regular season, but wake up for the playoffs.
Seattle in five.


Officials Cite Long Delay In Lodi Blast
The explosion that toppled a factory in downtown Lodi last week, killing four workers, occurred because of a mishap in the blending of toxic chemicals that was virtually ignored by the company for nearly 12 hours, allowing a volatile reaction to hurtle out of control, the authorities said today.
And the effort to put out the resulting blaze, they said, may have been hindered by misleading information from the plant supervisors.
The Bergen County Prosecutor's office said it had determined that the thunderous blast, which rekindled fears about the safety of Lodi's aging industrial base, was an accident.
But at a news conference, some officials had harsh words for the plant's owner, Napp Technologies, questioning whether it had violated safety regulations and had been forthright with investigators.


Engelhard Corp.(EC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Times Mirror and Cox Amend Cable Deal
The Times Mirror Company and Cox Communications Inc. have renegotiated the terms of the merger agreement under which they agreed to join their cable operations and create the fourth-largest cable operator in the nation.
Last June, when the deal was announced, the two companies planned to spend a total of $300 million on new cable services -- $100 million from Cox, which is a unit of Cox Enterprises, and $200 million from Times Mirror.
Yesterday, they said they would each invest $100 million.


Chemical Mishap Cited in Blast
The explosion that toppled a factory here, killing four workers, occurred after a mishap in the blending of toxic chemicals was virtually ignored by the company for nearly 12 hours, the authorities said.
Page A1.


Jerome W. Robbins, Watch Executive, 69
Jerome W. Robbins, a former chief executive of HMW Industries, which was once known as the Hamilton Watch Company, died on April 15 at the Jupiter Medical Center in Jupiter, Fla.
He was 69 and lived in Jupiter and New Canaan, Conn.
The cause of death was cancer, according to his wife, Patricia.


Turgenev's Inquiry Into Calamitous Love
Isaiah Berlin once described Ivan Turgenev as "the least vain of famous authors." When, in 1872, a Moscow company decided to give his "Month in the Country" its first stage production, 22 years after it had been written, Turgenev was pessimistic.
Audiences, the great novelist said, will find it tedious, and they did.
Seven years later no one could have been more surprised than Turgenev when the comedy was well received in its St.
Petersburg premiere.
Turgenev was grateful but, with some reason, still skeptical.
It wasn't until after the 1909 production by the Moscow Art Theater ensemble, directed by Stanislavsky and Moskvin, that "A Month in the Country" came to be recognized as a classic theatrical work in its own right.
That is, as something more than the forerunner of Chekhov's great comedies, which appeared toward the end of the century and helped put the Moscow Art Theater on the map.


McNamara Took a Long Step to Heal Our Vietnam Wound; A Day Late
To the Editor:
The last several days I have followed the news of Robert McNamara's memoir "In Retrospect" with great interest mixed with furious bitterness, awkward chagrin and appalled disappointment -- among other things.
I served in Vietnam as an extremely reluctant, highly skeptical draftee and returned from overseas thoroughly radicalized and unconscionably bitter.


Times Names Men's Fashion Editor
Robert E. Bryan, men's fashion director of W magazine and senior fashion features editor of The Daily News Record, a trade publication, has been named men's style editor of The New York Times Magazine.
The appointment, which was announced by Jack Rosenthal, editor of the magazine, is effective May 8.
Mr.
Bryan, 49, succeeds Hal Rubenstein, who is now the editor at large of InStyle magazine.
Mr.
Bryan will work with Holly Brubach, the magazine's style editor, and edit the men's fashion coverage in the magazine.
He will also supervise the spring and fall issues of Men's Fashions of The Times.


No Golf Course for State Park
Liberty State Park is not going to get a golf course.
State Senator Bernard F. Kenny Jr., who never wanted golfers to tee off in the shadow of the Statue of Liberty, said he got the news yesterday.
Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman will make an official announcement today, her spokeswoman, Rita Manno, said.


Surveying the 20th Century
Joel Krosnick, the cellist of the Juilliard String Quartet, has pursued a sideline collaboration with Gilbert Kalish, the pianist, for the last few seasons.
They have presented several surveys of the cello and piano repertory together, and on Sunday at Miller Theater they offered an overview of the 20th century in two concerts separated by a dinner break.
A scheduling conflict kept me from attending the afternoon session, in which they played sonatas by Ginastera, Overton, Poulenc and Hindemith.
The Sunday evening concert, in any case, had the stronger drawing card, the world premiere of Ralph Shapey's "Evocation No. 4," for which Mr.
Krosnick and Mr.
Kalish were joined by Joel Smirnoff, violinist, and William Trigg, percussionist.
Mr.
Shapey's three-movement work brought together conflicting impulses.
Aggression and lyricism, celebration and elegy, angularity and warmth, vigor and tenderness all tugged at the listener.
In the hands of a less rugged structuralist than Mr.
Shapey, so many opposing forces might have made for a diffuse work, but here they were exactly what bound the piece together.


Men Get More at Wimbledon
The All-England club said yesterday it would increase prize money for the 1995 Wimbledon tennis championships to $9.65 million from $9.17 million, a 5 percent increase.
The men's singles champion will continue to receive more than the women's champion.
The men's winner will pocket $586,900, up from $554,700.
The women's champion will receive $527,400, up from $498,400.(Reuter)


Three Women vs. a Broker; Olde Is Accused of Blatant Job Discrimination
Less than a year ago, Mary Graff was at the top of her professional game.
Of the more than 1,000 brokers at the Olde Discount Corporation, Ms.
Graff, who had been with the company for 11 years, led the list of big bond sellers in the latest company newsletter.
She also managed the office in Glenview, Ill., which was among the top 5 producers of the 200 Olde offices around the nation.
So imagine Ms.
Graff's surprise when her boss told her last June that she was to be stripped of her manager's title, knocked back down to being an ordinary broker, moved to a different office and forced to give up most of her customer accounts.


W. L. Eisenberg, 74, A Labor Mediator In 2,000 Disputes
Dr.
Walter L. Eisenberg, an economics professor emeritus at Hunter College who helped settle many labor disputes at the city, state and Federal levels, died on Saturday at his home in Brooklyn.
He was 74.
The cause was a heart attack, said Beatrice Kaufman Eisenberg, his wife of 49 years.


U.S. Surgical Corp.(USS,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Inmate Denies Participating In '79 Slaying
Over the last few years, Long Island has been rocked by one lurid crime after another, almost to the point of caricature.
But long before the arrests of Amy Fisher, Joel Rifkin and Colin Ferguson, Long Islanders were horrified by the slaying of a 13-year-old boy, John Pius, in 1979.
Authorities said four teen-agers stuffed pebbles down John Pius's throat because he had seen them steal a mini-bike, then hid his body under leaves and logs.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Promises on the Dollar, But No Clear Course Is Set
The U.S. and other economic powers promised to work together to reverse the dollar's fall.
But some traders had their doubts even before the meeting ended that the seven big industrial nations would act decisively to revive the slumping dollar.


Police Officer Is Buried


Market Place; Rewarding shareholders at the expense of bondholders.
IF someone is going to owe you money, wouldn't you rather that that someone had a lot of cash on hand?
Maybe not.
Some of the losers -- at least in terms of market value of their holdings -- in Kirk Kerkorian's odd effort to take over the Chrysler Corporation have been those who lent Chrysler money.
Mr.
Kerkorian wants to use most of Chrysler's cash to help pay for the buyout.
That might be good news for Chrysler shareholders, but it would be bad news for the bondholders, who would be left with a far weaker borrower owing them money.


Excerpts From Letter by 'Terrorist Group,' FC, Which Says It Sent Bombs
Following are excerpts of the letter received by The New York Times on Monday from the self-designated terrorist group FC, claiming responsibility for the serial bombings that the Federal Bureau of Investigation attributes to a single person or group in the case known as Unabom.
The document is presented verbatim, with original spelling, emphasis and punctuation.
Three passages have been deleted at the request of the F.B.I. [ Passage deleted at the request of the F.B.I. ]


C.I.A. Pick Is Facing Senate Test
Over the past decade, Deputy Defense Secretary John M. Deutch has survived the tricky business of managing the post-cold-war Pentagon, the trench warfare of high-level academic politics and the unpleasant experience of being hit by a truck.
All these things, his supporters say, make him well qualified to be the next Director of Central Intelligence.


United Asset Management Corp.(UAM,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Transactions
Football  National Football League
ATLANTA FALCONS -- Agreed to terms with Brian Pruitt, running back; Kyle Brady, wide receiver; Stacy Evans, Brian Hamilton, Rick Ceasar, and Alonzo Etheridge, defensive ends; Abdul Jackson, linebacker; Aaron Purdie and Roger Purgason, offensive tackles; Arnold Vaitai, guard; Tyrone Brown, wide receiver, and Ross Schulte, kicker.


Rwandan Killings Set Back Effort to Provide Foreign Aid
The killing of an estimated 2,000 ethnic Hutu by Rwandan Government troops last week is a major setback to efforts to bring international aid to this cash-strapped, desperately poor nation, United Nations and Western diplomats here say.
Diplomats say the killings, at a camp in Kibeho, are again putting Rwanda's stability into question.


CHRONICLE
Dizzy Gillespie's famous bent bell trumpet (bent when a party guest tripped over it) fetched $63,000 at auction at Christie's East yesterday.
The buyer, JEFFREY M. BROWN, a builder who lives in Manhattan and Philadelphia, said he bought it because he is a lifelong admirer of the musician.
A drummer (for fun only) himself, he said: "I have a great interest in jazz, and this particular trumpet is sort of a symbol of jazz history that can't be duplicated. I will keep it in my apartment in New York -- and I might even try to play it."


INSIDE
Lobbying on the Inside Track
The nation's largest wood products company worked with Senate Republicans to derail an inquiry into its environmental practices.
Page A18.
Argentine Army's Admission
For the first time, the Argentine Army has admitted "dirty war" killings in the 1970's and 80's.
Page A13.
Baseball Opens With a Jeer
Fans booed a peace gesture by the players before the Dodgers beat the Marlins, 8-7, in Miami.
Page B9.


Monsanto Co. (MTC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Northern Telecom Ltd.(NT,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Carl A. Gerstacker, 78, Dow Chemical Chairman
Carl A. Gerstacker, chairman of the Dow Chemical Company from 1960 to 1976, died on Sunday night in Midland, Mich.
He was 78.
The cause of death was leukemia, said his stepson, William D. Schuette of Midland.


Israel Bonds Live On
To the Editor:
Your April 18 report of New York City Comptroller Alan G. Hevesi's announcement of the possible establishment of an Ireland Development Bank portrayed State of Israel Bonds as a relic of an organization that existed in the 1950's.
State of Israel Bonds, begun in 1951 to promote the economic development of Israel, continues to do so to this day.
NATHAN SHARONY  President, State of Israel Bonds New York, April 18, 1995


For Sarajevo Serbs, Grief Upon Grief
Earlier this month, Aleksandar Lucic watched Maja Djokic die on a central Sarajevo street.
She was strolling back from a volleyball game on the evening of April 9.
He was tending some flowers on Titova Street near the Presidency building.
There was a flash.
The 17-year-old girl fell.
He hurried toward her.
She gasped, twice.
He took her to Kosevo Hospital in his car.
But two pieces of shrapnel from the Serbian shell had already killed her.


Goodyear Tire &amp; Rubber Co.  (GT,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; 'How to Succeed in Business': The producers are trying.
HOW do you succeed in marketing "How to Succeed in Business Without Really Trying"?
By really trying.


A 50th Birthday Party for the U.N.


2 Seized in Thefts From School Warehouse
Two independent truck drivers were arrested yesterday morning and accused of conspiring with school warehouse employees to sell $32,000 worth of school supplies to private retail stores, officials said.
The two, Andrew Baraba, 43, of 148-18 Third Avenue in Whitestone, Queens, and Jack Marchese, 46, of 122 Linton Avenue in Lindenhurst, L.I., were charged with grand larceny and bribery and, if convicted, face up to seven years in prison, according to the Queens District Attorney's office.


Serial Bomber Sent Letters Before Package Blast
Federal officials said yesterday that the mysterious serial bomber in the Unabom case sent several letters that were delivered on Monday, shortly before a package-bomb explosion killed an executive of a California timber trade group.
In one of the letters, to The New York Times, the writer said that he had spent considerable time perfecting ever-deadlier devices but that he would stop killing people if a newspaper or magazine with nationwide circulation published a lengthy article written by him.


New Jersey Resources Corp.(NJR,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article on Saturday about a proposal being considered by the Labor Department, to loosen rules on how Federal contractors report the makeup of their work forces, misstated the proposal's goal.
The intent is to make the reporting requirements for affirmative action programs "more user-friendly." The proposal would not change the affirmative action programs themselves.


Sad Farewell to Bomb Victims


Woman Is Raped and Beaten
A 39-year-old West New York woman has told the police that she was forced into a van at gunpoint, then raped and beaten for 13 hours before escaping yesterday morning.
She said she jumped from the van just before 8 A.M. when the driver slowed for a stop sign only six blocks from where he picked her up.


RJR Nabisco Shares Fall On First-Quarter Earnings
Shares of the RJR Nabisco Holdings Corporation fell yesterday to their lowest level in a year after the company announced disappointing first-quarter earnings showing declining domestic tobacco sales and lackluster international cigarette revenues as well.
The stock fell 75 cents, to $26.625, on the New York Stock Exchange.
The previous lowest price during the last 52 weeks was $26.875, hit on Feb. 21 and 22.
The stock was already under pressure from concerns about the potential legal and regulatory liabilities of tobacco, as well as last month's divestiture by Kohlberg, Kravis, Roberts &amp; Company of its 8 percent stake in RJR Nabisco, or 111.6 million shares.


Air Products &amp; Chemicals Inc.(APD,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Avery Dennison Corp.(AVY,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 1


6-State Force to Open Inquiry Into Insurance Sales Practices
Consumer complaints about life insurance sales practices led the New Jersey Commissioner of Insurance to announce yesterday a multi-state task force to examine the problem, starting with the Prudential Insurance Company of America.
Regulators in New York, Texas, California, Arizona and Maine have said they will join the investigation.
The New Jersey Insurance Commissioner, Drew Karpinski, whose department will head the task force, announced the plan at a meeting in Philadelphia of state regulators from around the country.


Transactions
Baseball  American League
KANSAS CITY ROYALS -- Agreed to terms with Vince Coleman, outfielder, on a minor-league contract.
Basketball  National Basketball Association
DETROIT PISTONS -- Fired Don Chaney, coach.
Announced the resignation of Billy McKinney, vice president of player operations.


Union Umps Make Call on Replacements
Inside Yankee Stadium yesterday, Bill Deegan, a replacement umpire, was preparing to man home plate, with his anachronistic chest protector.
Outside, locked-out union umpires picketed.


Journal; New World Terror
To blame Rush Limbaugh and that self-styled "revolutionary" Newt Gingrich for the Oklahoma City bombing is as fruitless as blaming the anti-war bombing of the University of Wisconsin's math center in 1970 on Jane Fonda and George McGovern.
Distinctions must be made, as Mr.
Limbaugh asserted this week, "between dissent and hate" -- between tart-tongued conservatives preaching limited government and right-wing extremists fomenting violence.
Only by making those distinctions, and moving beyond President Clinton's generalities about "promoters of paranoia," can you get to some questions that really matter.
Are there in fact nuts on radio whose ideas might have helped incite the bombing?
And if so, do such extreme voices speak not merely for an isolated lunatic fringe but for a larger ideological movement amassing real political power in this country?


Giuliani Adds To List of Cuts For Spending
Raising the specter of harsh new spending cuts for New York City's schools, hospitals, libraries and museums, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani has identified more than $400 million in additional cuts he says he would make, should the city fail to receive enough help from the state to close its yawning budget gap, officials said yesterday.
The contingency cuts, the officials said, were intended to put pressure on Gov.
George E. Pataki and legislative leaders, particularly Assembly Speaker Sheldon Silver, to include $950 million in savings and aid in the state budget that Mr.
Giuliani has proposed to balance the city's budget.


Belo (A.H.) Corp.(BLC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


MCA-Dreamworks Talks Said to Be at a Critical Stage
Efforts to forge a partnership by MCA Inc. and Dreamworks, the entertainment venture founded by Steven Spielberg, Jeffrey Katzenberg and David Geffen, have reached a critical stage, with several rival show-business companies waiting for their turn, should talks break down.
Negotiations are expected to be completed next week.
Should the talks end without an agreement, entertainment companies like Time Warner, Sony and Viacom are expected to quickly step in and begin talks of their own with Dreamworks.


Norfolk Southern Corp.(NSC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Standard for Bus Drivers to Rise After Brooklyn Fatal Accident
Two weeks after a bus driver with a record of several accidents struck and killed a 70-year-old woman as she crossed a Brooklyn street, Transit Authority officials said yesterday that they would raise the standard for new drivers to graduate from probationary to permanent status.
James Greene, the driver of the bus that killed Rachel Neufeld on April 8, had three accidents in his probationary year, and two were found to be his fault.
Even under current standards, officials said, he should not have been allowed to graduate from probation last October.


Ford Motor Credit reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Marcel Marceau Conjures Up the Human Condition
In the 40 years since Marcel Marceau first appeared on an American stage, the trademark gestures of the great French mime have lost none of their precision and graceful ethereality.
The fluttering, seemingly disembodied hands conjure up restless flocks of birds.
The gaunt, white-painted face with its hollow eyes and cavernous mouth twists itself into a funny-sad parody of the spectrum of human emotion.
The body stretches out like a long-necked goose attached to an accordion, then shrinks into itself, as joyous expectation collapses into fearful loneliness.
These impressions and transformations can be seen through Sunday at the Kaye Playhouse at Hunter College where Mr.
Marceau is giving his first Manhattan show in 12 years.
Mr.
Marceau is now 72, and his smooth, limber performance is a testament to the rejuvenating physical discipline of mime.


G-I Holdings reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Joslyn Corp.(JOSL,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Caraustar Industries (CSAR,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Baker Hughes Inc.(BHI,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Barrasso's Return Puts Devils In Knots
Tom Barrasso made his first appearance of the season in goal for the Penguins tonight and looked as sharp as ever as Pittsburgh gained a 3-3 tie with the Devils.
"I'm glad to have a tie," said Devils Coach Jacques Lemaire, "because five or six of our guys were not at their best and we took some penalties against a dangerous team."


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-13  SLOW CHANGE IN SOUTH AFRICA  A year after South Africans voted in the country's first free election, slum dwellers in Soweto-on-Sea, like people throughout the country, find improvements are few.
A1


Easco Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 1


American Colloid Co.  (ACOL,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


No Golf Course for Liberty State Park


American Annuity Group Inc.(AAG,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


CLASSICAL MUSIC
Filling In, an Austrian Singer Shows Flexibility of Expression  Angelika Kirchschlager, mezzo-soprano Alice Tully Hall
The mezzo-soprano Brigitte Fassbaender was to have sung at Alice Tully Hall on Sunday afternoon, but a few months ago she abandoned the stage to become a full-time opera director.
That was a lucky break for Angelika Kirchschlager, a 28-year-old Austrian mezzo who has been singing a good deal in Europe.
Except for a private performance in Washington, her concert on Sunday was her first in the United States.
She was accompanied by Jean-Yves Thibaudet, a young French pianist with a notable solo career who turns out to be a sensitive accompanist.


Isabel Leighton, 95; Actress and Writer
Isabel Leighton Bunker, whose long career as an actress and writer embraced theater, journalism and television, died on Saturday at her home in Manhattan.
She was 95.


Now Chosen, Chinese Girls Take to U.S.
IN an Upper West Side apartment building, to the soft, angular sounds of Chinese lute music on a tape recorder, six Chinese girls, the oldest 3, stepped and turned, turned and stepped, waving long red ribbons as the rhythm required.
They were performing the Chinese ribbon dance, a wave here, a wave there, in a class taught in Mandarin.
They were also being initiated into what is perhaps the littlest sisterhood in Manhattan.


Energy Ventures (EVI,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Rangers Aren't Pretty, but the Points Add Up
The Rangers are playing some ragged, sloppy games against what were once thought to be inferior teams.
Their goaltending is inconsistent.
They are giving away goals with defensive lapses.
Their energy and confidence levels sag from time to time.
But the bottom line is that the Rangers are winning most of their games lately and are getting closer to securing a berth in the playoffs.


Citation Corp.(CAST,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 3


Loctite Corp.(LOC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Howell Corp.(HWL,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Envirosource Inc.(ENSO,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


HIGH COURT KILLS LAW BANNING GUNS IN A SCHOOL ZONE
The Supreme Court today dealt a stinging blow to the Federal Government's ability to move into the realm of local law enforcement, ruling in a bitterly divided 5-to-4 decision that Congress acted beyond its constitutional authority five years ago when it made possession of a gun within 1,000 feet of a school a Federal crime.
The decision, with a majority opinion by Chief Justice William H. Rehnquist, was based on the Court's interpretation of the authority of Congress to regulate interstate commerce.
While not overturning any precedents, the decision marked a sharp departure from the modern Supreme Court's expansive view of Congressional power to regulate commerce.


Ceremony, Circus Act And Even Some Fans Greet Game's Return
At Yankee Stadium, the Yankees had Reggie Jackson.
At Riverfront Stadium in Cincinnati, the Reds had Cecil Jackson.
Reggie sat with Joe DiMaggio, who tossed out the ceremonial first pitch.
Cecil was the unusual celebrity who threw out the first ball in Cincinnati.
He was assisted by Princess Schottzie, a baseball-toting elephant from the Cincinnati zoo.
Joe DiMaggio at Yankee Stadium, an elephant at Marge Schott's place.
Who said this wouldn't be a normal opening day?


Bomb-Threat Hoaxes Keep City on Edge
In the week since the bombing of the Federal Building, the Oklahoma City area has been disrupted by at least 35 bomb threats, aimed at schools, churches, government buildings and a large hospital here.
The threats have all been hoaxes, the police say, but they have strained already overtaxed emergency and law-enforcement workers.


Mr. Yeltsin's Cease-Fire
President Boris Yeltsin wants to suspend the fighting in Chechnya for the wrong reasons.
The Russian leader has ordered a three-week cease-fire, beginning tomorrow.
With thousands of Chechens dead and their capital city, Grozny, in ruins, a cessation of this savage war is overdue and any lull is welcome.
But instead of moving to end the fighting permanently and to seek a settlement, Mr.
Yeltsin is merely trying to avoid embarrassment when President Clinton and other foreign leaders visit Moscow in early May to mark the 50th anniversary of the German surrender in World War II.
While the White House is undoubtedly thankful that Russian warplanes may not be strafing Chechen villages while Mr.
Clinton is honoring the Russian sacrifices in World War II, the cease-fire is no reason for the President to mute his criticism of the Chechen conflict.
Mr.
Clinton's silence is precisely what Mr.
Yeltsin hopes to win with the cease-fire.


Army Chief's Admission of 'Dirty War' Rips Veil From Dark Era
The startling announcement by Argentina's army commander on Tuesday night that the military dictatorship of the 1970's tortured and killed political prisoners has opened the door for Argentina to finally come to grips with its dark past.
The army Chief of Staff, Gen.
Martin Balza, admitted in a television news program that the military had "employed illegitimate methods, including the suppression of life, to obtain information" during its reign between 1976 and 1983.


Datascope Corp.(DSCP,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Senate Panel Postpones Budget Vote
With Republicans split over spending and taxes, Pete V. Domenici, chairman of the Senate Budget Committee, today postponed his committee's first session on next year's budget to add time to line up the votes that he needs.
The committee had been scheduled to start speech-making on the budget on Thursday, and Mr.
Domenici, Republican of New Mexico, had planned to announce on May 1 his plan for balancing the budget over the next seven years.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Dollar Responds To Calls for Action  The finance ministers spoke, and the dollar responded.
The Group of Seven ministers said the dollar's slide had "gone beyond levels justified by underlying economic conditions" and called for an "orderly reversal," and currency markets saw those words as probable preludes to action.
The dollar staged its biggest rally in 20 months, surging more than 2 percent, to 83.80 yen.
It also stabilized against other currencies, although it gave up most of its early gains against the mark.
D19.
Stock traders were more cautious, as some worried that the finance ministers were long on verbal support, but short on concrete remedies.
The Dow industrials slipped 0.34, to 4,299.83.
Technology issues surged.
D12.


International Briefs; Transavia Seeks Planes
The Dutch air charter airline Transavia said yesterday that it was in talks with Boeing and Airbus over a $645 million deal to buy new aircraft.
"We are negotiating for between 8 and 10 new planes to replace leased aircraft, but it could be more," a spokesman said.
A decision would come in the next few months, he added.
Transavia has a fleet of 19 planes, 8 of which are leased. (Reuters)


Scalia Wasn't Wrong on Frost
To the Editor:
Re "Justice Scalia's Poetic License" (editorial, April 22):
Before you and Justice Stephen Breyer become too self-congratulatory over catching Justice Antonin Scalia in a misinterpretation of Robert Frost's poem "Mending Wall," consider these points:


Overseas Press Club Gives Awards to ABC and Times
An ABC News broadcast, two ABC reporters and two correspondents for The New York Times were among the winners announced at the Overseas Press Club's 55th annual awards ceremony last night in Manhattan.
Roger Cohen, The Times's correspondent in Zagreb, Croatia, shared the Eric and Amy Burger Human Rights Award for an article about a Serb-run concentration camp "whose existence when he began his probe," the press club said, "was only a rumor." Sharing the Burger award with Mr.
Cohen was the ABC News program "Turning Point," for a report on the continuing problem of slavery around the world.


Douglas &amp; Lomason Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Jenny Craig Inc.(JC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Mexico Eager to Celebrate End to Crisis Despite Hardships
It may be too early to celebrate, but Mexican officials lately have turned optimistic when they talk about an end to the country's current economic crisis, even as the hardships of the Mexican people are increasing sharply.
A beefed-up peso and a stock exchange that has come back from the dead are just two of the signs officials cite to show that the Government's austere economic recovery plan is working.


Suit Widens Family Divisions at San Francisco Chronicle
Nan Tucker McEvoy, the feisty 75-year-old former chairman of the media company that publishes The San Francisco Chronicle, filed a lawsuit today in her effort to regain the job she lost last week.
The suit provides a glimpse at the divisions within the related families that own Chronicle Publishing, especially those involving politics as well as the direction of the company.


Domco Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 25


Jason Inc.(JASN,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Japan Police Arrest 2 Found Beneath Sect Headquarters
One month after thousands of police began searching Aum Shinrikyo sites across Japan, two key suspects in last month's nerve-gas attack on the Tokyo subway system were arrested today after they were found hiding in an underground room below the headquarters of the religious sect.
One of those arrested, Masami Tsuchiya, was the head of Aum's "chemical squad," which operated sophisticated laboratories that police believe were used to produce sarin nerve gas for the subway attack.
Mr.
Tsuchiya, 30, studied organic chemistry in a doctoral program at Tsukuba University, a prestigious state-run institution.


Judge Has Done More to Reduce Court Backlog Than Add to It
To the Editor:
Your April 17 front-page article on New York's clogged Federal courts singles out my colleague Judge I. Leo Glasser as having "the most backlogged civil docket among the 43 judges in New York's Eastern and Southern Districts."


I.M.F. Moves to Bolster Ability to Handle Crises
Finance Ministers from rich and poor countries took a first step today toward strengthening the International Monetary Fund's capacity to head off future Mexican-style financial crises and giving the institution more resources to cope with those it fails to prevent.
At the first meeting of the I.M.F.'s policy-setting Interim Committee since the Washington-based institution contributed $17.5 billion to the Mexican rescue package, the ministers agreed to study ways to tighten I.M.F. surveillance over members' economies, creating a new financial safety net to help countries hit by sudden capital outflows and increasing the fund's lendable capital.


Wallpapering the Past
MIDCENTURY modern designs -- prancing poodles, dancing martini glasses, swirling television broadcast signals and the bungalows of America's early suburbs -- are well represented in the "Kitsch to Corbusier: Wallpaper From the 1950's" show at the Cooper-Hewitt National Design Museum at 2 East 91st Street until Aug. 27.
For teen-age glamour pusses there are beach parties and a Brigitte Bardot type with cherry lips, in sunglasses, above.
For architects, red and white geometric wallpaper designed by Le Corbusier.
For New York sophisticates, Saul Steinberg's delightful postwar "Views of Paris," top.


Ceremony Marks Issuance of Nixon Stamp


Chrysler Shares Tumble 5.7% As Kerkorian's Chances Fade
The Chrysler Corporation has surely never been so happy to see its stock price tumble.
In a sign that investors have all but written off Kirk Kerkorian's chances of buying Chrysler, the shares of the company endured today their sharpest fall since Mr.
Kerkorian publicly announced his takeover intentions two weeks ago.
Shares of Chrysler fell $2.50, or 5.7 percent, to $41.625, on the New York Stock Exchange.
Chrysler's shares were the most actively traded of the day.


Johnston Industries Inc.(JII,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Grand Casinos Inc.(GND,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 2


Newmont Gold Co.(NGC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


29 Years Later, McNamara Is Given Warmer Welcome
This time they came to listen, not to protest.
And although some railed against what they called the iniquities of Robert S. McNamara, who as Defense Secretary was a major architect of Vietnam policy under Presidents John F. Kennedy and Lyndon B. Johnson, it was a much warmer reception than he received the last time he spoke at the John F. Kennedy School of Government at Harvard University.
The year was 1966, the height of the Vietnam War.
Mr.
McNamara was at the university to meet privately with students and faculty and discuss policy in Indochina.
Demonstrators threw themselves under his car, and the police led Mr.
McNamara away through steam tunnels linking university buildings.


Francis B. Trudeau, 75, Founder Of Biological Research Institute
Dr.
Francis B. Trudeau, founding president of the Trudeau Institute, a research organization in Saranac Lake, N.Y., that specializes in determining how the body's immune system is damaged by disease, died on Tuesday at the Adirondack Medical Center in Saranac Lake.
He was 75 and lived in Saranac Lake.
The cause was heart complications from amyloidosis, said his son, Garry, the creator of the "Doonesbury" comic strip.
Amyloidosis is a systemic disease of unknown cause in which damage to the heart and other organs results from deposits of the protein amyloid.


Bosnian Serb Denies All at a War Crimes Tribunal
At the opening hearing of the first international war crimes tribunal since the end of World War II, a Bosnian Serb pleaded not guilty today to charges including the murder, torture and rape of Muslims in Bosnia.
Seated behind a bulletproof glass screen in a specially prepared United Nations court here, the Serb, Dusan Tadic, said, "I did not take part in any of the crimes with which I am charged."


Atlantic Southeast Airlines Inc.(ASAI,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Charges of Rousting Homeless Are Made Up, Group Says
The chairman of the Grand Central Partnership has accused advocates for the homeless of fabricating charges that squads of Partnership workers beat homeless people to roust them from cash machine lobbies and other sites.
The chairman, Peter L. Malkin, was responding to an article in The New York Times in which four former outreach workers said they roughed up the homeless at the behest of the Partnership, a business improvement district.
One of the four, who has expressed a fear he might be prosecuted, said yesterday that he was retracting his story.


Scalia Wasn't Wrong on Frost; Foe of Walls
To the Editor:
Robert Frost's "Mending Wall" has been subjected to many conflicting interpretations, but your April 22 editorial gives the correct one.
The "pro-wall" speaker was Frost's French-Canadian neighbor, Napoleon Guay.
In the opening lines, Something there is that doesn't love a wall,


To Serve Others
To The Home Section:
As the parent of a 15-year-old, I was appalled to read of the pressures placed on teen-agers by their parents, and by the students themselves, to engage in an inordinate number of community-service projects to qualify for a chance to make the "increasingly rarefied list of the nation's most prestigious colleges"  [ "Heavy Angst When It's 'Ivy or Else,' " March 30 ] .


S.A.T. Software: Does It Work?
ON May 6, more than a million high school students across the country will take the S.A.T., the college admissions test.
Their hopes will teeter on answers to geometry and analogy questions -- those little numbered ovals filled in with that No. 2 pencil.
In a bid to improve their scores on the Scholastic Assessment Test, about 10 percent of those students are paying hundreds of dollars for extracurricular courses marketed by companies that promise to sharpen test-taking strategies.
But what options exist for the majority of anxious test-takers, who are unable to enroll in such courses because of the cost or conflicting schedules or lack of room?


Northern States Power Co.(NSP,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Augat Inc.(AUG,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Diet Ads Draw Lawsuit
The ads in Cosmopolitan, Glamour and Parade told readers to "just pop a Chew-Lite in your mouth and chew the fat away." That promise was enough to persuade thousands of people to send money to two Livingston companies for Chew-Lite diet gum and Lipo / Trim diet pills, hoping they could lose 6 to 10 pounds a week and still eat everything they love, as the ads said.
The Federal Government has sued the owners of the companies, calling the advertising "false and misleading." SUSAN JO KELLER


Borg-Warner Automotive Inc.(BWA,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Bias Hits Hispanic Workers
Efrain Castillo, a 43-year-old truck driver, was forced to quit his job in mid-March after Mexico's economic crisis hit border-area businesses and left him idle two or three days each week.
"There's just no work," he lamented, looking up from job-search forms at the state's cavernous downtown unemployment office on Front Street.
But Mr.
Castillo, who came to the United States from Mexico in the early 1970's, is not just one American citizen whose livelihood happened to depend on the Mexican economy.
He is a member of a growing Hispanic labor force that is losing ground in this country's increasingly competitive job market.


Libbey Inc.(LBY,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Brooklyn Union Gas (BU,N) reports earnings for 12mo to Mar 31


Agents Pursue the Suspects' Money Trail
A week after the Oklahoma City bombing, Federal agents have begun pursuing the money trail left by the suspects.
The agents are working on witnesses' reports that Timothy J. McVeigh and his confederates carried thousands of dollars in cash despite working just sporadically, law-enforcement officials said today.


Assembly Offers Alternative to Pataki Budget
The Democratic leadership of the State Assembly answered Gov.
George E. Pataki's challenge to produce an alternative budget today, releasing new details of a plan that would restore $527 million of the amount the Republican Governor has proposed cutting.
The Assembly bill, which was passed tonight, 86 to 56, deals with aid to local governments, which represents about two-thirds of Mr.
Pataki's proposed $32.4 billion general-fund budget.
It also covers many of the most contentious elements of the budget fight, including spending on local schools, health care and welfare.


Cilcorp Inc.(CER,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


COMPANY BRIEFS
ASARCO INC., New York, a mining company, doubled its quarterly dividend to 20 cents a share.
Asarco will pay the dividend on June 1 to shareholders of record on May 8.
DU PONT &amp; CO. , Wilmington, Del., a chemical concern, will raise its quarterly dividend by 10.6 percent to 52 cents a share from 47 cents a share, payable June 12 to shareholders of record as of May 15.


Butler Brings Hope Right Off the Bat
Dallas Green wasn't around to see it.
Bobby Bonilla wasn't around to see it.
Hopefully, the four replacement umpires -- working where the major league umpires would have been but for a contract dispute and a lockout -- won't be around long enough to see it again.
And that is what the quintessential leadoff hitter can do.


Mystery Bomber Sent Taunting Letter to Victim at Yale, F.B.I. Says
Federal officials today released the text of a letter in which the mysterious serial bomber in the Unabom case ridicules one of his victims for opening the package that exploded and maimed him.
The letter was sent to David J. Gelernter, a prominent computer science professor at Yale University who was injured when a bomb went off in his hands in June 1993.
The package-bomb blinded Dr.
Gelernter in one eye, tore off part of his right hand, deafened him in one ear and wounded him in the chest.


Combustible Rhetoric
Much of the debate over President Clinton's warning against violent language has focused on two connected questions.
Was he unfairly linking mainstream conservatives to the violent right?
If so, did this amount to a tactical error that lessened the political benefit of his steady performance during the Oklahoma City tragedy?
But the President's tactics are less important than the substance of his remarks.
Mr.
Clinton is right that the language of violence and conflict has permeated political discussions, and that is nowhere more true than on talk radio.
The most extreme of these broadcast entertainers speak of "lynching" political opponents.
G.
Gordon Liddy has introduced the crackpot notion that citizens have the right to commit "self-defense" killing of Federal agents.
More polite hosts use less violent language, but they cast those who differ with them not as political opponents but as satanic enemies bent on destroying American society.
Moreover, these invocations of violence and condemnation come in a context in which the Government is cast as the enemy of the people.


Imasco Ltd. reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


An annual industry gathering has made significant changes to reverse its slumping attendance.
JUST as the agency industry has undergone extensive and sometimes painful "re-engineering" for the 1990's, so, too, has the industry's largest and best-known gathering, the annual meeting of the American Association of Advertising Agencies.
For the 77th annual meeting, which began yesterday in Orlando, Fla., the association, known as the Four A's, has made significant changes, trying to reverse slumping attendance.
For instance, the schedule has been trimmed a day so the meeting will end at noon on Friday, rather than at noon on Saturday as has been traditional.
The usual formal dinner-dance the final evening is being scrapped in favor of a reception at Sea World, where only the penguins dress in black tie.


Nominee for C.I.A. Vows to Clear Out Cold War Culture
The man nominated to be the next Director of Central Intelligence, Deputy Defense Secretary John M. Deutch, pledged today to sweep away a generation of cold warriors at the Central Intelligence Agency and change the spy service "all the way down to the bare bones."
Appearing before the Senate intelligence committee, whose members said he would easily be confirmed, Mr.
Deutch, 56, bluntly detailed his plans to redesign the Central Intelligence Agency and the rest of the nation's intelligence agencies.
Foremost among these, he said, was replacing the senior management of the C.I.A.'s operations directorate, which conducts espionage around the world and has recently suffered a series of self-inflicted wounds, from spy scandals to sex-discrimination lawsuits.


Women's Work: What's New, What Isn't
Yesterday was National Secretaries Day.
Today is Take Our Daughters to Work Day.
Many women are celebrating both.
Fully one in five of all working women holds a secretarial or clerical job, a proportion that has remained largely unchanged since 1950.
At the same time, women now constitute a majority of workers in a wide range of occupations long male-dominated, including psychologist, accountant, journalist, bus driver, bartender, and insurance or real estate agent.


The Boy Wonders Of Victoriana
SAY Victorian to most Americans and they will envision overstuffed furniture, oppressive bibelots, overbaked architecture.
It was an era dominated by an undisciplined goulash of decorating styles, most of them relying less on grace than on double helpings of gemutlichkeit.
Then, again, there was Herter Brothers.
As seen in "Herter Brothers: Furniture and Interiors for a Gilded Age," a touring exhibition that will be at the Metropolitan Museum of Art from May 10 through July 30, the German-born New York decorators Gustave Herter and his younger half-brother, Christian, were not the boy wonders of late 19th-century household design for nothing.


Leaving a Life but Not Quite Escaping
LADDER OF YEARS  By Anne Tyler  326 pages. Alfred A. Knopf. $24.
Anne Tyler's comically touching new novel, "Ladder of Years," begins with a one-page newspaper story headlined "Baltimore Woman Disappears During Family Vacation." The article begins, "Delaware State Police announced early today that Cordelia F. Grinstead, 40, wife of a Roland Park physician, has been reported missing while on holiday with her family in Bethany Beach." It goes on to say that Mrs.
Grinstead was last seen walking south along the beach by her husband, Dr.
Samuel Grinstead, 55, and her three children, Susan, 21; Ramsey, 19, and Carroll, 15.
It adds, "Her failure to return was not remarked until late afternoon."


Accounts
Eurocard, Frankfurt, to Bates Frankfurt, a unit of Cordiant P.L.C., to handle the credit card company's account, previously at TBWA Advertising, Frankfurt, a unit of the Omnicom Group.
The billings were estimated at $18 million to $22 million.
MFS Communications, Omaha, to Cadwell Davis Partners, New York, a unit of Cordiant P.L.C., as the first agency to handle advertising for the telecommunications company.
The billings were estimated at $5 million.


KLLM Transport Services Inc.(KLLM,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Barrasso's Return Puts Devils In Knots
Tom Barrasso made his first appearance of the season in goal for the Penguins tonight and looked as sharp as ever as Pittsburgh gained a 3-3 tie with the Devils.
"I'm glad to have a tie," said Devils Coach Jacques Lemaire, "because five or six of our guys were not at their best and we took some penalties against a dangerous team."


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corp., known as Freddie Mac, is selling $50 million of notes due in 2002 through Merrill Lynch.
Callable in three years, the issue is priced at par to yield 7.55 percent.
Norwest Corp., Minneapolis, is selling $100 million of medium-term notes due in 2002 through Morgan Stanley.
The notes are priced at par to yield 7.68 percent.
Callable in three years, the issue is rated Aa3 by Moody's Investors Service Inc., AA- by the Standard &amp; Poor's Corp. and AA by Duff &amp; Phelps.


Sturgis Warner, 81, Washington Lawyer
Sturgis Warner, a Washington lawyer who helped the capital's residents secure the right to vote for President, died on Saturday at his home in Washington.
He was 81.
The cause was cardiopulmonary arrest, his family said.


POP MUSIC
In the Third Phase Of a 10-Year-Old Career  Charlie Sexton Sextet Mercury Lounge
At 26, Charlie Sexton is already in the third phase of his career.
In 1985, he became a teen-age idol, singing David Bowie-style rock with his handsome face promoted by MTV.
The vogue didn't last; he returned to Austin, Tex., worked as a sideman, and re-emerged from 1992 to 1994 as a member of the blues-rock band Arc Angels.
Phase 3 is the Charlie Sexton Sextet, a five-member band that performed on Monday night.
All but one song in the set came from Mr.
Sexton's new album, "Under the Wishing Tree" (MCA).


Fremont General Corp.(FMT,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


CLASSICAL MUSIC
A Quartet Becomes A Duo Plus Two  Takacs String Quartet Miller Theater
It was a wonder the Takacs String Quartet performed at all on Tuesday evening.
In the last year and a half, the group has lost its first violinist, Gabor Takacs-Nagy, to personal problems; the Amati instruments it had on loan from the Corcoran Gallery were recalled to be put on sale, and, just a few months ago, its violist, Gabor Ormai, learned that he had inoperable cancer.
The remaining Hungarians, Karoly Schranz, second violinist, and Andras Fejer, cellist, have been joined by two Englishmen, Edward Dusinberre, first violinist, and Roger Tapping, violist.
And they have rounded up fine instruments.
Yet not surprisingly, the ensemble seemed unsettled.
Mr.
Dusinberre got caught up in some awkward embellishment in the Largo of Haydn's "Rider" Quartet (Op. 74, No. 3); Mr.
Tapping often looked, and sometimes sounded, like a doe stunned by headlights.
In addition to his sheer newness on board, Mr.
Tapping seemed far less extroverted than his colleagues, though a greater unity may come with time.
Schubert's Quartet in G (D. 887) generally cohered better than the Haydn.
But what worked best were Webern's pithy Bagatelles (Op. 9) and the like-spirited epigrams of Gyorgy Kurtag's "Officium Breve in Memoriam Endre Szervanszky." Despite their technical difficulties and unforgiving transparency, these short, concentrated statements were evidently easier for the group in its present state to hold together.
One can only wish the beleaguered and brave performers well. JAMES R. OESTREICH


Market Place; Does Kansas City Southern want to remain a mutual fund player?
ONE question that will be on the minds of analysts at a meeting today in New York with the management of Kansas City Southern Industries is whether the company wants to stay in the mutual fund business.
The answer for Kansas City Southern, which is better known for its railroad, appears to be yes -- for now.
But the company sent a mixed message about its future when it announced this week that it would include one of its two mutual fund companies, Berger Associates, in the initial public offering of 51 percent of its DST Systems, the leading record-keeper for the mutual fund industry.


Baker (Michael) Corp.(BKR,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Officer Is Killed in Shooting
An off-duty Essex County correction officer was shot and killed last night by a masked gunman as he walked down a crowded street in the Central Ward, the police said.


Belden Inc.(BWC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Sports of The Times; The Missing Minority -- Or Majority?
JUDGING by their decibels and their devotion, those who were at Yankee Stadium wanted to be there.
Their lungs and their loyalty had been stifled for more than eight months, and yesterday 50,245 let both all hang out while enjoying the Yankees' 8-6 victory.
But opening day at Yankee Stadium is often a sellout, especially in sunny warmth under a sky-blue dome with what's expected to be a first-place team.


A Different Take On Quiz Scandals
A little compassion, please, for Richard Greenberg.
The very gifted author of "Eastern Standard" and "The Extra Man" has had the misfortune to bring to New York an elegant, didactic play about the quiz show scandals of the 1950's, eight months after the opening of Robert Redford's elegant, didactic movie about exactly the same subject.
Despite a slew of Academy Award nominations and critical accolades, Mr.
Redford's "Quiz Show" has yet to become a popular hit.
But it generated enough publicity to reacquaint the country with the cautionary tale of Charles Van Doren, the young academic who made and destroyed his name on the question-and-answer show "21."


Brunswick Corp.(BC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Against the Odds, Hutu Refugees Express Hope
After a year in nomadic squalor, the families here hope they have reached the last leg of their journey.
Undaunted by the ethnic violence behind them or the uncertain reception that awaits them, they are finally going home.
"We are so tired of the camps," said Mukiza Nkurikiyo, who left a makeshift encampment in Kibeho, in the southwest, last week with his wife and four children.
"We have only the clothes we wear. Everything else was taken or abandoned."


Marie Claire Magazines
The American edition of Marie Claire, published jointly by Hearst Magazines and Marie Claire Album, will become a monthly magazine in September.
The women's feature magazine was introduced in August and has published four issues to date with a circulation of 400,000 guaranteed to advertisers.
The guaranteewill be increased to 500,000 in September.


Cabot Corp.(CBT,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


French Conservative in Bid for Far-Right Votes in Runoff
Mayor Jacques Chirac's campaign to win the second round of the French presidential election on May 7 has taken a sharp turn to the right, with a pitch intended to please voters who supported the extreme-right, anti-foreigner candidate Sunday in the first round.
Jean-Marie Le Pen, the leader of the far-right National Front, may no longer be a candidate in the flesh, but he is still a powerful force.
He has scheduled a rally in Paris for Monday night to make known his preference in the second round, which pits Mr.
Chirac, 62, against a 57-year-old Socialist, Lionel Jospin.


A Pause in Sympathy With Oklahomans


F.B.I. Offers Reward for Tip
Law enforcement officials are offering a $10,000 reward for information about bombs placed in a Rutgers University library earlier this month.
The Federal Bureau of Investigation will not say whether the reward is an effort to jump-start a stalled case.
"It's an ongoing investigation, and it's policy not to comment on an ongoing investigation," said Special Agent Stephen J. Montgomery.


Essay; The Paranoid Style
"Let us put an end to the teaching and preaching of hate and evil and violence," said the President after the killing.
"Let us turn away from the fanatics of the far left and the far right, from the apostles of bitterness and bigotry, from those defiant of law and those who pour venom into the nation's bloodstream."
The President was Lyndon Johnson, five days after the assassination of John F. Kennedy.
The evenhanded message was needed, though some were trying to lay the blame at the door of "right-wing extremists."


State's Hospital Bill Surcharges Upheld
The United States Supreme Court today upheld New York State's practice of raising revenues by tacking surcharges onto hospital bills, saving the state's health financing system from potential collapse.
Several states use similar surcharges or taxes to help pay for indigent health care, to boost hospital revenues and even to close state budget gaps, as New York did in 1992.
The primary principle behind the practice -- subsidizing health care for the indigent by taxing hospital payments by the insured -- was at the center of the debate over Federal health care legislation in 1993 and 1994.


Avnet Inc.(AVT,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


More Time to Revise Budgets
A little more breathing room has been written into law for communities forced to rework school budgets that voters did not like.


Jacob Shaham, 52, Columbia Physicist
Jacob Shaham, a theoretical astrophysicist and professor of physics at Columbia University who helped expand the knowledge of neutron stars, died last Thursday at Presbyterian Hospital.
He was 52 and lived in Riverdale in the Bronx.
The cause was heart failure, said his wife, Meira Shaham.


Manager of Boston Subway Gets No. 2 Post at Port Authority
George J. Marlin, the new executive director of the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey, yesterday appointed as his top deputy the general manager of the agency that runs the Boston subways.
The selection appeared to be an attempt by Mr.
Marlin to allay concerns among some of the authority's commissioners and Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman of New Jersey that he did not have management experience in the public sector.


Masland Corp.(MSLD,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Supermarket in Doubt
A plan to open a big supermarket in East Harlem appears headed to defeat as members of the Manhattan Borough Board prepare to vote on the $12 million project.
Opponents of the store, who fear that it would hurt local bodega owners, said they could block the project.
Article, page B3.


Loblaw Cos. reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 25


Garden Q.&amp;A.
Spring Shrub Overhaul
Q.
I have an overgrown forsythia that blooms sporadically and is a big mess.
But I love it and don't want to lose it.
What should I do? -- Alan Wells, Washington


Golden Poultry Co.  (CHIK,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 25


Art Fleming, 70, Television Host Who Gave Polish to 'Jeopardy!'
Art Fleming, a tall, dignified actor who brought a generation of couch potatoes to attention and became an unlikely celebrity as the original host of the television quiz show "Jeopardy! ," died on Tuesday at his home in Crystal River, Fla.
He was 70.
The cause was pancreatic cancer, his family said.


Harman International (HAR,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Amplicon Inc.(AMPI,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Nipsco Industries(NI,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Conner Rides The Wind Past Mighty Mary To Gain Finals
In what was perhaps the most dramatic reversal in America's Cup history, Dennis Conner made up a four-minute deficit on the final leg of the course today as his Stars &amp; Stripes beat Mighty Mary by 52 seconds to win the right to defend yacht racing's premier trophy against New Zealand's Black Magic 1.
In the key maneuver, Mighty Mary sailed into a windless hole on on the right side of the course just when the mostly female team thought it had knocked Conner out of the three-boat final series to select a defender.


Destec Energy Inc.(ENG,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Interface Inc.(IFSIA,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 2


Kulicke &amp; Soffa Industries Inc.(KLIC,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Precisely at 9:02 A.M.


Adams Resources &amp; Energy Inc.(AE,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Mapco Inc.(MDA,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


East Harlem Pathmark Plan Appears Headed for Defeat
A plan to build a big supermarket in one of Manhattan's most economically depressed communities appeared headed for defeat yesterday as members of the Manhattan Borough Board prepared to vote this morning on the $12 million project.
Opponents of the 53,000-square-foot Pathmark supermarket planned for East Harlem, who fear that the store will hurt local bodega owners, said they had the necessary votes to block the sale of a vacant, city-owned lot on 125th Street where the store would be built.
And telephone calls to the board's members confirmed that unless 11th-hour negotiations were successful, the plan would be killed.


Donohue Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


New Medium for the Far Right
At 8 P.M. on the sixth day after the Oklahoma City bombing, "Mark From Michigan" -- as Mark Koernke, a paramilitary recruiter, is known to listeners -- was delivering his nightly broadcast over shortwave radio.
"What bothers me is the way they took this man and put him in an orange jumpsuit, and walked him amongst the public," he said, referring to the nationally televised arrest of Timothy J. McVeigh in the Oklahoma City bombing.
"It was almost as if they wanted the man to be shot. Amazingly, when they got him to the other end, they had spotlights on the area. They had this man illuminated as a target.


The Garden Path Leads Indoors
TODAY'S gardening experience often takes place indoors.
"We're seeing people putting garden sculptures in conservatory additions that have nothing to do with plants but are more like informal living rooms," said Michael Garden, the director of Elizabeth Street, bucolic outdoor shops in SoHo and on the Upper East Side.
It has just added a third site, indoors, at 1176 Second Avenue (62d Street).
Things there are suitable for the smallest apartment and the grandest estate, from a circa 1915 American iron gate ($12,500), below, to a re-creation of a 19th-century American cast-iron vase ($125), left.
For information: (212) 644-6969.
The garden is also likely to grow out of the past.
Munder-Skiles is a company that reproduces historical garden ornaments (an $85 reproduction of a 16th-century watering jug) and commissions new ones, like the iron garden gate ($2,600), top, inspired by Hector Guimard's Art Nouveau Paris metro designs.
By appointment at 22 West 88th Street, (212) 724-9438.


Another Way Out Of Mideast Impasse
To the Editor:
The opposite proposals of Eliahu Ben-Elissar and Henry Siegman to solve the Israeli-Palestinian conflict (letters, April 16) are unrealistic.
The Palestinians will not accept the autonomy self-rule the Likud is proposing, and the Israelis, at this stage, will not agree to Palestinian statehood.
There should be a third way, which might, during an interim process, solve most unsolved questions.


International Briefs; Bayer Profit Rises 35%
The German chemical and drug maker Bayer A. G. said stronger demand and higher prices for its finished chemical products helped lift first-quarter pretax profit 35 percent to 1.02 billion marks ($745 million).
Sales for the quarter rose 6.3 percent to 11.681 billion marks from 10.988 billion marks in the period a year ago.
Sales would have risen an additional 7 percent if not for the strengthening mark, Bayer said. (Bloomberg Business News)


China to Swap U.N. Mission Building in Deal
Under an agreement signed in Beijing with a major Manhattan real estate developer, the Chinese Government plans to swap the West 66th Street building that houses its United Nations Mission for two properties on First Avenue at 34th and 35th Streets.
The developer, Millennium Partners, will transfer air rights from the mission to its impending construction of a nearby apartment building of more than 30 stories at 1965 Broadway, between 66th and 67th Streets, where Tower Records and the Pottery Barn will operate stores at ground level.
Controlling the air rights of the adjacent mission will allow the developer to construct a bigger building than would otherwise be permitted.


Duke Power Co. (DUK,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


For Czech Art and Leisure
ART jewelry by the Czechoslovak-born constructivist designer Eva Eisler relies on the poles of tension and repose to replace pins and fasteners.


Guilty Plea in Executive's Death
A Rockland County man pleaded guilty today to helping his girlfriend kill her husband, a wealthy executive of the Grand Union supermarket chain, at the Monsey, N.Y., home the three of them were sharing last year.
As part of a plea bargain, the man, Robert Tomassi, agreed to testify against the woman when she goes on trial for murder next week.


International Briefs; Philips Electronics Says Profit Tripled
Philips Electronics said yesterday that its first-quarter profit had nearly tripled, but the company, a major Dutch manufacturer, cautioned that it would be hard to maintain that pace because of the dollar's decline.


A Right Not to Pray
To the Editor:
Re "School Prayer Is Already Allowed" (editorial, April 23):


La Quinta Inns Inc.(LQI,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Under-Age Drinking and Hotels
It is traditional for high school seniors to head for shore resorts for after-prom celebrations.
It is also traditional for those celebrations to include alcohol.
This year, the Ocean County Prosecutor, Daniel J. Carluccio, wants to make sure hotel and motel owners know about a new law aimed at stopping under-age drinking.
He called a news conference to talk about a measure, signed into law in February, that makes it a misdemeanor to rent rooms if customers under 21 will be drinking alcohol there.
Violations are punishable by up to six months in jail and a fine of up to $1,000.


Boyd Gaming Corp.(BYD,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Jones Apparel Group Inc.(JNY,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 2


Sports of The Times; Good Things Happening for One Who Decided to Wait
ALICE COACHMAN returned to her hotel room Tuesday afternoon following an exhausting schedule: three television interviews, one luncheon and a 45-minute visit to Joan of Arc Middle School in Manhattan.
Coachman sighed as she entered the room.
But instead of merely flopping down, she leaped into her bed with one sudden, explosive motion -- a surprising exhibition of spring for a 73-year-old woman.


Facing Major-League Scrutiny
The two men may have had talent when it came to professional baseball, but they have not done so well in business, state regulators say.
So officials are taking a hard look at an application by Bobby Brown and Jerry Mumphrey, both former major league players, to get a casino service license for Major League Food Management Inc.
The men's lawyer acknowledges that their companies have had some money problems but says that his clients' honesty is beyond reproach.


Editorial Notebook: Ginger Rogers; A Fine Romance With a Fine Gal
I met Ginger Rogers once.
She was 75 then, looking jazzy with a blonde bouffant and false eyelashes and lots of red lipstick.
She was sitting because her legs bothered her, but she was full of vinegar.
She had come to Washington to campaign before Congress against the colorization of movies, which seemed appropriate, since nothing filmed in color was ever as beautiful as the sight of Ginger Rogers in a feathery gown spinning through a black and white Art Deco moonscape with Fred Astaire.
Watching herself in the colorized "42nd Street" had upset her.
"All those lovely girls in '42nd Street' suddenly had the same orange face, the same orange legs, the same green costume and the same blank look," she said.
I had knelt by her chair to interview her, and as I got up she pronounced me a "fine gal." A small compliment from Ginger Rogers was, as Fred once sang, Heaven.


Season Opens for House Tours
SHOPPING for good design ideas?
The season of show houses (and house and garden tours) has arrived: Curtains are being draped, floors polished to a shine and plants pruned to perfection.
Here is a sampling of events in the New York area and on the East Coast.
Bring a notepad and remember to leave your high heels at home.
New York City
Upper East Side, Manhattan, through May 16 -- The Kips Bay show house is at 57 East 64th Street.
Open Monday through Saturday, 11 A.M. to 4:30 P.M. (Tuesday and Thursday until 7:30 P.M.); Sunday, noon to 4:30 P.M.
No children under 6.
Admission: $15.
Information: (212) 517-7733.


At Kips Bay, Opposites That Enchant
THE winds of change in decorating are blowing strong and in the most unlikely of places: the Kips Bay Boys and Girls Club Decorator Show House.
Who would have thought that Old World style -- crystal chandeliers, rare needlepoint rugs and $300-dollar-a-yard silks -- would be upstaged by New World informality: bare floors, kitchen chairs and a sofa that retails for $1,650?
Or that bold, over-the-top decorating could make hearts beat fast once again, as establishment decorators like Thomas Britt and Juan Pablo Molyneux reinvent themselves in surprisingly fresh ways.


Antec Corp.(ANTC,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Gadfly Says A.C.L.U. Is Trying to Oust Him for Dissent
The American Civil Liberties Union has long defended the right of people to express unpopular opinions, whether they were Nazis in Skokie, Ill., or flag burners in Texas.
But when it comes to internal dissent by one of its own, Dr.
Alan Bell, a longtime New Jersey A.C.L.U. member, says the organization is not so tolerant.
Dr.
Bell, a 30-year A.C.L.U. member and a former board member of the New Jersey chapter, is in danger of becoming the first member to be thrown out of the A.C.L.U. since 1940, according to an official of the group.
Dr.
Bell says it is all because he has complained too loudly and too often about the organization's budget practices.


Money Store Inc.(MONE,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Arkansas Best Corp.(ABFS,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Johnstown America Industries Inc.(JAII,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Glenayre Technologies Inc.(GEMS,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


INSIDE
Hospital Surcharges Upheld
The United States Supreme Court upheld New York's practice of raising revenues by adding surcharges to hospital bills, a system also used in several other states.
Page B5.
Giuliani Weighs More Cuts
Mayor Giuliani has identified $400 million in possible additional budget cuts affecting schools, hospitals, libraries and museums.
Page B1.
War Crimes Trial Opens
At the first international war crimes trial in nearly 50 years, a Bosnian Serb pleaded not guilty to murder, rape and other charges.
Page A3.
Conner Sails Into Final
Dennis Conner's yacht beat the mostly female crew of Mighty Mary and will defend the America's Cup against New Zealand.
Page B9.


Acuson Corp.(ACN,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 1


Milwaukee Parents Like School Choice
To the Editor:
Re "In Test of School-Voucher Idea, the Sky's Not Falling but Neither Is Manna" (Education page, April 19): You uncover a strange incongruence in Milwaukee's school choice program.
Parents are enthusiastic about choice, yet an evaluation by Prof.
John Witte finds that academic performance remains about the same for choice students as for public school students.


Chief of Prodigy Services Is Planning to Step Down
The Prodigy Services Company, a leading provider of computer on-line information services, said yesterday that its president and chief executive, Ross Glatzer, would retire on Monday.
He is the second senior executive to leave the company in two months.
Prodigy, which is jointly owned by I.B.M. and Sears, Roebuck &amp; Company named Edward A. Bennett, a former executive with Viacom Inc., to be president and chief executive.


METRO DIGEST
EXECUTIVE DENIES ROUSTING HOMELESS The chairman of the Grand Central Partnership has accused advocates for the homeless of fabricating charges that squads of workers beat homeless people to roust them from cash machine lobbies and other sites.
B3.
PRISON TERM FOR HIDING DRUGS IN DOG A New Jersey man was sentenced to three years in prison for trying to smuggle cocaine into Kennedy International Airport in the belly of an Old English sheep dog last year.
The dog, since named Cokey, has recovered and is now a Customs Service mascot.
B3.


What's Underfoot And Overhead
AFTER touring the 15 rooms on five floors of the Kips Bay show house this year, visitors may come away a bit out of breath and with a crick in the neck to boot: a lot of the decorating action takes place underfoot and overhead.
Artists, muralists and even a tent maker (Gisela Stromeyer of Brooklyn, whose parents and grandparents made circus tents in Germany) have enlivened ceilings and transformed floors into canvases to evoke atmosphere, attitude or just a smile.


DeVry Inc.(DVRY,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Shape of Things to Come, in Theory
PETER EISENMAN, the New York architect, says that Charles Jencks, the U.C.L.A. professor and theorist, "has the uncanny capacity to announce a new movement in architecture before it has begun." Or even before people have finished digesting his last ones (remember Ad Hocism? Post-Modernism?).
Now, Mr.
Jencks has codified another theory on how the world works, something that he calls cosmogenics, in his 27th book, "The Architecture of the Jumping Universe -- A Polemic: How Complexity Science Is Changing Architecture and Culture" (Academy Editions, 1995, $20).
He writes: "We no longer live in a static cosmos, but in an expanding, generative universe. It unfolds, gestates, and jumps, sometimes violently, to a new level." Mr.
Jencks is interpreting his theory in furniture that has a language of waves and twists, warps and folds, at right.
An exhibition of his furniture and conceptual drawings is at the Redfern Gallery, 20 Cork Street, London, till May 25.


Correction Officer Gunned Down on Newark Street


MacMillan Bloedel reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


AFLAC Inc.(AFL,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Louisiana Land &amp; Exploration Co. (LLX,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Appier Unhittable But Can't Go All 9
Royals 5, Orioles 1
Maybe if there had been a normal spring training, Kevin Appier might have been able to pitch a no-hitter.
And certainly there would have been more people to see it.
Instead, only 24,170 fans -- including some admitted for free -- saw Appier pulled after six and two-thirds innings with a no-hitter in progress.
Reliever Rusty Meacham gave up a hit with one out in the eighth, and the Kansas City Royals went on to beat the Baltimore Orioles, 5-1.


Allied Products Corp.(ADP,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Pistons Giving Collins Chaney's Job and More
DON CHANEY and BILLY McKINNEY are out with the Detroit Pistons, and DOUG COLLINS is in.
Chaney was dismissed as coach and McKinney resigned as vice president of player operations yesterday.
The jobs will be combined and handed to Collins, whose hiring is expected to be announced Saturday.
The Pistons' president, TOM WILSON, emphasized that Collins has yet to sign a contract.
But he made it clear that the former Chicago Bulls coach is leaving the broadcast booth to take charge of the Pistons.


Knicks Know That Cavaliers Can Be Dangerous
The Knicks expect to be playing for another six weeks.
The Cleveland Cavaliers want to stop New York's championship run before it starts.
So, after preparing all week, the Knicks and Cavaliers will open the playoffs tonight with Game 1 of the three-of-five-game series at Madison Square Garden.
The Knicks are favored, but the Cavaliers are dangerous.
The teams split their four games during the regular season, and each one was 0-2 on its home court.


Ending Operation in Iraq, Turkey Claims Success Against Kurds
With Turkish troops now winding down their five-week-old operation in northern Iraq, senior Turkish officials said today that the army had succeeded in its mission to wipe out the base camps, arms depots and supply routes used by Kurdish separatist guerrillas.
But the officials acknowledge that the hard part comes now, as Turkey tries to find a way to secure the mountainous border area that had become a launching pad for armed forays into Turkey by the Kurdistan Workers' Party.


Teen-Ager, Hurt by Explosion From a Pipe Bomb, Is Arrested
A Queens teen-ager who told the authorities he wanted to become a bomb-squad detective was seriously injured after a pipe bomb he was making exploded late Tuesday in the basement of his home in Woodhaven, the police said yesterday.
The youth, Ramon Bifulco, 17, lost two fingers on his left hand when the bomb blew up about 10:40 P.M., said Detective Mark Patterson, a police spokesman.


Dentsply InternationalInc.(XRAY,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


London Insurance reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Democracy, Year 1 -- A special report.; As South Africa Changes, Fulfilling Hope Is Hardest
At the edge of this motor city and somewhere near the bottom of South Africa's prosperity index sits a black slum called Soweto-on-Sea, where pink flamingos flap in a sewage-saturated estuary and wind slices through leaky cells made of scrap tin and pasteboard.
A year after the residents of this place cast their votes in the country's first free election, Soweto-on-Sea has as much to show for democracy as any community in the land.


Larizza Industries INc.(LII,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Scalia Wasn't Wrong on Frost; Flag-Burning Precedent
To the Editor:
"Justice Scalia's Poetic License" (editorial, April 22) points out that the Supreme Court wrongly cites Robert Frost's "Mending Wall" as if the poem were in favor of walls.
This is not the first time that justices got a major American poem backward.


Lukas Keeps Mum on Derby Outlook for Serena's Song
The great gathering of the 3-year-olds intensified at Churchill Downs yesterday as Jumron, Knockadoon, Pyramid Peak and Wild Syn worked out on the track where the 121st Kentucky Derby will be run one week from Saturday with the maximum number of 20 horses likely to run for the roses.
The vigil continued at the barn where D. Wayne Lukas keeps his juvenile champion of last year, Timber Country; his Florida Derby winner, Thunder Gulch, and his Jim Beam winner, the filly Serena's Song.
Would he or wouldn't he run the filly?
Lukas wasn't saying, except to repeat the party line that he would wait as long as possible before casting the die.


CHRONICLE
A recurring heart problem has caused BILL MOYERS to cut back on a commitment to deliver three commentaries a week on the "NBC Nightly News" program, a memo to the network's staff said yesterday.
In a report to NBC on his health status, Mr.
Moyers said that he had successfully undergone coronary artery bypass surgery but that he still required an intensive, year-long rehabilitation program that would prevent him from fulfilling his NBC commitment.
Mr.
Moyers joined NBC as a news analyst in February.
"Call it hubris, denial or just the obsession to return to work, I deceived myself," Mr.
Moyers was quoted as saying in the memo.
But the memo said he would still appear occasionally on NBC news programs, including "Meet the Press."


California Plans To Open Local Phone Markets
California regulators voted yesterday in favor of a proposal to open the state's local telephone market to competition, in what would be the most sweeping deregulation yet of the traditionally monopolistic business.
The proposal by the California Public Utilities Commission would allow long-distance providers and cable television operators to compete with Pacific Bell and GTE for a $6 billion market.
Several states -- including New York, Michigan and Illinois -- have allowed new competitors into their local markets.
But the regional Bell operating companies retain key marketing advantages over their new rivals; for example, they can force customers to change telephone numbers to switch to a competing carrier.
Such loopholes would be largely scrapped under California's plan.


Chauvco Resources reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Nestle Unit Selects Dailey
The chocolate and confections division of the Nestle Food Company in Glendale, Calif., the American unit of Nestle S.A. of Switzerland, has named Dailey &amp; Associates in Los Angeles, a unit of the Interpublic Group of Companies, to handle advertising for its Nestle Crunch and Nestle Buncha Crunch candy brands.
The account, with billings estimated at $8 million, had been at Jordan, McGrath, Case &amp; Taylor in New York for the last 10 years until that agency was dismissed late last month.


AMP Inc.(AMP,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Clinton Seeks More Anti-Terrorism Measures
President Clinton tonight proposed a new round of anti-terrorism measures, including hiring 1,000 new Federal agents and easing the ban on military participation in law enforcement to let the armed forces help investigate crimes involving chemical, biological or nuclear weapons.
The Administration is proceeding with efforts to carry out Mr.
Clinton's first set of proposals for combating terrorism, which the President outlined on Sunday, including creation of a new domestic counterterrorism center headed by the Federal Bureau of Investigation.


Capitals Top Isles to Boost Playoff Bid
The Washington Capitals held off the pesky Islanders, 6-5, at USAir Arena tonight and earned 2 critical points on a night when all eight teams fighting for the Eastern Conference's five final playoff berths were in action.
The victory left Washington, which started the night alone in sixth place, with 47 points with three regular-season games left to play.


Eastern Enterprises (EFU,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS  Sampras Withdraws  A twisted ankle knocked Pete Sampras out of the Monte Carlo Open yesterday and dimmed his chances of being in top clay-court form for next month's French Open.
Sampras was playing well against Paul Haarhuis of the Netherlands, having won the first set.
Sampras was chasing a forehand winner by Haarhuis at 1-1 in the second set when he caught his toe in the clay.
After some treatment, Sampras decided to quit. (AP)


International Briefs; Toyota to Step Up Purchase of U.S. Parts
The Toyota Motor Company said yesterday that companies in the Toyota group would increase purchases of tires and batteries from the United States but denied that the decision was made because of pressure from the White House.


John Stennis Is Laid to Rest


Civil Suit Names Tyson
Barely a month out of prison after serving three years on a rape conviction, MIKE TYSON has been hit with a civil suit that was originally filed before he went to jail.
The suit was filed by PHYLLIS C. POLANER in Superior Court in Newark in 1990 and has been reopened there.
She charges that in 1988, Tyson sexually attacked and injured her while she was serving as publicist for ROBIN GIVENS, Tyson's former wife.
The trial date has been set for June 12.


Awestruck Wetteland Cool in Debut
For the first five innings or so, John Wetteland wasn't much different than the 50,245 fans who ventured to Yankee Stadium yesterday afternoon for the sun-splashed opening of the baseball season.
He had no popcorn or hot dogs, but his view from the dugout was better than from the box seats and the feel was as comfortable as his own living room.
"It felt great to sit in the dugout and watch major league baseball again," Wetteland said.
"It was exciting. The bell rang and everybody answered the call."


AllTrista Corp.(JARS,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 2


CHRONICLE
More than a dozen frail, elderly survivors of Nazi death camps and several others who managed to escape have been quietly preparing for months for this afternoon.
All of them are residents of the Hebrew Home for the Aged in Riverdale, the Bronx, and they will gather in the home's synagogue to observe Yom Hashoah, the international day of Holocaust remembrance.


Capitals Top Isles to Boost Playoff Bid
The Washington Capitals held off the pesky Islanders, 6-5, at USAir Arena tonight and earned 2 critical points on a night when all eight teams fighting for the Eastern Conference's five final playoff berths were in action.
The victory left Washington, which started the night alone in sixth place, with 47 points with three regular-season games left to play.


Kinetic Concepts Inc.(KNCI,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Energen Corp.(EGN,N) reports earnings for 12mo to Mar 31


Banta Corp.(BNTA,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Equitable of Iowa (EIC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


City Ballet Opens Season, All Sunshine and Mists
The New York City Ballet evoked sunny days and misty nights when it opened its spring season on Tuesday night at the New York State Theater.
How appropriate it was for George Balanchine's "Donizetti Variations" to be performed in April.
This bouncy little piece is like a mild spring morning.
The choreography sparkles, except for one melodramatic, yet obviously tongue-in-cheek, mime sequence that darkens the action like a passing storm cloud.
But no showers fall and merriment prevails.


GATX Corp.(GMT,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Calendar: Shows, Sales, Cherry Blossom Festival
Violets Times Two  Horticultural Society of New York, 128 West 58th Street; (212) 757-0915.
The New York City African Violet Society's annual show and sale will take place tomorrow, from 2 to 7 P.M., and on Saturday, from 10 A.M. to 5 P.M.
A second show, sponsored by the African Violet Society of Greater New York, will take place at the Queens Botanical Garden, 43-50 Main Street (at Dahlia Avenue) in Flushing.
Open Saturday, 1:30 to 5:30 P.M., and Sunday, 11 A.M. to 5 P.M.
Information: (718) 423-2786.
No charge for admission.


A. Loomis Bell, 72, St. Luke's Specialist In Pulmonary Illness
Dr.
A.
L.
Loomis Bell Jr., who developed new diagnostic methods during 46 years as a heart and lung specialist at St.
Luke's Hospital, died on Tuesday at his home in Birdsboro, Pa.
He was 72.
The cause was pulmonary fibrosis, his family said.


Pursuing the Bottom Line In Victorian Industry
For whatever marketing reason, a new production of Charles Dickens's "Hard Times," Sunday on PBS, is being promoted by "Masterpiece Theater" as "darkly comic." But there is little or nothing comic about this novel, written in 1854.
As Russell Baker, the series host, notes, it is the only Dickens story that doesn't even pretend to have a happy ending.
His portrait of Coketown, actually Preston in Lancashire, is a bitter indictment of the squalor and pollution of the Industrial Revolution in Victorian England.
With a few exceptions, the major characters, depicted here with delicious malice, are fools or scoundrels.
Downsizing and all that.


Artur Balsam Tribute
A memorial concert for the pianist Artur Balsam is to take place on Saturday at 8 P.M. at the Manhattan School of Music, Broadway at 122d Street, Morningside Heights.
The violinists Joseph Fuchs and Roman Totenberg, the cellist Zara Nelsova and the pianist Edmund Battersby are among those to play.
The speakers will be Marta Istomin, Richard Adams and Gideon Waldrop, the school's president, vice president and former president, respectively.
Mr.
Balsam, who died in September at the age of 88, was a longtime member of the faculty at Manhattan School, where a piano scholarship is to be established in his name.
Information: (212) 749-2802, Ext. 428.


Mother's Age Called Factor For Newborns
Teen-age girls who become pregnant have long been known to face a higher risk of having premature babies and other complications, and a new study says biological factors may be an important reason.
Researchers at the University of Utah said today that a study of more than 130,000 pregnancies indicated that teen-agers faced higher risks than older women even when such risk factors as low income, poor education, bad health habits like smoking, and inadequate access to health care are taken into account.


Simpson Defense Focuses Again on Blood
Defense lawyers focused once again today on a vial of blood drawn from O. J. Simpson the day after his former wife was slain and suggested that the testimony of the Police Department's junior evidence collector as to how she had handled it was inconsistent, incredible and coached.
Mr.
Simpson's lawyers have accused the police of handing over the blood half a day after they say they did and spending the intervening hours sprinkling it on anything incriminating.
Today one of those lawyers, Peter Neufeld, suggested that garbled recollections of the evidence collector, Andrea Mazzola, made what could seem like a wild conspiracy theory more plausible.


Man Who Used Dog to Smuggle Receives 3-Year Prison Sentence
A New Jersey man was sentenced yesterday to three years in prison for trying to smuggle cocaine into Kennedy International Airport in the belly of an Old English sheep dog.
The man, John Erik Roa, 22, a former pizzeria worker from Paterson, had pleaded guilty in January in Federal District Court in Brooklyn, admitting that he knew the dog he was supposed to pick up at the airport had had nearly 5 pounds of cocaine surgically implanted before being shipped as cargo from Bogota, Colombia.


U.S. and Russia Put Upbeat Front on Summit Talks Rehearsal
With relations between Washington and Moscow at their worst since before the collapse of the Soviet Union, Secretary of State Warren Christopher and Foreign Minister Andrei V. Kozyrev of Russia today staged a dress rehearsal for the summit meeting between their Presidents next month in Moscow.
There are no illusions inside the Administration that President Clinton will move President Boris N. Yeltsin from his fixed positions on a variety of issues.
Mr.
Christopher has said that the talks in Moscow will be businesslike, which in diplomatic code means no breakthroughs are expected.


Protest Filed for Schulz
As expected, CEDRIC KUSHNER -- AXEL SCHULZ's promoter -- made his protest official last night, demanding that Saturday night's victory by GEORGE FOREMAN in Las Vegas, Nev., be reversed, or that Foreman meet Schulz in a rematch.


Murphy Oil Corp.(MUR,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Sports of The Times; Good Things Happening for One Who Decided to Wait
ALICE COACHMAN returned to her hotel room Tuesday afternoon following an exhausting schedule: three television interviews, one luncheon and a 45-minute visit to Joan of Arc Middle School in Manhattan.
Coachman sighed as she entered the room.
But instead of merely flopping down, she leaped into her bed with one sudden, explosive motion -- a surprising exhibition of spring for a 73-year-old woman.


Benjamin Zdatny, Food Executive, 68
Benjamin Zdatny, a food industry executive and philanthropist, died on Friday at his home in Huntington, L.I.
He was 68 and also had a home in Boca Raton, Fla.
He had suffered from heart disease for some time, said his son, Ian Zdatny.


Yankees of '95 Pick Up Where '94 Team Left Off
Finally, there was baseball at Yankee Stadium yesterday.
Baseball on the immaculate green grass, baseball before 50,245 spectators, baseball that proved how memorable the game could be.
From home runs to hit-and-runs and from starter to closer, the Yankees made their fans and themselves feel special again by doing the same kinds of things that made them so powerful last year as they outlasted the Texas Rangers, 8-6.
Jimmy Key started the game, John Wetteland finished it with a strikeout and the 1995 Yankees imitated the 1994 Yankees in between with precise execution, big bats and an intense approach.


Van Halen, at Home In High School Forever
Sammy Hagar, Van Halen's lead singer, works hard at his job.
It can't be easy for a 47-year-old man who has been in the music business for more than 20 years to pretend he's a rowdy high-school boy.
Between songs here at Byrne Arena on Tuesday night, Mr.
Hagar could have been rock's own Kato Kaelin, only more vulgar, making garbled pronouncements about love and peace as he crammed every sentence with four-letter words.
The audience thrilled to every profanity; Mr.
Hagar knows his crowd.
Van Halen didn't bother with much spectacle: just a bare stage, two walls of amplifiers (for guitar and bass) and a big video screen.
As he sang, Mr.
Hagar bounded around the stage, bounced in place like an aerobics buff and demonstrated the official Van Halen hand signal.
He was constantly putting on and taking off T-shirts, baseball caps and a Rangers jacket that was tossed on stage by fans.
"I'll wear anything," he bantered, even hanging a bra around his neck.


Ball Corp.(BLL,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 2


The Many Facets of Krystian Zimerman
Critics often look for theories about a musician: patterns of strengths and weaknesses that reveal fundamental principals about a player's technique, musical interpretations and personality.
But at Krystian Zimerman's recital in Carnegie Hall on Tuesday night, this quest was futile.
There were, of course, some recurring qualities of sound and phrase.
Mr.
Zimerman's recordings and concerts have, by now, made his lyrical gifts familiar: his elegantly songful lines, his love of delicacy, his carefully controlled pacing.
But on Tuesday, for every moment of gracious charm there were others of almost casual routine; for every moment of shapely drama, there were others of bland recitation.
It seemed almost as if a radio dial were being turned slightly between pieces: sometimes the signal was crisp and clear; at other times muffled and stripped of nuance.


Samuel Herman, 91, Xylophonist for NBC
Samuel Herbert Herman, a xylophonist and longtime staff musician for NBC radio and television, died on Sunday at the Baptist Home at Brookmeade in Rhinebeck, N.Y.
He was 91 and lived in Fishkill, N.Y.
The cause was heart failure, said his niece, Ellen Wolf of Fairfield, Conn.


Forward Picks St. John's
MIKE MINNIEFIELD, a 6-foot-8-inch, 233-pound forward who helped Spartanburg Methodist of South Carolina reach the national junior college championship game, has signed a letter of intent to attend St.
John's.
Minniefield averaged 12 points and 10 rebounds last season. (AP)


Clark Equipment (CKL,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


CHRONICLE
CONAN O'BRIEN , the late-night talk show host, will toss a few jibes at President Clinton and former President Jimmy Carter on Saturday night at the annual White House correspondent's dinner at the Washington Hilton Hotel.
Mr.
O'Brien will perform his familiar "Clutch Cargo" routine, which is based on an old television cartoon character.


Allegheny Ludlum Corp.(ALS,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 2


Ionics (ION,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


BASEBALL: Just Get Home, All Is Forgiven; 50,245, Not Counting Umps, See Yankees' Delayed Opener
Baseball returned to New York City yesterday afternoon, bringing with it the balm to soothe tens of thousands of heartsick fans.
The crowd for opening day at Yankee Stadium -- 50,245, about 6,500 fewer than last year -- arrived early and stayed late, witnesses to the first professional baseball game in the city since a players' strike shut down the game last August.
In between they saw the Yanks hold off the Texas Rangers, a satisfying start to a season in which the New York team is expected to excel.
But more than that, the returning fans seemed to relish the sheer pleasure of being in the ball park on a sunny day, as if it were a kind of medicine for an undiagnosed malady.


Marion Merrell Dow Inc.(MKC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Israel, in Possible Pullout Move, To Reassign West Bank Troops
In a move that seemed a prelude to a long-awaited withdrawal of Israeli forces from some Palestinian towns, Israel said today that it would reassign soldiers at three army bases in the West Bank.
Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin told Cabinet members that conscripts going through basic training would be replaced by seasoned soldiers at those bases, two near Nablus in the northern West Bank and one near this Israeli settlement, 10 miles north of Jerusalem.


Atlantic Energy Inc.(ATE,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Matlack Systems Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


A Director Who Delights in the Dark
Little Junior Brown, the chop-shop kingpin in the film "Kiss of Death," makes a strong impression.
Played by Nicolas Cage, he puts on leather gloves, turns up the music on his boombox and methodically beats a man to death in one scene.
In another, he delivers an earnest moral lecture to a customer who gets fresh with one of the strippers at Baby Cakes, a topless club he owns.
It would be easy to punish, but Little Junior wants the man to understand just how insensitive he has been.
"He's a monster," says Barbet Schroeder, the film's director, with a delighted laugh.
"But he's an interesting monster."


Bortolami Wins a Close One
In the closest finish ever in the prologue time trial of the 12-day Tour DuPont, America's most important bicycle race, four favorites finished little more than a second apart tonight.
Gianluca Bortolami won the race against the clock, covering the 2.98-mile course in 6 minutes 5.749 seconds.
Andrea Peron, who lives 15 miles from Bortolami in Italy, finished second in 6:06.315.
Lance Armstrong of Austin, Tex., was third in 6:06.656 and Vyacheslav Yekimov of Russia fourth in 6:06.887.
For the overall standing going into Thursday's 68-mile road race from Dover to Wilmington, Bortolami will get a time of 6:05 and the three others 6:06.


Talk on Bombs Surges On Computer Network
Weeks before a car bomb destroyed the Federal building in Oklahoma City, human rights groups noticed a surge in communications traffic on the Internet about bomb-making, including an easy-to-follow recipe about how to manufacture the same type of fertilizer and fuel oil bomb used in the attack.
"Let the mixture soak for at least half an hour," says the recipe, which was posted on March 25.
It then went on to explain how to hook up a detonator to two carts of high explosives.


Kemet Corp.(KMET,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Did Yale Impostor Really Earn B Grades?
To the Editor:
The well-publicized story of Yale's expulsion of Lon Grammer, a transfer student who gained admission to Yale by allegedly falsifying documents, would by now have been forgotten were it not for this twist: Mr.
Grammer is said to have achieved a 3.0 grade point average at Yale, as compared with the 2.1 he earned at little-known Cuesta College.
Prof.
Paul J. Korshin (letter, April 23) sees this as but another indication of declining standards in higher education.


No Lullaby Here, a Brahms Work by Way of Lubovitch
Left to his best instincts, Lar Lubovitch is a choreographer of surge and flow, mass and volume rather than line and balance.
When he sets dancers flying across the stage, flings them out with centrifugal force or draws them into intimate whirlpools of emotion, passion is never absent from his view of movement.
The quintessential Lubovitch was happily on display Tuesday night at the Metropolitan Opera House, when American Ballet Theater presented "A Brahms Symphony," a 1985 masterwork that was now seen here for the first time in a new and longer version.


Snuff Makers Accused of Manipulating Nicotine to Lure Young
Scientists said today that makers of snuff appeared to have induced hundreds of thousands of children to use their products since 1970 by manipulating nicotine levels.
In four articles in Tobacco Control, a peer-reviewed medical journal of the British Medical Association, the scientists said the amount of nicotine in snuff had been deliberately graduated, and the milder, sweeter products had been marketed to young, beginning users.


Gaylord Container Corp.(GCR,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Visiting a Landmark


Fiserv (FISV,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Ruling Upholding Surcharges On Hospital Bills Wins Praise
Connecticut officials today cautiously celebrated the United States Supreme Court decision allowing states to impose surcharges on hospital bills, saying it could provide a much-needed $150 million to fill a gap in next year's budget.
The ruling could also help resolve a bitter legal battle over state taxes on hospitals that had contributed to a deficit in the current state budget.


Horace Mann Educators Corp.(HMN,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


A '92 Letter Says Violence Is Road to Change
In a letter to the editor of a newspaper in upstate New York in 1992, the Oklahoma City bombing suspect suggested that violence might be the only way to change things.
"What is it going to take to open the eyes of our elected officials?" the suspect, Timothy J. McVeigh, wrote in The Union-Sun and Journal of Lockport, N.Y.
"Do we have to shed blood to reform the current system? I hope it doesn't come to that. But it might."


No Headline
"I was mad there was no baseball at the end of last year, but I'm psyched it's back." -- SAMMY POLITZINER, 18, who played hooky to go to the Yankees' opening game.  [ B1:2. ]


American National Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Excerpts of Opinions on Gun Ban Near Schools
Following are excerpts from the Supreme Court's decision today in United States v.
Lopez, declaring unconstitutional a Federal law banning the possession of guns near schools.
Chief Justice William H. Rehnquist wrote the majority opinion and was joined by Justices Sandra Day O'Connor, Antonin Scalia, Anthony M. Kennedy and Clarence Thomas.
Dissenting were John Paul Stevens, David H. Souter, Ruth Bader Ginsburg and Stephen G. Breyer.


Butler International Inc.(BUTL,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


International Briefs; Spain Blocks Galerias From Cutting Jobs
The Spanish Government has blocked a plan by the retailer Galerias Preciados S.A. to cut 1,800 jobs for four months to save money.
Galerias went into receivership in December, owing more than 60 billion pesetas ($48 million) to creditors, and management had justified the request for the job cuts as a means of resolving its financial crisis.


Royals Sign Coleman
Yesterday, the last day of the free-agent training camp in Homestead, Fla., outfielder VINCE COLEMAN agreed to a minor league contract with the Kansas City Royals that would pay him $250,000 if he makes the club.
Coleman, 33, hit .240 for the Royals last season and stole 50 bases in 58 attempts.
His contract was for $3 million. (AP)


Jannock Ltd. (JANNF,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


General Growth Properties Inc.(GGP,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


AT HOME WITH: Blair Brown; Never the Ingenue
BLAIR BROWN may be the only performer to have played both the President of the United States and the First Lady.
In "Kennedy," a 1983 television mini-series, she played Jacqueline Kennedy; in 1992, she starred in "Majority Rule," a made-for-television film about the first woman in the Oval Office.
"Yes, I married myself," Ms.
Brown said, with a characteristic delight in self-mockery.
"Or what is it Gloria Steinem said? I became the man I always wanted to marry."


'Catch' Is Claimed in Warranties
Car owners thought they had extended warranties to protect their vehicles, but there was a catch, state officials say: to keep the warranties in effect, they also had to buy a collection of automotive lubricants -- a fact nobody bothered to tell them at the companies that sold the warranties, and the lubricants.


CLASSICAL MUSIC
Cross-Cultural Songs By an American Soprano  Marvis Martin Walter Reade Theater
Marvis Martin looked at the art song repertory from two distinct perspectives in her recital on Monday evening.
In the songs by Mendelssohn, Schubert, Schumann and Bachelet that she sang in the first half of the program, she presented the most formal and refined side of the literature.
When she sang some of Canteloube's "Songs of the Auvergne" and a group of spirituals after the intermission, it was as if she had stripped away several layers of artifice to present varieties of art song closer to their folk roots.


Hawaiian Electric Industries (HE,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Economic Scene; Disneyland and the old U.S.S.R.: Sharing something in common.
IT'S 3 o'clock on a sunny April afternoon, and tens of thousands of parents know exactly where their children are.
Here at Disneyland, the line for Pirates of the Caribbean is an hour long.
But that's nothing: Splash Mountain will set you back 90 minutes.
And somewhere, deep in the bowels of Adventureland, 10-year-olds are hunkering down for the two and a half hour trial-by-boredom that precedes entry to Indiana Jones's Temple of the Forbidden Eye.
Nothing so graphically illustrates the organizational triumph of Disney as its ability to make people stand in line and like it.
But wait.
Didn't lines symbolize the bankruptcy of the Soviet system?
Maybe Disneyomics has more in common with Soviet rationing than is first apparent.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
9.00
9.00
6.75
DISCOUNT RATE
5.25
5.25
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
6.19
5.97
3.42
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.65
5.66
3.87
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.74
5.73
4.24
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.00
6.99
6.82
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.32
7.32
7.10
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.15
8.15
7.93
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.27
6.25
6.29
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills 8


A New World Bank: Consultant to Third World Investors
If James D. Wolfensohn has his way, the finance ministers gathering for a World Bank-sponsored meeting Thursday on third world development strategies will soon be dealing with a radically different international lending institution.
Mr.
Wolfensohn, the 61-year-old investment banker and arts patron, becomes the World Bank's ninth president in June, and what he has in mind is nothing less than a revamping of the bank's role.


Adventure Electric reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


This One Has It All, Except Met Victory
They waited more than eight months for the return of major league baseball, and they came out despite 30-degree weather and a chill wind.
It was worth the effort.
Here in Colorado, where the locals opened Coors Field, their spectacular new stadium, the Mets and the Rockies played a game that will be legendary -- and not only because it will go down as the first played in this park.


Prices of Treasuries Mixed On Data for Durable Goods
The prices of Treasury securities were mixed yesterday, after a Government report of an unexpected rise in durable goods orders for March led to some weakness in bond prices.
At the same time securities dealers were setting up for the Treasury's $11.5 billion five-year note auction yesterday, a normal preoccupation that often lowers prices because inventories are lightened to make room for new securities.


Take Them Out to the Ball Game


Marion B. S. Rice, A Dance Teacher And Producer, 90
Marion Burbank Stevens Rice, a noted teacher and producer of dance by the pioneering modern dancers Ruth St.
Denis and Ted Shawn, died on April 12 at the Highlands Long Term Care Center in Fitchburg, Mass..
She was 90 and lived in Ashby, Mass.
Mrs.
Rice was known for the purity and vitality of her dancers and her dance restagings.
She learned the Denishawn technique and most of the dances in the late 1920's and early 30's at the Braggiotti-Denishawn School of Dance in Boston, where she studied with Shawn and others.
From 1929 through 1988, she was director of the Marion Rice Studio of the Dance in Fitchburg, Mass., and she continued to teach in the area after closing her school.


Coleman Co. (CLN,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Cold Comfort From the Mayor
Mayor Rudolph Giuliani boasted last week that new screening procedures and work requirements had wrung thousands of fraudulent applicants out of Home Relief, the New York State program of cash assistance for poor residents who do not qualify for Federal welfare.
One day later the Mayor proposed to eliminate the program entirely.
But why abandon the truly needy, the only recipients who would presumably be left once fraud is vanquished?
The Mayor's answer is that the able-bodied poor need only assistance in finding jobs, not cash.
As proof, the mayor's office points to three months' experience under the new program, during which the number of Home Relief applicants in New York City who found jobs soared almost 400 percent.
But three months prove nothing.
States that have already done what Mr.
Giuliani proposes have seen quite different results.


Doctor Testifies Against Defendant
A doctor testified yesterday that an Egyptian immigrant who was acquitted in a New York State trial of murdering Rabbi Meir Kahane admitted to him that he had done the killing.
The doctor, testifying at a Federal trial in which prosecutors say the rabbi's assassination was part of a terrorist conspiracy, said the admission had been made by El Sayyid A. Nosair in the Bellevue Hospital prison ward about a month after the rabbi, a prominent Jewish militant, was fatally shot at a Manhattan hotel on Nov. 5, 1990.


Need a Teller? A Big Bank Plans $3 Fee
As part of the movement sweeping the banking industry to supplant branch workers with automated services, the nation's 10th-largest bank announced a broad-ranging plan yesterday that would charge some customers $3 each time they use a human teller.
Under the plan, the First Chicago Corporation said, customers who choose a checking account that does not require a minimum balance will pay the fee if they go to a teller when they could have completed the same transaction using an automated teller machine or telephone banking system.
Only those customers who keep either $2,500 in a checking account or $15,000 in a combination of checking and interest-bearing accounts would continue to have free, unlimited access to tellers, the bank said.
The plan will take effect in May.


Yes to Hydrogen as Fuel
To the Editor:
Peter G. Wolynes (letter, April 21) criticizes the idea of hydrogen as an energy source.


Crown Pacific Partners L.P.  (CRO,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


India Didn't Snub Rubin
To the Editor:
"Treasury Chief Goes to India and Is Upstaged by Iranian" (front page, April 19) admonishes India for snubbing Treasury Secretary Robert E. Rubin.
But diplomatic protocol demands priority status for a visiting head of state, even if he or she represents a nation that has fallen out of favor with the United States.
The incident is an example of bad timing, rather than a political snub by India.
NONDITA MASON  New York, April 21, 1995


Tears Amid the Silence as Oklahoma City Mourns Victims a Week After Bombing
Today, precisely one week later, there was silence in Oklahoma City and across the nation.
At 9:02 A.M., a police whistle pierced the air and dozens of police officers, firefighters and rescue teams abruptly stopped their work.
They turned their backs to the north face of the Federal Building here, destroyed by a bomb at that same time last Wednesday.
Many wept, others crossed themselves, some did both.


Freeholders Regret 'Oversight'
The Morris County freeholders violated the state's open meeting law on Tuesday, and no one is more upset about it than the Morris County freeholders.
They want to make sure everybody knows they made a mistake.
"It was really just an absolute oversight, a totally unintentional thing," said Freeholder Chris Christie.


Bridge
The Spring National Championships of the American Bridge Association ended on Saturday in Las Vegas.
Winners of the premier event, the C. G. Fredd Knockout Teams, were Chester Johnson, Herb Taylor, Gary Kessler and Dan Requard, all of Chicago, and Dwight Galley of Houston and Lela Wilson of Beaumont, Tex.
The diagramed deal from the Morning Knockout Teams was provided by Bill Furr, who edits the association's Bulletin.
North and South were Bob Friend of Irvine, Calif., and Leroy Wilson of Los Angeles.
In four hearts, South had to pay careful attention to his trump suit: he could afford to lose two trump tricks but not three.


Lee Enterprises Inc.(LEE,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Gartner Group (GART,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


President of Shanghai Firm Quits After Trading Scandal
Since late February, when financial scandal befell China's securities markets, talk among brokers and bankers here invariably turned to a favorite question: What will happen to Guan Jinsheng?
The answer came today.
Mr.
Guan, the nimble-minded and chain-smoking president of Shanghai International Securities, China's largest brokerage house, formally resigned his post.


Lawson Products (LAWS,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Warwick Baker Gets Tennis Account
The Tennis Industry Association, a trade organization in North Palm Beach, Fla., said yesterday that it had awarded its account to Warwick Baker &amp; Fiore in New York.
The billings on the account, to create campaigns to improve the image of tennis, particularly among youth, were estimated at $7.5 million over three years.


Affidavit Offers Clues About Suspect's Activities in the Days Before the Bombing
Four days before the bombing of the Federal Building in Oklahoma City, Timothy J. McVeigh said to his friend Terry Nichols, "Something big is going to happen," according to an affidavit presented in Federal court in Wichita today.
And a Federal prosecutor said that neighbors of Mr.
Nichols in Herington, Kan., had described two men they had seen staying at Mr.
Nichols's house a week before the bombing, and that the descriptions matched those of Mr.
McVeigh and a second suspect now being sought, known only as John Doe No. 2.


A Message From Michael: There Are No Rules, but . . .
For Chicago Bulls Coach Phil Jackson, the return of Michael Jordan means tight security, private charters and the chore of teaching his team to again make room for the 20th century's most valuable player.
"We let people know, because of Michael's one-on-one ability, that the ball sometimes will stop in his hands and the timing of our offense becomes inconsistent," said Jackson.
"They have to know how to use that timing to our team's advantage. He forced us to make a lot of adjustments."


E. E. Huddleson, 81, Rand Corp. Director
Edwin E. Huddleson Jr., a lawyer who also acted as counsel for government and other organizations, died on Saturday at the California Pacific Hospital in San Francisco.
He was 81 and lived in Oakland, Calif.
The cause was complications from pneumonia, said his daughter, Katie Huddleson.


A Plea to Help Capital Flow to Third World
Against a background of stagnant aid flows and rising rates of abject poverty in some developing countries, finance ministers from rich and poor nations called here today for new steps to increase private investment in third world projects like roads, electricity, communications and clean water.
Noting that developing countries now spend $200 billion a year on such essential projects, almost all of it government-financed, the ministers called for "more use of private finance in various forms" and said they wanted to "pass the commercial risks to the private sector and reduce the call on public funding and guarantees."


METRO DIGEST
GIULIANI PROPOSES $1.1 BILLION IN CUTS
Mayor Giuliani proposed a $31.1 billion budget that included the largest reduction in spending since World War II, $1.1 billion in overall cuts that will squeeze city services in ways that would affect virtually every New Yorker.
Offering hope for better times ahead, he pledged that today's austerity would bring stability in just a few years.
A1.
NEW YORK CITY


Although Unrestrained in a Crisis, Television Is a Tie That Binds
In a week of reporting on the Oklahoma City bombing, television stumbled at first, but it also rose to the grim occasion, demonstrating the medium's special strengths and fulfilling what may be its most important mission.
To begin with the stumble, television reporters rushed to speculation.
At various points that first day, viewers were given the impression that an unexploded bomb or two had been left behind by two or three dark-complexioned men who appeared to be from the Middle East.


Bombing Alters The Landscape For Gun Lobby
The first three months of the year were a heady time for opponents of gun control.
The National Rifle Association had given "A" ratings or better to 225 members of the House of Representatives.
And Republican leaders in Congress were promising to repeal the ban on assault-style weapons.
Then came the bombing of the Federal Building in Oklahoma City.


Company Plans Not to Rebuild Its Lodi Plant
Napp Technologies, the company whose chemical plant exploded and killed four workers last week, says it is leaving Lodi for good.
Bowing to pressure from an angry community and a restrictive zoning ordinance, Napp said today that it will not rebuild its plant in Lodi.


Art in Review
Elliott Puckette  Paul Kasmin Gallery 74 Grand Street SoHo Through May 13
Back in the 1950's, it was fashionable to write about abstract brushwork as a kind of calligraphy.
Elliott Puckette turns this equation on its head, presenting calligraphic curves and flourishes as a kind of abstraction.
As in his 1993 show at Paul Kasmin, the meticulous white lines are carved from a field of black ink spread over a gesso ground, lending them a subliminal sculptural presence.
Last time around, the white lines were spread more or less evenly over the black field.
Now they are grouped into large clusters, like wildly elaborated capitals from a medieval manuscript.
Sometimes they suggest flowers or other natural forms, sometimes the ornate signatures on old documents. (Mr. Puckette strays into Saul Steinberg territory here.)


In the Air and On Court, A Rough Trip for Cavs
It has not been a good week for Cleveland forward Tyrone Hill.
On the team flight home from Charlotte, N.C., to Cleveland last Sunday, after the regular-season finale, the plane was tossed around violently.
As turbulence sometimes does, it twice sucked the plane down thousands of feet in seconds.
Inside, huge basketball players were tossed around like rag dolls.
Hill was so shaken by the experience that he rented a limousine and drove nine hours from Cleveland to New York for last night's first-round playoff game against the Knicks.
As if getting rocked by Mother Nature wasn't enough, Hill and the Cavaliers were hammered badly by the Knicks, 103-79, before 19,763 fans at Madison Square Garden.


COMPANY BRIEFS
MEAD CORP., Dayton, Ohio, raised its quarterly dividend by 12 percent and said it planned to buy back up to five million common shares, or about 8.7 percent of its outstanding stock.


Diner's Journal
Ciao, Formality!
Amarcord is gone, taking with it the painted legs that graced its walls.
The piadina bread is gone, too, and the bollito misto that linked the restaurant to the Emilia-Romagna region of Italy.
When you walk in the door at 7 East 59th Street these days, you find pots of herbs on one wall and rustic murals on the other.
In the center of the restaurant, renamed Il Toscanaccio, is a long wood table covered with huge baskets of breads and heaps of radishes.
An overflowing bowl of fava beans spills onto the bar.


Bomb Delays Man's Trial On Gun Charge in Virginia
A judge in Roanoke, Va., has delayed the trial of a member of an anti-government paramilitary group in Virginia on gun charges, saying it would be difficult to find an impartial jury.
The judge, Jackson L. Kiser of Federal District Court, said speculation about links between the Oklahoma City bombing and paramilitary groups in other states had tainted prospective jurors.


Art in Review
'Exposition Internationale du Surrealisme, Galerie Beaux-Arts, Paris, 1938' 'An Homage'  Ubu Gallery 16 East 78th Street Manhattan Through May 13
The 1938 exhibition recalled here has a good claim to being the first Happening, more notable for the experience it provided than for the individual works of art in it.
The main gallery was decorated by Marcel Duchamp, with burlap bags hanging from the ceiling and leaves, moss and dirt on the floor.
To reach it, visitors walked down a corridor lined with nude mannequins, each decorated by a different Surrealist.
On opening night, the overhead lights were turned off and flashlights were distributed instead.


Conner Weighs the Use of a Rival's Boat
It was an early round of golf instead of the usual morning walk today for Dennis Conner and his buddy, Tom Whidden.
But by 8 A.M., Conner, the skipper of Stars &amp; Stripes, and Whidden, his tactician, were back worrying about their next yacht race, the one that opens the five-of-nine-race America's Cup series against New Zealand's Black Magic 1 here on Saturday, May 6.
While Conner took sponsors out on Stars &amp; Stripes, Whidden and others at the Conner compound were working the phones.
There wasn't much time to savor the team's epic 52-second victory over Mighty Mary in a race Wednesday in which Stars &amp; Stripes had been trailing by four minutes.


The Spoken Word
"BLACK ROOTS FESTIVAL OF POETRY, PROSE, DRAMA AND MUSIC," New York Society for Ethical Culture, 2 West 64th Street, Manhattan.
Readings and other performances featuring the writers Terry McMillan, Walter Mosley, Ntozake Shange, Quincy Troupe, Patricia Smith and Arthur French, and the jazz musician Henry Threadgill.
Sunday at 5 P.M.
Presented by the Frederick Douglass Creative Arts Center.
Admission: $15.
Information: (212) 864-3375.
JEAN-CLAUDE BAKER, Barnes and Noble, Broadway and 82d Street, Manhattan.
Mr.
Baker, one of 12 children who lived with the singer Josephine Baker, will discuss "Josephine: The Hungry Heart," a biography he wrote with Chris Chase.
Tonight at 8.
Free.
Information: (212) 362-8835.
KAHIL GIBRAN, Bahai Center and Bookstore, 53 East 11th Street, Greenwich Village.
The poet and philosopher will be discussed by Prof.
Suheil B. Bushrui, an author who is affiliated with the University of Maryland's Center for International Development and Conflict Management.
Sunday at 2 P.M.
Free.
Information: (212) 330-9309.


CHRONICLE
DAVID BOWIE is a singer, actor, painter -- and a designer of wallpaper.
But it's wallpaper as art, not for walls.
He created two designs for his first solo art exhibition at the Gallery on Cork Street in London.
One, "British Conflicts," depicts portraits of Lucien Freud, the English painter, on a purple and lavender floral background.
The other, "The Crouch," shows charcoal drawings of a minotaur against a large concrete block, also on the same delicate floral background.
The show runs through Saturday.


EVIDENCE LINKING SUSPECT TO BLAST OFFERED IN COURT
A Federal magistrate said today that there was "an indelible trail of evidence" linking Timothy J. McVeigh to the bombing of the Federal Building in Oklahoma City and found that there was probable cause to detain him.
The ruling by Magistrate Ronald L. Howland came after a Federal Bureau of Investigation agent testified that at least three witnesses had placed a man resembling Mr.
McVeigh near the Federal Building shortly before the explosion, which has been characterized as the deadliest terrorist attack in United States history.


S.E.C. Sues Nevada Company, Charging Complex Fraud
In a case that underscores the potential for abuse of a controversial securities rule, the Securities and Exchange Commission yesterday sued a Nevada company and certain officers charging that they had engaged in a complex international fraud.
The complaint describes a laundry list of fraudulent actions involving Softpoint Inc., which develops and sells a computer-driven cash register.
According to the complaint, the company and its officers inflated its earnings through fictitious sales, paid kickbacks to brokers, failed to maintain internal accounting controls and engaged in insider trading.


Xerox Earnings Reduced By Insurance Operations
Losses from the insurance operations the Xerox Corporation has been trying to sell drove its first-quarter earnings below the expectations of investors, despite a strong performance by the company's copying and printing operations.
Xerox shares, which rose with forecasts that first-quarter earnings would increase more than 50 percent, slumped by $4.50 in early trading yesterday, recovering to close at $122.25, down $3.50.


How to Shield Children From Divorce Trauma
To the Editor:
Most professionals who work with families favor mandatory education classes for divorcing parents ("Now Divorcing Parents Must Learn How to Cope With Children's Needs," news article, April 24).


Telephone Companies Challenge New Television Entry Rules
In an effort to knock down another barrier to their entry into television, three regional Bell telephone companies sued the Federal Communications Commission yesterday.
BellSouth, Bell Atlantic and SBC Communications contend in the suit that new F.C.C. standards they must meet to deliver video services infringe their right to free expression.


A Dog With a Good Memory
In "Top Dog," Hollywood's most easygoing action hero, Chuck Norris, is thoroughly upstaged by a shaggy canine named Reno, who is assigned to be his police partner.
Although Reno is referred to throughout the movie as a "mutt," the dog is actually a Briard, a French herding dog noted for its intelligence.
Reno turns out to be smarter than any of the movie's humans, including Mr.
Norris's character, Jake Wilder.
The dog is a genius with a photographic memory.
The movie actually has a doggie flashback in which Reno remembers the faces of the neo-Nazi brutes who killed his former owner.


Treasury Prices Are Lower Ahead of Report on Growth
Prices of Treasury securities were lower yesterday, weighed down by concern that the economy has not slowed enough to ward off fears of inflation.
The price of the 30-year bond fell 5/32 , to 10318/32 .
Its yield, which moves in the opposite direction from its price, rose to 7.33 percent, from 7.32 percent on Wednesday.


Corliss Lamont Dies at 93; Socialist Battled McCarthy
Corliss Lamont, the Socialist author, teacher and humanist philosopher who battled Senator Joseph R. McCarthy, the C.I.A. and other icons of authority in a lifelong fight for civil liberties and international understanding, died on Wednesday at his country home in Ossining, N.Y.
He was 93 years old and lived in New York City.
Dr. Lamont died of heart failure, his family said.


COMPANY REPORTS: A Bitter Pill for the H.M.O.'s; Swallow Hard and Cut Your Costs, Customers Say
For years, shareholder-owned health maintenance organizations have profited handsomely by forcing hospitals and doctors to rein in galloping costs.
Now, many H.M.O.'s may have to take their own bitter medicine.
The H.M.O.'s are being pinched coming and going.
On the revenue side, customers -- especially employers who offer H.M.O.'s to their workers -- are finally getting smarter, said Sara Fisher, an analyst at UBS Securities.
She noted that the H.M.O. industry had long relied on "the stupidity" of employers who let the H.M.O.'s recruit their healthiest, least expensive employees and make a big profit off them.
Employers are now learning to play one H.M.O. against another, forcing them to hold the line on premiums or even accept reduced payments.


BUSINESS DIGEST
U.S. Sues to Block Microsoft-Intuit Deal
The Justice Department challenged Microsoft's planned $2 billion takeover of Intuit, the maker of Quicken personal finance software.
In an antitrust suit, it said the deal -- the largest software acquisition ever -- would lead to higher software prices and less innovation, if completed.
The suit was a big blow for Microsoft, which wanted a commanding position in the electronic banking market.
It had proposed selling its rival Money program to Novell, but the Government said that would not be good enough.
A1.


How to Replace Cemetery Watchdog?
For eight months, Ralph Perfetto investigated stolen bones, backyard burials, embezzled cemetery trust funds, twice-sold graves andprice gouging.
Mr.
Perfetto was widely respected, but he did not last long.
He was dismissed, his agency is being eliminated and the regulation of the 1,908 nonprofit cemeteries in New York is to be turned over to the Attorney General's office.
This has caused a sharp debate between political and religious leaders over how best to regulate the cemeteries.
Article, page B3.


New Theory Offered of How Outfielders Snag Their Prey
The riddle of how an outfielder can glide gracefully to the spot where a fly ball will come down and, without apparent effort, let it nestle into his glove has been solved, a psychologist says.
The researcher, Michael K. McBeath, who is a sometime baseball player -- "I peaked in Little League," he said -- argues in a report being published on Friday in the journal Science that an outfielder runs so that the ball's trajectory looks straight against the visual background.


20 Years After War, 3 in Hanoi on Healing Mission
They are all survivors of the war, these three Americans whose lives tell the history of their country's ordeal in Vietnam.
They gathered in a newly whitewashed ward of an otherwise decrepit children's hospital: a decorated veteran whose leg was blown off in a Vietnamese rice paddy in 1968; a doctor who in 1971 announced that he would refuse to fight in Vietnam, a declaration that could have landed him in prison, and a Vietnamese-born engineer, who was only a boy of 7 on that fateful night 20 years ago this week when American evacuation helicopters carried the rest of his family away from Saigon, and left him behind.


Bill Proposes Charter Schools
A Republican and a Democrat have joined forces on an Assembly bill to allow teachers, parents or colleges to establish charter schools -- a school that is public but operates independent of any local district.
"Charter schools would enable teachers to have more flexibility and be more innovative," said John A. Rocco, the Camden Republican and Education Committee chairman who co-sponsored the bill with the Assembly's Democratic minority leader Joseph V. Doria Jr. of Bayonne.


Michael Fordham, Child Psychiatrist, 89
Dr.
Michael Fordham, an influential British child psychiatrist and Jungian psychoanalyst, died on April 14 at Chalfont St.
Peter, Buckinghamshire, England, where he had his office.
He was 89 and lived in the nearby town of Jordans.
He had pneumonia for some days before his death and had remained professionally active until he fell ill, said Dr.
Thomas B. Kirsch, an American Jungian psychoanalyst.
Dr.
Kirsch, who is the president of the International Association for Analytical Psychology, a professional organization of Jungian psychoanalysts with more than 2,000 members, said yesterday that Dr.
Fordham "was one of the most prominent and creative thinkers in the Jungian movement." He said Dr.
Fordham was one of the last remaining members of the first generation of creative Jungian psychoanalysts.


Top Teacher to Meet Clinton
It's off to the White House today for Thomas Tracey Fallon, New Jersey Teacher of the Year.
Mr.
Fallon teaches sixth-grade social studies at Glen Landing Middle School in Blackwood.
Charles Folker, the school's assistant principal, said Mr.
Fallon makes history come alive by donning a toga to discuss ancient Greece and a Minuteman's uniform for a lesson on the American Revolution.
President Clinton will honor Mr.
Fallon, a teacher for 27 years, along with teachers from the 49 other states.
Elaine Griffin of Alaska is the National Teacher of the Year.


A Man With Troubles and a Low Integrity Quotient
Dennis Hopper plays the violin; John Turturro looks like Tiny Tim; Martin Scorsese audits tax returns, and Christopher Walken sings "Red River Valley." These are among the fringe benefits of "Search and Destroy," a hollow but crazily arresting film version of Howard Korder's play.
Handsomely directed for the screen by the artist David Salle, the film makes sure its audience will concentrate on bold colors, striking juxtapositions and over-the-top performances rather than on anything being said.
Rampant cynicism is its subject, and the film itself may be an object lesson in that regard.
Directed more sparely on stage, Mr.
Korder's play presented quacks and hustlers caught up in the conniving that made a movie producer out of Martin Mirkheim, a flailing would-be entrepreneur. (His project was aptly called "Dead World.") That premise then had resonance as a microcosm of moral decline, but now it's just the pretext for stylish, absurdist encounters staged with unexpected dash.
It's not necessary to embrace this film's precepts to sense that Mr.
Salle is exhilarated by movie making and his actors are having a good time.


Giuliani Frames Budget Choice: Cut Welfare, or Cut Middle-Class Services
Unveiling his second budget yesterday, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani sought to frame the fiscal debate in both New York City and Albany as a stark choice between cuts in health and welfare programs for the poor or reductions in services cherished by the middle class.
He did so by putting a contingency plan in his budget for vast cuts in libraries, schools, the city university, sanitation, and the arts that he said would have to take place unless Assembly Democrats go along with Medicaid and welfare cuts that would allow the city to stop spending $750 million on those poverty programs.


Mafia's Foes Fear Rome Is Faltering
Three years into Italy's latest and most successful war against the Mafia, Palermo's anti-crime prosecutors have growing doubts whether the Italian state still has the will to pursue the war to its next, most sensitive stage.
"We feel alone, and we are beginning to wonder whether there is anybody backing us," said Roberto Scarpinato, a deputy prosecutor in Palermo.


Lobo Spurns Pros for Olympic Dream
REBECCA LOBO, with an eye on Olympic gold, has turned down a chance to try out for the Jersey Turnpikes of the United States Basketball League to concentrate on making the United States national team that will compete in the Atlanta Games next summer.
Lobo, the all-America center who led Connecticut to an undefeated season and the National Collegiate Athletic Association championship, was chosen as the 77th pick over all in the U.S.B.L. draft earlier this month, becoming only the fourth woman in men's pro basketball history to be drafted.


Stanley B. Thomas Jr.; Cable TV Executive, 52
Stanley B. Thomas Jr., president of the Sega Channel of video games, died on April 15 at his home in Tenafly, N.J.
He was 52.
The cause was non-Hodgkin's lymphoma, his family said.


Also of Note
Critics' choices of some other Manhattan art shows: R. CRUMB: DRAWINGS AND SCULPTURES, Bess Cutler Gallery, 379 West Broadway, near Broome Street, SoHo (through tomorrow).
On the occasion of an outstanding documentary about the leading genius of the comic underground's first generation, this small show of originals, mostly in ink on paper, also includes larger-than-life painted wood cutouts of several of his best-known characters, created for a store-window display (Roberta Smith).


British Uproar on Move To Buy Churchill Papers
Only 11 days from the 50th anniversary of V-E Day, Britain is caught in a storm over a Government decision to pay $20 million to Churchill's family for his papers.
Newspaper editorials strongly criticized the deal, in which $18.4 million in proceeds from the new national lottery is to be used to buy a voluminous archive of pre-1945 letters, speeches and other material from the wartime leader.
The remaining $1.6 million was contributed by John Paul Getty, the oil heir.


Buccaneers Sign Sapp for Four Years
WARREN SAPP, whose stock in the National Football League draft dipped after reports that he had failed drug tests, signed a four-year contract yesterday with the Tampa Bay Buccaneers.
The financial terms of the deal were not disclosed, but they were significantly lower than Sapp would have received if he had been the top-five selection most teams expected him to be.
Instead, the 6-foot-1, 281-pound from Miami slipped to the Bucs at No. 12.


Corrections
An article in Business Day on Tuesday, about differences between supermarkets in the Northeast and those in the South and the West, referred incorrectly to George Jenkins, the founder of the Publix supermarket chain.
Mr.
Jenkins is still alive at age 87, not "the late"; he is chairman emeritus of Publix.


Home Video
Starting today, you can officially pick up "Forrest Gump" on videocassette.
Unofficially, some copies of Robert Zemeckis's multiple Academy Award winner got into consumers' hands prematurely, but for a title as big as this one a moderate amount of release-date jumping is to be forgiven.
The film, the third biggest moneymaker ever at the box office, after "E.T. the Extra-Terrestrial" and "Jurassic Park," is big enough on home video to do everything from drawing crowds into stores to helping out a small format like the video compact disk.
On Tuesday, Paramount, the distributor of "Forrest Gump," announced that 15 million cassettes of the film are in stores.
If that many are sold, "Forrest Gump," which has a suggested retail price of $22.95, will be among the top 10 video best sellers ever.


Clinton and Yeltsin Seeking Common Ground for Talks
President Clinton and President Boris N. Yeltsin struggled today to find common ground in anticipation of their summit meeting next month in Moscow, papering over some disputes, ignoring others, and resolving none of them.
Their 30-minute telephone conversation was cordial but vague, underscoring strains between the United States and Russia that American officials made no effort to hide.
Senior American officials acknowledged that Mr.
Clinton did not even raise the most serious issue dividing Washington and Moscow: Russia's $1 billion deal to build two nuclear energy reactors for Iran, which the United States wants canceled.


Cemetery Watchdog Goes and Debate on Regulation Begins
For eight months, Ralph Perfetto investigated stolen bones, backyard burials, embezzled cemetery trust funds and tales of graves dug in heaps of construction debris and refrigerator parts.
The rights of the dead are inalienable, the director of the State Division of Cemeteries liked to say.
And so Mr.
Perfetto, who was appointed to a six-year term last August, held public hearings, listening to complaints of twice-sold graves and price gouging, and promised prosecutions.


On Stage, and Off
Hard-Nosed Mysticism
The premise of the show now in previews at the American Jewish Theater is catchier than that of most new musicals.
The show is set in the Ottoman Empire in 1665 and follows a little-known chapter in Jewish history: Shabbatai Sevi -- a mystic fixated on a Talmudic saying that the Messiah will arrive when all men are holy or all are sinners, and sure that holiness was impossible -- attracted hundreds of thousands of converts to his doctrine of universal sin.
He married a Christian prostitute at his delayed bar mitzvah and tried to find a way through evil to perform "the great tikkun," or rectification, that would repair a shattered God.


At an Israeli Checkpoint, Food Rots, Tempers Boil
After waiting four days at checkpoints earlier this month to drive his vegetables out of the Gaza Strip, Suleiman Qdeih moved to the head of a line of trucks with a load of spoiling produce and simmering resentment.
The delay had ruined his cargo.


One Big, Contented Musical Family
A lot of wonderful music is heard in "True Believers," Robert Mugge's straightforward tribute to Rounder Records, an independent company based in Cambridge, Mass., that is celebrating its 25th anniversary.
Since its founding in 1970 by Marian Levy, Bill Nowlin and Ken Irwin, all of whom are interviewed, Rounder hasn't lost sight of its original goal: recording quality blues, folk, bluegrass and other American roots styles.
Even when one of the label's artists, George Thorogood, broke through in the late 1970's, the company resisted taking a more commercial path and used the profits from his albums to expand on what it was already doing.


Ex-Official Pleads Guilty in Orange County's Fall
In the first criminal action since Orange County was forced into bankruptcy late last year, the county's former treasurer, Robert L. Citron, pleaded guilty late today to six felony counts, including misappropriating hundreds of millions of dollars and misleading investors in the county's bonds.
Mr.
Citron, whose investment strategies with high-powered securities caused $1.7 billion in losses and created the largest municipal bankruptcy in American history, was subdued and wan as he entered his plea late today before Judge David Carter of the Orange County Superior Court.


Mets' Bullpen Fails Again In Colorado
When the game started this afternoon at Coors Field, Dallas Green, the Mets' manager, had two pitchers in his bullpen who had not appeared in the 14-inning extravaganza the Mets and the Rockies had played the previous night.
One was Kevin Lomon, who had never pitched in a major league game.
The other was Josias Manzanillo, who had performed terribly this spring.
Called upon to shut down hot-hitting Colorado in a ninth-inning, tie-game situation, Lomon pitched his heart out.
Yet he still gave up the bases-loaded single to Walt Weiss that gave the Rockies an 8-7 victory.
He took the loss, but Manzanillo was the one truly responsible.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  *
Household Finance Corp., Prospect Heights, Ill., a unit of Household International Inc., is selling $250 million of notes due in 2007 through Morgan Stanley.
The notes are priced at 99.778 to yield 7.678 percent.
The noncallable issue is rated A2 by Moody's Investors Service Inc., A by the Standard &amp; Poor's Corp. and A+ by Duff &amp; Phelps.


McDowell Wants to Go The Distance for Yanks
Jack McDowell, who will make his Yankee debut against the Royals on Friday night, is ready to throw nine innings and doesn't think he should be limited to a certain number of pitches just because of the shortened spring training.
"I would expect to throw a normal game," McDowell said.
"If I'm knocked out of there in three innings, that's one thing. But if I'm throwing a good game, I expect to stay in there."


Corliss Lamont Dies at 93; Socialist Battled McCarthy
Corliss Lamont, the Socialist author, teacher and humanist philosopher who battled Senator Joseph R. McCarthy, the C.I.A. and other icons of authority in a lifelong fight for civil liberties and international understanding, died on Wednesday at his country home in Ossining, N.Y.
He was 93 years old and lived in New York City.
Dr. Lamont died of heart failure, his family said.


New York Shelter Programs Get Residents Back on Their Feet
To the Editor:
"A Hollow Plan for the Homeless" (editorial, April 20), regarding the proposed regulations for New York City shelter residents, states that Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani's proposed continuum of care for homeless people never developed into a coherent plan, particularly for the provision of social services.


Transactions
Football  National Football League
CAROLINA PANTHERS -- Signed Willie Brookins, linebacker; Billy Mitchell, defensive back-kick returner; Leonard Larramore, nose tackle; David Lauder, kicker; Kevin Feighery, punter; and Brandon Hayes, offensive tackle.


No Headline
"When the army sent me to Vietnam, they told me I was fighting for the people of Vietnam. Now, at last, it's true. Now I really am fighting for these people." JEFFREY FREDRICK, a 45-year-old veteran who lost his leg in the war, and is now working in a clinic in Hanoi.  [ A3: ]


Senator, in Fury, Advances Regulatory Bill
With a furious bang of his gavel, the chairman of a bitterly divided Senate Judiciary Committee today turned back the committee's Democrats and moved ahead on the most ambitious version so far of Republican legislation to roll back environmental and other regulations.
Senator Orrin G. Hatch, his voice rising in anger, abruptly ordered the legislation approved without a formal vote this morning.
The chairman, a Republican from Utah, said Democrats on the committee had exhausted his patience by continuing to argue for changes in the bill.


Mr. Deutch's Message
John Deutch's emphatic commitment to cleanse and redesign the Central Intelligence Agency could herald a watershed in the history of that troubled agency.
His testimony before the Senate Intelligence Committee Wednesday put the agency on notice that its next director has no tolerance for immoral, illegal or incompetent intelligence activities and will dismiss anyone who does.
The C.I.A. has been adrift since the disintegration of the Soviet Union.
Its operations directorate, the center of espionage activity and covert operations, has engaged in a self-destructive binge of misbehavior.
It mishandled the Aldrich Ames case, the costliest intelligence betrayal of the cold war, and subverted American policy in Guatemala by keeping money flowing to Guatemalan military officers involved in the killing of one American and the spouse of another.
In addition, it mistreated the few women who managed to make careers as spies.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
9.00
9.00
6.75
DISCOUNT RATE
5.25
5.25
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
6.06
6.23
3.66
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.67
5.65
3.86
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.77
5.74
4.26
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.03
7.00
6.99
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.33
7.32
7.26
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.17
8.15
8.06
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.30
6.27
6.32
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills 8


Otto Friedrich Is Dead at 66; A Prolific Author and Editor
Otto Friedrich, a prolific magazine writer and author who turned out sprightly journalism for Time magazine by day and a succession of elegant histories, biographies and other works of nonfiction by night, died on Wednesday at North Shore University Hospital in North Shore, L.I.
He was 66 and lived in Locust Valley, L.I.
The cause was lung cancer, a disease diagnosed two weeks before, said his oldest daughter, Liesel Lucas.
She said her father, once a heavy smoker, had given up cigarettes 20 years ago.


World News Briefs; Berlin and Brandenburg Sign Agreement to Merge
The Mayor of Berlin and the Governor of Brandenburg, the state that surrounds it, signed an agreement today to merge Berlin and Brandenburg into a single state that will occupy much of what was once Prussia.
The decision to merge Berlin, which has 3.5 million people, and Brandenburg, which has 2.5 million, must be approved by two-thirds majorities in both legislatures.
It must then be ratified by 25 percent of the region's registered voters in a referendum scheduled for next year.


Knicks Off and Running Out of the Starting Blocks
The Knicks were intense. They were prepared. And they were superb.
After waiting all season for the playoffs to start, the Knicks unleashed themselves on the Cleveland Cavaliers.
It was more than a victory.
It was domination.


Electronics Store Fined $60,000
An electronics store in Scarsdale, N.Y., has agreed to pay $60,000 in costs and penalties to settle charges of deceptive sales practices, the State Attorney General's office announced yesterday.
The store, Central Park Electronics, has not admitted to any wrongdoing.
But it agreed to refrain from misleading customers with advertising about sale-priced cameras and electronics items that were not available, then talking the customers into buying higher-priced items, Attorney General Dennis C. Vacco said.


Nicolai's 'Wives' as a Welcome Cutting-to-Size
One of the pleasures of Shakespeare's "Merry Wives of Windsor" is Falstaff's deflation: this gargantuan figure of great appetites and greater pretense is finally reduced to human size.
One of the pleasures provided by Otto Nicolai's 1845 version of "Merry Wives" is seeing the same thing happen to the opera form: desire, adultery, jealousy and retribution -- all the ponderous, grand themes of operatic plots -- are turned into comic divertissements, deflated into songful farce.
And one of the great pleasures of the student production of the Nicolai classic at the Manhattan School of Music is that the spirit of that deflation so often comes through.
Not all of the singing is first-rate; there are times when Rosalind Elias's production strains too much for farce, and the dancing fairies that bring Falstaff to his senses are too often unintentionally campy.
But even the Shakespeare play has its flaws, and on Wednesday night, a viewer was more than willing to look beyond such details for the deftly performed score (conducted by Glen Cortese) and the appealing charms of the best members of the cast.


Women of the Weimar Era, in a Social Context
Photography has always been a particularly democratic medium, but in few places or periods was this more strikingly apparent than in Germany after World War I. "Women Photographers of the Weimar Republic," an impressive show at the Jewish Museum, presents a remarkable collection of pictures by no fewer than 50 artists, all of whom were active in commercial or artistic photography in Germany in the 1920's and 30's.
Included are works by such renowned photographers as Ilse Bing, Lotte Jacobi and Lucia Moholy, as well as a host of lesser-known figures.
The show, which was organized by Ute Eskildsen for the Folkwang Museum in Essen, Germany, is an invaluable addition to photographic scholarship, with the works and personal histories of many of the women rescued from the rubble of Germany's past.


Art in Review
John Cederquist
Franklin Parrasch Gallery  588 Broadway near Houston Street  SoHo  Through May 20
The idea that form needn't have a thing to do with function finds an extreme expression in the work of John Cederquist, a consummate craftsman who makes what might be called pictorial furniture.
In his third, and best, solo show at this gallery, Mr.
Cederquist maintains the form-function schism through an energetic game of hide-and-seek between flatness, illusion and reality, especially in the chests of drawers, which are his best efforts.


The Holocaust Remembered


Hudson Shad Festival
A festival in honor of the Hudson River and one of its inhabitants, the shad, will be held tomorrow from noon to 4 P.M. at the St.
Charles A.M.E.Z.
Church, 432 Valentine Avenue, Sparkill, N.Y.
The festival includes storytelling, music, crafts and food.
Admission is free.
The church can be reached from Route 9W, off the Palisades Parkway.
Information: (914) 359-3509.


Rwanda Calls for Others To Join Massacre Inquiry
The Government said today that it would organize an international inquiry into a massacre last weekend at a refugee camp, but then promptly began digging up the corpses, a move that drew sharp criticism from diplomats and senior United Nations officials.
"What's the point of establishing a commission and then pre-empting the work of the commission and starting digging?" said Shaharyar Khan, the United Nations special envoy to Rwanda.
He said that the United Nations welcomed the inquiry but that it stood by its figure of 2,000 killed in the camp.


Art in Review
'Me'
Dru Arstark Gallery  568 Broadway, at Prince Street  SoHo  Through May 6
Critical theory may have proclaimed the "death of the author," but the news hasn't reached the 15 artists represented here, a diverse group including Tina Barney, Chuck Close, Lyle Ashton Harris and the late Hannah Wilke.
Several of the artists follow Cindy Sherman in using the self-portrait as a means of investigating sexual identity.
The risk here is that the viewer will start grading the work by how good or bad the artist looks in it.
Sean McDevitt, for example, looks much better in shirt and pants than he does dressed only in stockings and with a shaved head.


Cities Also Need Limits on Lawsuits
To the Editor:
The fight for tort reform has moved to the Senate floor.
The House of Representatives began the process of correcting the abuses that plague our system of civil justice by approving limitations on joint and several liability and placing a cap of $250,000 on pain and suffering damages (health care suits only) and a similar cap on punitive damages.


In Battle Over Blood Work, Simpson Defense Takes a Last Shot at Evidence Collector
Peter Neufeld, a lawyer for O. J. Simpson, spent several excruciating additional hours today sowing every last conceivable seed of doubt about Andrea Mazzola, the Police Department's junior evidence collector in the case.
As even some customarily attentive jurors rubbed their eyes, several reporters took catnaps, and Deputy District Attorney Christopher A. Darden read a book secreted in a videocassette box -- related to the case, he insisted -- Mr.
Neufeld subjected Ms.
Mazzola to one final round of second- and third-guessing.


Knicks Leave Price With Nowhere to Go
Mark Price drove right and was met by the Knicks' defensive posse.
He went left and Pat Riley's mounties were there, too.
Price would get a step on Derek Harper and run into 7 feet worth of Patrick Ewing or a brick wall named Charles Oakley.
Price is 6 feet, 180 pounds, and can make his body play the most amazing angles.
Against the Knicks last night, every one of them took him nowhere.
"Every time there was a crack or an opening, there was someone else running at me," Price said after the worst playoff night of his life, after he became the first head on the wall in the Knicks' 1995 playoff Hall of Defense.


The Start of a Trip to the Heart of Yankee Fandom
The boys in the upper deck of the right-field stands, plump white boys with pumped arms and earrings, were drinking their beer too fast and cupping their cigarettes against the no-smoking rules in Yankee Stadium.
But they seemed to be yelling and performing mostly for themselves -- they were not annoying me or throwing batteries or crushed cups at box-seat holders as were the boys in the bleachers, so it was almost relaxing up there on opening day.
Scattered among us were young women in their boyfriends' team jackets and bearded old men, the bindlestiffs of baseball, with canes, headphones, backpacks, scorecards.
Were these the natives I have decided to seek this strange season?
I had planned to talk to them, ask them how they felt about baseball now, about the Yankees, if their fandom had been damaged by the strike, but the game has rhythms to lull any resolve and I ended up merely there.
Below us, the field was greener, cleaner, than it would ever be again this year.
It seemed as though we were flying over America's heartland, looking down at squares of farmland.
Of course, America's heartland was blown out of complacency last week; before the game, there was an announced moment of silence for Howard Cosell and the "terrible tragedy" in Oklahoma City.
But that seemed so far away in the right-field upper deck.
From those seats, I couldn't see the right fielder much less reality; Paul O'Neill, of all people, had vanished beneath the overhang.
The metaphor was too beguiling.
Remember that Babe Ruth, who looked just like the boys sitting around me although he was born a hundred years ago, who fills the cover of the $9 Yankee yearbook, played right field.
As did all those kids who were chosen last.


Defending a Pariah
Timothy J. McVeigh, accused in the Oklahoma City bombing, is entitled to the best possible defense.
But given the heinousness of the crime, what lawyer will want to provide it?
Article, page A28.


On My Mind; Clinton Does His Duty
The spectacle is astonishing, sad to hear and witness.
Bill Clinton is being denounced by Americans who live and profit by freedom of speech and conscience for practicing his own -- which also happens to be his duty as President.
Mr.
Clinton is accused by politicians, journalists and lobbyists who want him out of office of misusing his powers, manipulating the minds and emotions of the American people and smearing his opponents with the blood of Oklahoma.


Life and Liberty
In the aftermath of the Oklahoma City and World Trade Center bombings, Americans ask whether the Government can do more to prevent terrorism while preserving our civil liberties unabridged.
The answer is yes, it can.
The changes needed to crack down on international and domestic terrorism can be made without impinging on basic liberties.
The main instrument is President Clinton's Omnibus Counterterrorism Act of 1995.
It figured into the Senate Judiciary Committee's hearing on terrorism held yesterday.
The House Judiciary Committee will hold hearings on terrorism on Wednesday.


Matthew Barney's Surreal Visions, on Film and in the Gallery
Matthew Barney's new film at the Joseph Papp Public Theater, "Cremaster 4," is, if nothing else, hard to forget.
You recall that for his debut four years ago at the Barbara Gladstone Gallery, Mr.
Barney climbed the walls: he had himself videotaped naked in a harness, negotiating his way with titanium ice screws and hooks across the ceiling into a refrigerated compartment.
The compartment contained a metal sculpture shaped like a weight lifter's incline bench, encased in frozen petroleum jelly.
He made another videotape in which he dressed in high heels and an evening dress and performed movements based on the signals and gestures that football referees make.
The show included the videos, the compartment and the sculpture, which had embedded in its petroleum jelly a gadget involving a gynecological speculum.
Though memorably weird, Mr.
Barney's work seemed as muddled and juvenile as it sounds, not to say derivative of the activities of 1970's performance artists like Chris Burden and Vito Acconci.


Yeltsin Goal: New Alliance
In the broken, post-Chechnya political landscape, a weakened Boris N. Yeltsin, the Russian President, has moved to try to create a centrist bloc in December's parliamentary elections and to preserve his own options for re-election in June 1996.
Having lost the support of the squabbling liberals who were once the backbone of his presidency, Mr.
Yeltsin himself has moved to the nationalist center.
Now he's trying to get some firmer legislative support behind him and diminish the chance of a new parliament controlled by today's ideological extremes: the ultranationalists like Vladimir V. Zhirinovsky and the Communists, with their Agrarian Party partners.


Proud Base Faced With Notoriety by Association
Young soldiers in this military town in the Kansas Flint Hills have heard the stories about how the older guys were sometimes called "baby killer" when they returned from Vietnam.
But nothing like that ever happened to any of them until last week, when Timothy J. McVeigh, a former soldier who had once been stationed at nearby Fort Riley, was held in the Oklahoma City bombing and Terry L. Nichols, another former G.I., was linked to the investigation.


Guilty Plea in Death of Jordan's Father
A 19-year-old man pleaded guilty yesterday in Lumberton, N.C., to first-degree murder in the death of MICHAEL JORDAN's father and agreed to testify against his co-defendant.
LARRY MARTIN DEMERY, who could still be sentenced to death, also pleaded guilty to robbery, weapons violations and other charges in two other robberies.
Demery faces a minimum sentence of life in prison on the first-degree murder charge.
In entering the plea, he said understood that the maximum penalty was death.


Corrections
An entry in the Executive Changes listing of Business Day on Tuesday about a management change at the Nationsbank Corporation misstated the new title of Bob D. Sessoms.
He is president and chief operating officer of a unit of the company, the Nations Financial Holdings Corporation, not of the parent company.


Justices Step In as Federalism's Referee
Unlike President Clinton, Chief Justice William H. Rehnquist does not hold news conferences.
But if he did, it would not occur to anyone to ask him whether he was still relevant.
The Supreme Court's stunning decision of Wednesday that Congress lacked the authority to bar gun possession in or near schools was a forceful reminder not only of the Court's raw power -- nine people, divided 5 to 4, invalidated a law that two houses of Congress and the President of the United States approved five years ago -- but also of its inevitable role in shaping the country's ongoing political dialogue.


As Optimism Fades, Those Waiting Find Solace in Small and Quiet Ways
Hope is personal.
For some it lies in the thought that a missing loved one died instantly, tearing a track straight to heaven.
For others it rests in the odds-defying certainty that a heart still beats within the wreckage.
As the days tick away with no survivors, the grim wait for news from inside the shattered Federal Building here has become the hardest part of an extraordinary vigil.


Daughters Visit Work In Growing Numbers, But Backlashes Build
"Welcome to the morgue, girls," said Raul Rodriguez, smiling slightly.
"The nicest place in the hospital."
Peering over his shoulder at the mayonnaise jars full of brains, the eerie stainless steel table equipped with a scale for weighing other vital organs, and the storage spaces for the dead, the group of young girls touring Metropolitan Hospital Center in Manhattan on Take Our Daughters to Work Day contemplated a career in pathology.


Last Chance
Here is a sampling of shows and exhibitions that are to close soon: Closing This Weekend  "BLOOD BROTHERS," Music Box Theater, 239 West 42d Street, Manhattan.
A musical about twins separated at birth.
Book, music and lyrics by Willy Russell; directed by Bill Kenwright and Bob Tomson.
Through Sunday.
Performances: today at 8 P.M.; tomorrow at 2 and 8 P.M.; Sunday at 3 P.M.
Tickets: $45 to $65.
Reservations: (212) 239-6200.


St. John's McLeod Is Transferring to Duke
ROSHOWN McLEOD, who missed a chance to come to Duke two years ago, will join the Blue Devils next season as the first transfer during Coach MIKE KRZYZEWSKI's tenure.
McLeod, a 6-foot-9-inch, 220-pound forward from Jersey City, confirmed yesterday that he will transfer to Duke from St.
John's.
He will sit out next season, then have two years of eligibility. (AP)


Corrections
An article on the Media Business page on Wednesday, about the problems that newspapers face from rising newsprint prices, misspelled the surname of the president of Newsprint South Inc. of Jackson, Miss.
He is Frank C. Breese.


A Philip Guston Decade Colored by Red and Pink
By the time he died in 1980, Philip Guston had turned his back on the Abstract Expressionist style that established his reputation: a style so serene that it was often renamed Abstract Impressionism.
He devoted his last decade to a garrulous, robustly painted figurative mode that reflected a lifelong admiration for Krazy Kat and de Chirico, a deep affinity for all shades of red and pink, and a passion for fusing the political and the personal.
Populated by alternately goofy or sinister hooded thugs and sweaty-eyed self-portraits, these late paintings earned the artist the increasing admiration of younger generations and mixed reviews from his own.
Harold Rosenberg wrote favorably that Guston had "risked a fully developed career on the possibility of engaging his art in a political reality." Hilton Kramer, in The New York Times, lamented the new Gustons in an article strikingly titled "A Mandarin Pretending to Be a Stumblebum."


Bomb Scare on Daughters' Day
A bomb threat, an evacuation and the arrest of a suspect lifted Take Our Daughters to Work Day into the realm of the extraordinary for state employees at the Department of Environmental Protection building.
Shortly before noon a threat was phoned in, including a warning to get the children out.
When the threat was repeated in a call to the police, the authorities said they were able to trace it to a public telephone, where John Yeager, 37, of Trenton was arrested.
No bomb was found.


Hipness to the Nth Degree In a Candy-Colored World
Jack Baran's "Destiny Turns On the Radio" has a catchy title, a yellow swimming pool and Quentin Tarantino, who should have been otherwise engaged.
Filmed with iconographic admiration, Mr.
Tarantino glides through this smugly facetious film as a fount of cryptic wisdom, shedding the funny spontaneity that made him an appealing walk-on in "Sleep With Me" and a lively actor in films of his own.
Instead, he's cast as the super-suave Johnny Destiny, one more mannered character in a film populated by nothing else.
His performance is a reminder that Mr.
Tarantino, after all, established his reputation as a consummate hipster on the other side of the camera.
But none of the actors in "Destiny Turns On the Radio" could have gotten past the film's unflagging flipness anyhow.
All the actors have been encouraged to behave as if they're half-kidding, an approach much likelier to leave a film half empty than half full.


Township Manager Resigns
Caught in the center of a feud between the editor of a weekly newspaper and town officials, Township Manager Joseph Picardi has resigned.
Mr.
Picardi, 47, the manager for five years, said he quit because the Township Council did not support him.
Councilman Harry Leeds said Mr.
Picardi was asked to resign.
Bob Reynolds, the editor of The Absecon-Galloway Township Beachcomber News, which has been critical of town officials, said he took neither credit nor blame for the resignation.
Mr.
Picardi, who will remain in the payroll for three months, will be replaced by Stephen J. Bonnani, a former director of public works.
LAWRENCE VAN GELDER


Michael Fordham, Child Psychiatrist, 89
Dr.
Michael Fordham, an influential British child psychiatrist and Jungian psychoanalyst, died on April 14 at Chalfont St.
Peter, Buckinghamshire, England, where he had his office.
He was 89 and lived in the nearby town of Jordans.
He had pneumonia for some days before his death and had remained professionally active until he fell ill, said Dr.
Thomas B. Kirsch, an American Jungian psychoanalyst.
Dr.
Kirsch, who is the president of the International Association for Analytical Psychology, a professional organization of Jungian psychoanalysts with more than 2,000 members, said yesterday that Dr.
Fordham "was one of the most prominent and creative thinkers in the Jungian movement." He said Dr.
Fordham was one of the last remaining members of the first generation of creative Jungian psychoanalysts.


CHRONICLE
The University of Pennsylvania educated three generations of the family of RONALD O. PERELMAN, the chairman of MacAndrews &amp; Forbes Holdings, who is one of the country's wealthiest men.
Mr.
Perelman has pledged $20 million for an academic and student activities center, a gift that the university's president, JUDITH RODIN, called an example of "extraordinary generosity."


Court Ruling Forbids Impeding Of Affordable Housing by Towns
Cities and towns cannot obstruct developers from building affordable housing, a state appeals court ruled yesterday in a Westchester County case that lawyers said will have important repercussions statewide.
In an eight-year legal battle over a proposed apartment complex, the Appellate Division of state Supreme Court, in Albany, ruled against the town of North Salem, a low-density community of rolling hills and horse farms.


Israel Plans to Take Arab Land in Jerusalem
The Israeli Government plans to seize dozens of acres of Arab-owned land in East Jerusalem for new Jewish neighborhoods and a police headquarters, officials said today.
The confiscation plan, approved by the Finance Minister, was immediately denounced by the Palestinian government in the Gaza Strip, which warned that it violates understandings with Israel and creates "a severe threat to the whole peace process."


Match Made in Hawaii, In Hard Days of 1918
Kayo Hatta's decorous "Picture Bride" is as gentle and pretty as "The Joy Luck Club" in describing the hardships endured by Asian-American women.
The setting is Hawaii, the year 1918, and the custom of the title a commonplace.
This film is the story of Riyo (Youki Kudoh), a shy flower of a young woman who travels from Yokohama, Japan, to Hawaii for an arranged marriage.
Only 16, she is shocked to discover that her groom, Matsuji (Akira Takayama) is 43, and has lured her to a strange land with a photograph of himself that is very dated.
Matsuji is older than the father whose death left Riyo in the hands of fate.


Spring Auctions: Riches To Delight The Eye
NT since the boom years of the late 1980's have Sotheby's and Christie's had so many drop-dead Impressionist and modern paintings, drawings and sculpture for sale.
But the wealth of Picassos and Matisses, Vuillards and Monets that have found their way to auction this spring speak less about the state of the market than about providential occurrences.
A number of well-known collectors died this winter, leaving estates that are chockablock with first-rate art, the kind that may have been lent to museums for special exhibitions but otherwise never left the Park Avenue living rooms where it hung for generations.


Jet Lost Engine and Air-Controller Contact
Air traffic controllers lost radio contact with a United Airlines jetliner over the North Atlantic late Tuesday as the Boeing 767, having lost one of its two engines, headed on an emergency course for Bermuda and flew too low to communicate with the controllers' antiquated radios.
The controllers complain that had the plane been forced to ditch in the water, they would not have had a precise location to send rescuers, largely because of limitations of the controllers' radio system and the lack of radar coverage over water.


That Moving Strike Zone
Bret Saberhagen is scheduled to start the Mets' home opener against St.
Louis on Friday night.
He has been a major league pitcher for 11 seasons, and he is renowned for his control.
Still, he no longer has any idea what defines the strike zone.
After three spring training starts and two days of watching other Mets pitchers at Coors Field, Saberhagen has come to the same conclusion as both his manager, Dallas Green, and most of his teammates: The replacement umpires are not getting the job done.
"You can't depend on anything anymore," Saberhagen said today.


A Feminist Fairy Tale From Miami
With the premiere of Lynne Taylor-Corbett's "Mystery of the Dancing Princesses," an ingeniously staged and sardonic little story ballet, the Miami City Ballet has become the seventh and final company to take part in the Kennedy Center Ballet Commissioning Project.
Intended to stimulate new works for regional American ballet troupes, the venture had a spectacular beginning in 1991 when the Houston Ballet presented Paul Taylor's "Company B" to recordings by the Andrews Sisters.


Jerusalem Journal; The Cardinal Visits, and the Chief Rabbi Is Pained
Like thousands of others, a mild-looking Frenchman who says he is a Jew went today to Yad Vashem, the memorial in Jerusalem to the Holocaust.
This was the annual day when Israel pauses to recall the Nazis' crimes and shed a collective tear for the six million Jews who perished.
For this 69-year-old visitor, born in Poland, it was the first time in more than 20 years that he looked at Yad Vashem's photo displays recording the horror.


Andres Diaz to Perform
The cellist Andres Diaz is to be the featured artist in the opening concert of the Naumburg Retrospective Series on Monday at 8 P.M. at Merkin Concert Hall, 129 West 67th Street, Manhattan.
He replaces the originally scheduled Harvey Shapiro, who canceled for health reasons.
The pianist Samuel Sanders is to accompany Mr.
Diaz in a program including works by Bach, Lutoslawski, Falla, Chopin and Shostakovich.
The series highlights past winners of the Naumburg Foundation International Cello Competition.
Information: (212) 362-8719.


Mother Charged in Slaying
When 14-year-old Naltary Vallejo failed to come home from school on Wednesday night, her mother summoned the police to their Queens apartment.
As the officers were about to write a report, the girl showed up.
But shortly after midnight, the police received a call that she was dead.


Art in Review
Audrey Flack
Louis K. Meisel Gallery  141 Prince Street  SoHo  Through tomorrow
Although she had been exhibiting since the 1950's, Audrey Flack burst into the public consciousness in the 1970's, as one of the group of Photo-Realists who seemed to reject the formal austerity of both Minimalism and Pop in favor of an unabashed pleasure in meticulous description.
Then as now, Louis K. Meisel was the leading promoter of Photo-Realism, and this 20-year retrospective of Ms.
Flack's work seems meant to vindicate his long and sometimes lonely crusade.


Bill Proposes Income Tax Cut
Assembly Republicans introduced legislation yesterday to cut income taxes next year by $616 million.
The bill, in keeping with Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman's pledge to cut income taxes for most residents by 30 percent by the end of her term, would mean a savings of $345 for families with $50,000 in income and $405 for individuals with $50,000 incomes.


Abroad at Home; Back to the Future
In 1933, with farmers bankrupt and desperate in the Great Depression, Congress passed the Agricultural Adjustment Act to regulate farm production.
Three years later the Supreme Court held it unconstitutional: beyond the power of the Federal Government.
The A.A.A. decision and others of the time paralyzed Government efforts to bring the country out of the Depression.
And they brought on a crisis for the Court itself: a crisis of public confidence.


Art in Review
Tina Barney
Janet Borden Gallery  560 Broadway (at Prince Street)  SoHo  Through May 31
The psychodramas in Tina Barney's large color tableaux of family and friends are less repressed and more balletic than in the past.
In one work, a man and woman seem to be caught in mid-argument in their driveway; in another, two casually dressed men in a restaurant twist like gesturing dancers.


Design Could Have Been Another Enemy
Whether they knew it or not, the terrorists who blew up the Oklahoma City Federal Building chose a target whose architecture might have made it more vulnerable to bomb damage than other designs.
The building's front had four large columns supporting a horizontal beam, creating a two-story atrium -- a common design for low- to medium-rise buildings.
Starting above the beam, other columns rose the rest of the way up the nine-story structure.


Keep in Mind
"FABLES," a new production of seven Aesop fables, with music and campy humor.
At the Singer's Forum, 39 West 19th Street, Chelsea.
Tickets: $15 for adults; $8 for children.
The two-hour performances, starting tomorrow, are Saturdays at 2 and 7 P.M., Sundays at 2 P.M. and May 12 and 19 at 7 P.M.; through May 21.
For children 6 and up.
Reservations: (212) 366-0541.
"SKYE," a musical fable set in medieval times in which a princess is rescued by a dragon from a good-looking prince.
Saturdays and Sundays at 2 P.M., through June 4.
For children 4 and up.
At the Queens Family Theater, 256-21 Union Turnpike, at 257th Street, Floral Park.
Tickets: $10 for adults; $6 for children.
Reservations: (718) 343-1052.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article on Tuesday about the financing of the Broadway run of the play "Love! Valour! Compassion!" misstated the contribution of the Jujamcyn theater chain.
Jujamcyn reduced the weekly rent for the production to $30,000 (not $30,000 plus a percentage of the receipts).


How to Shield Children From Divorce Trauma; Include the Court
To the Editor:
Mandatory education classes for divorcing parents (news article, April 24) should be expanded to include judges and lawyers, who too often allow and encourage the use of children as weapons.


'Isolationism' Strongly Attacked By Top Clinton Security Adviser
The President's national security adviser today attacked what he called a rising wave of isolationism in the nation.
The national security adviser, Anthony Lake, made one of the Administration's fiercest attacks against isolationism at a time when many Republicans in Congress are seeking to slash foreign aid and restrict President Clinton's ability to commit United States troops to United Nations peacekeeping operations.


Disaffected, Official to Quit
One of Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani's budget proposals has apparently led a senior administration official to resign.
The City Sheriff, Kerry John Katsorhis, a former assistant district attorney in Queens, sent his resignation to the Mayor yesterday.
In the letter to Mr.
Giuliani, Mr.
Katsorhis, who ran unsuccessfully for District Attorney in Queens in 1991 on the Republican and Conservative lines, said he was leaving for "personal reasons as well as professional."


Corrections
An article in Business Day on Tuesday about a Federal appeals court hearing in an antitrust case involving the Microsoft Corporation misspelled the surname of the company's lead lawyer.
He is Richard Urowsky.
A picture caption in some editions with the article misidentified the man shown.
He was Mr.
Urowsky, not Joel Klein, a Justice Department lawyer.


Penn Relays Hero Runs Into a Coaching Career
A decade ago, John Marshall was an Olympic 800-meter semifinalist and another in Villanova's long line of Penn Relays heroes.
Today, as a 30-year-old rookie head coach of men and women at his alma mater, he made more history at the 100th anniversary Penn Relays, America's oldest, largest and best track-and-field carnival.
In the nine years they were coached by Marty Stern, the Villanova women dominated the longer relay races here.
With Marshall watching coolly from the stands, they extended that dominance by winning the distance medley in 11 minutes 5.49 seconds, their seventh victory in nine years in this race.


Governors' Draft Plan Rejects Parts of House Welfare Bill
The bipartisan leadership of the National Governors' Association has drafted a new proposal to overhaul the nation's welfare system, urging the Senate to reject stringent work requirements and many other provisions of a welfare bill passed last month by the House.
A sweeping critique of the House bill, prepared by the staff of the association, says "most states do not believe they can achieve" the goals of the House bill, which would require half of all adult welfare recipients to work by 2003.


Art in Review
Lawrence Gipe  'Approved Images'
Blum Helman Gallery  20 West 57th Street  Manhattan  Through May 27
Lawrence Gipe's new work blends the strategies of 1980's appropriation art to create a kind of documentary installation that is historically informative while also being almost embarrassingly derivative.
The installation consists of paintings based on "approved images" that appeared in a German annual of fine art photography, Das Deutsche Lichtbild, during the first half of the Nazi regime.
In a slick realist style, they depict bland landscapes that are either heroically industrial or romantically natural.


Corliss Lamont Dies at 93; Socialist Battled McCarthy
Corliss Lamont, the Socialist author, teacher and humanist philosopher who battled Senator Joseph R. McCarthy, the C.I.A. and other icons of authority in a lifelong fight for civil liberties and international understanding, died on Wednesday at his country home in Ossining, N.Y.
He was 93 years old and lived in New York City.
Dr. Lamont died of heart failure, his family said.


Seeking for a Change in Name
Merv Griffin's casino company wants to change its name.
Resorts International Inc., which owns and operates the 670-room Merv Griffin's Resorts Casino Hotel here, would like to be known as Griffin Gaming &amp; Entertainment Inc.
It will ask shareholders to approve the change June 27.
The casino's name would stay the same.


Shaping Pirandello's Existential Haze
Reality is only provisional in the twilight world that has materialized in the Opera House at the Brooklyn Academy of Music, and there's the sense that the figures onstage there can always be reclaimed by the shadows from which they have emerged.
Flesh-and-blood actors are transformed with a single step into insubstantial silhouettes; mechanical puppets metamorphose into humans merely by spinning on their heels.
A glorious, saffron-colored dawn is instantly conjured out of the night, only to evaporate just as quickly, leaving a constellation of glittering fireflies in its wake.


East Harlem Store Wins Crucial Vote
After a last-minute change of heart by a City Councilman, a plan for a 53,000-square-foot supermarket in the economically depressed community of East Harlem passed a crucial vote yesterday by the Manhattan Borough Board.
The $12 million project, which has been in the planning stages for more than four years, in recent weeks had escalated into a political, ethnic and corporate struggle.


Governor, Meet Nikita. Nikita, Meet . . .


Voting and Rights
To the Editor:
What rights were abridged for the black, white and Asian-American plaintiffs challenging majority black Congressional districts in Georgia and Louisiana (news article, April 20)?
The right not to be represented by a black member of Congress?
The right not to be in an electoral minority?
The right to deny black incumbents re-election protections routinely claimed by whites?
The right to majority group protection against assertions of minority group rights?
Or simply the time-honored right to assert that every black gain is, of necessity, a white loss?
JULIAN BOND  Washington, April 25, 1995


Bulgaria Not Sure Whether It Should Turn East or West
Any night of the week, one of the hottest spots here is Eddy's Tex-Mex Diner, where young Bulgarians guzzle Jack Daniels, eat chili burgers and Cajun shrimp, and listen to local bands belt out songs about tequila sunrises and flat-back Fords.
A large American flag dominates the decor.
Several blocks away stands Sofia's most imposing Orthodox church, the splendid golden-domed Alexander Nevsky Cathedral.
It is named for one of Russia's most heroic saints, and a plaque inside explains that it was built to express gratitude for Russia's role in freeing Bulgaria from Ottoman rule in the 1870's.
Nearby, a heroic equestrian statue of Czar Alexander II conveys the same message.


Chasing Ambulances Before Dreams
THE RAINMAKER
By John Grisham
434 pages. Doubleday. $25.95.
Part of the appeal of John Grisham's humongously popular novels has always rested in their grabby beginnings, their twisty, if disorganized, plots.
Unlike Scott Turow, Mr.
Grisham has never excelled at creating psychologically nuanced characters or used anything but the most pedestrian prose.
His latest book, "The Rainmaker," lacks even his patented narrative hooks.
The novel gets off to a plodding, colorless start, decelerates into a wholly predictable tale of David and Goliath, and finishes up with a manic flurry of ridiculously implausible events including, in the last 30 pages alone, a crucial court decision, a sudden murder, the loss of millions of dollars, the revelation of a money-skimming scam and the abrupt decision on the part of the hero and heroine to start completely new lives.
Given such weaknesses, why do Mr.
Grisham's novels routinely zoom to the top of the best-seller lists?
Much of his success, of course, has to do with his subject matter.
In recent years, the law and lawyers have taken center stage in American life: a development attested to not only by the high visibility of trials involving O. J. Simpson, the Menendez brothers, Lorena Bobbitt and other cases broadcast on CNN and Court TV, but also by the increasingly noisy public debate over individual rights and responsibilities, freedoms and regulations.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; At an industry group's annual meeting, a lesson about the paradox of global communication.
PERHAPS it was the proximity to Walt Disney World and the popular attraction "It's a Small World." Whatever the reason, globalization was the focus yesterday of the general session of the 77th annual meeting of the American Association of Advertising Agencies.
The attendees at the meeting, at the Hyatt Regency Grand Cypress here, heard two provocative and challenging speeches that linked the fundamental realignments of the agency industry with the systemic shifts that advertisers and the media are undergoing.


Otto Friedrich Is Dead at 66; A Prolific Author and Editor
Otto Friedrich, a prolific magazine writer and author who turned out sprightly journalism for Time magazine by day and a succession of elegant histories, biographies and other works of nonfiction by night, died on Wednesday at North Shore University Hospital in North Shore, L.I.
He was 66 and lived in Locust Valley, L.I.
The cause was lung cancer, a disease diagnosed two weeks before, said his oldest daughter, Liesel Lucas.
She said her father, once a heavy smoker, had given up cigarettes 20 years ago.


Market Place; At U.S. Funds, No Time for the Sidelines
Mutual fund buyers are bullish on the American stock markets.
Mutual fund managers are even more so.
Yesterday, while fund companies were reporting a flood of cash coming into the funds this month -- much of it money to finance retirement accounts before the April 17 tax deadline -- the Investment Company Institute, a trade group, was reporting that cash levels in domestic stock funds had fallen to 7 percent of total assets in the most recent period.
It appears that is the lowest figure since 1978.


Senator, in Fury, Advances Regulatory Bill
With a furious bang of his gavel, the chairman of a bitterly divided Senate Judiciary Committee today turned back the committee's Democrats and moved ahead on the most ambitious version so far of Republican legislation to roll back environmental and other regulations.
Senator Orrin G. Hatch, his voice rising in anger, abruptly ordered the legislation approved without a formal vote this morning.
The chairman, a Republican from Utah, said Democrats on the committee had exhausted his patience by continuing to argue for changes in the bill.


A Step Forward for the City Budget
Mayor Rudolph Giuliani's proposed $31 billion budget for the next fiscal year provides a more humane and realistic road map toward solvency for New York City than anything he has put forward this year.
Backing away from the harshest cuts in welfare and Medicaid that he urged last winter, Mr.
Giuliani seems to recognize that he needs to show greater flexibility in working with both Gov.
George Pataki and the Legislature to help the city.
His chief problem remains that his budget is still filled with hopes, dreams and aspirations that have to be translated into reality in Albany, where no budget agreement is in sight.
Since taking office 16 months ago, Mr.
Giuliani has found himself forced to deliver so many budget plans that New Yorkers can be forgiven for feeling bewildered.
The one certainty about his latest set of numbers is that the Mayor will be back with another version soon.
The main reason is that he is still calling on the state to help close about a third of the city's $3 billion deficit, most of it from cuts in welfare and Medicaid programs for which the city pays about a quarter of the bill.


INSIDE
Storm Over Churchill Papers
Only 11 days from the 50th anniversary of V-E Day, Britain is caught in a storm over a Government decision to pay $20 million to Churchill's family for his papers.
Page A2.
An Unlikely Fund-Raiser
The widow of Malcolm X and the man she thinks helped kill him, Louis H. Farrakhan, will rally to raise money for her daughter.
Page B3.
Golden Venture's Legacy
After two years, some Chinese passengers from the steamer Golden Venture have abandoned their quest for political asylum.
Page B1.
Chemical Plant Leaving Lodi
Under community pressure, the company whose factory exploded last week, killing four, will not rebuild in Lodi, N.J.
Page B1.
N.B.A.
PLAYOFFS
The Knicks began the playoffs with a dominating victory over the Cleveland Cavaliers at the Garden as Patrick Ewing scored 21 points.
Page B7.


Halting Immigration Won't Help Welfare
To the Editor:
Your April 19 book review of Peter Brimelow's "Alien Nation" is misleading, as is the book itself.
First, the largest number of immigrants from any one country into the United States are Canadians.


Errant Husband Returns: Big Mistake
Michael Chambers, who left his wife and a load of gambling debts behind several years before, returns home to Austin, Tex., walks into a club and spots her.
As played by Peter Gallagher, Michael has an unmistakable aura of sincerity.
"So how are you?" he asks, handsome and charming as ever.
His stunned ex-wife stares back, and though she says nothing her frozen face seems to shout: How can he even ask that?
This is what Steven Soderbergh does best, bringing to the surface the familiar, unspoken tensions in complicated relationships.
Even if you knew nothing about "The Underneath," it would be easy to see Mr.
Soderbergh's fingerprints all over it.
As he did in Mr.
Soderbergh's career-making "Sex, Lies and Videotape," Mr.
Gallagher here plays another man caught in a love triangle.
The new film also uses some expressionistic camera angles and a shifting, almost surreal sense of time that recalls Mr.
Soderbergh's underrated "Kafka." But if these qualities hint that no one else could have directed "The Underneath," the plot gives the movie away as a remake of "Criss Cross," the 1949 film noir starring Burt Lancaster.


X-and-O Test Starts for Jets
What looked good to the Jets on paper -- Coach Rich Kotite's dismantling and reconstruction of the team -- gets its first look on the field and in the classroom today.
"The most important thing," Kotite, the new coach, was saying on the eve of his first minicamp, "is to establish our own history. You can't just dwell on the past. This is the only opportunity the 1995 Jets will have."


New Prison, School and University Building Is Expected to Slow
Along with sharp reductions in spending for city services, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani's budget proposal slashes financing for capital building projects by 21 percent, a move that will bring visible changes in the city over the next few years.
Construction of new schools will slow, or even stop.
Repair work on highways will stretch over longer periods, and ferries will be replaced or refurbished less frequently.


Philatelists Just Wanna Have Fun
The people of the Caucasus, after decades of Soviet blight, have a reputation for dullness.
So do stamp collectors.
An American marketing firm associated with Abkhazia, the rebellious Caucasus region in the northwest of Georgia, wants to undo both stereotypes.





Awards Recognize New-Product Work
The Chrysler Corporation of Auburn Hills, Mich., and Johnson &amp; Johnson of New Brunswick, N.J., took top honors at the ninth annual Edison New Product Awards ceremony, sponsored by the American Marketing Association.
At a dinner in New York on Wednesday, Chrysler and Johnson &amp; Johnson were both awarded the Grand Edison New Product Marketer of the Year award.
In addition, Chrysler won two gold awards for its Neon and Cirrus car models, while Johnson &amp; Johnson won three gold awards and one silver award for product introductions like Tylenol Extended Relief and the Arthritis Foundation Pain Reliever lines.


Art in Review
Robert Riger  James Danziger Gallery 130 Prince Street SoHo Through May 20
As a Sports Illustrated photographer in the 1950's and 60's, Robert Riger covered many legendary athletic events.
An all-star lineup of sports heroes appears in his pictures, from Jackie Robinson and Mickey Mantle to Bill Russell and Y. A. Tittle.


Giuliani Calls for Budget Cut of $1.1 Billion
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani proposed a $31.1 billion budget for New York City yesterday that included the largest reduction in spending since World War II -- $1.1 billion in overall cuts that would squeeze city services in ways that would affect virtually every New Yorker.
Even as he outlined a second straight year of sharp budget cutting, Mr.
Giuliani offered hope for better fiscal times ahead.
He pledged that today's austerity would bring stability in just a few years.
Under his plan, the city's budget would show a surplus as soon as 1997.


Reed and Coaches Meet With Owners
In the aftermath of a season with 52 losses and no playoff appearance, General Manager Willis Reed and the Nets coaching staff met with the franchise majority owners yesterday at the club's offices in East Rutherford, N.J.
No decisions on personnel were made, but Coach Butch Beard called it "a very good meeting."
"That's all I can say," the coach added. "There's nothing happening right now."


Big Game, Big Decision: Is It Richter or Healy?
The question of the hour here today was who would be in goal Friday night at Madison Square Garden, when the Rangers play the Islanders in a game with playoff implications for the home team.
Would it be the incumbent, Mike Richter, who was brilliant in the waning moments Monday night against Washington, but who was pulled early in the second period Wednesday night after allowing 3 goals on 18 shots against Tampa Bay?
Or would it be the backup, Glenn Healy, who stopped 22 of 23 shots on Wednesday as the Rangers rallied from a 3-1 deficit for a 6-4 victory?


International Briefs; In Brief
*
A.
B.
Volvo, the Swedish car, truck and bus producer, is in talks to buy a 75 percent stake in the Hungarian bus producer Ikarus for 12 billion forints ($99 million), the Hungarian newspaper Magyar Hirlap reported.
The bus maker is majority-owned by the Hungarian Government.


F.C.C. Approves Purchase Of TV Station by Fox Unit
The Federal Communications Commission decided yesterday to allow a company with ties to Fox Broadcasting to complete its purchase of a television station in Green Bay, Wis.
But the commission deferred a decision on whether Fox, a unit of the News Corporation, would be forced to include the station among those that Fox owns until the commission issued new rules on the ownership of stations.


H.E. McMahon, 93, U.N. Medical Chief
Dr.
H.
Easton McMahon, a cardiologist who was the first medical director at the United Nations, died April 20 at his home in Southbury, Conn.
He was 93.
The cause was congestive heart failure, said a son, E. Tompers McMahon.


Liz Phair Progresses Beyond the Awkward
"Weave my disgust into fame, and watch how fast they run to the flame," Liz Phair sang on Tuesday night during the second of two sold-out solo concerts at Town Hall.
This line, from Ms.
Phair's 1993 debut album, "Exile in Guyville," has turned out to be a blueprint for her career.
Ms.
Phair's disgust, expressed in songs about being taken advantage of by so-called friends and lovers, has helped her grow from a bedroom musician to a college-radio favorite in two years.
In fact, fans are so drawn to the flame of her bad memories that while she was singing a song about regretting a one-night stand, one male fan yelled, "Marry me, Liz."
Two years ago, watching Ms.
Phair perform was like watching a wounded bird trying to fly.
One took pity on her, but knew that some day she would learn to soar.
On Tuesday, she was no longer awkward, just uneasy at times.
A look of relief spread across her face after each successful guitar solo.
The music, filled with melodies that seemed to be influenced by overdoses of classic-rock radio, sounded as if she was performing rough versions of songs for a demo tape.
Her guitar playing was simple and unadorned, and she often flubbed chord changes and fell off tempo.
But imperfect music only heightened the effect of songs about imperfections.
There seems to be a handful of emerging female songwriters, including Ms.
Phair, Lisa Germano and Jill Sobule, who have found a way to come to terms with the social and sexual mistakes they made in the past (particularly as teen-agers) in songs that mix maturity, regret and revenge.


EVIDENCE LINKING SUSPECT TO BLAST OFFERED IN COURT
A Federal magistrate said today that there was "an indelible trail of evidence" linking Timothy J. McVeigh to the bombing of the Federal Building in Oklahoma City and found that there was probable cause to detain him.
The ruling by Magistrate Ronald L. Howland came after a Federal Bureau of Investigation agent testified that at least three witnesses had placed a man resembling Mr.
McVeigh near the Federal Building shortly before the explosion, which has been characterized as the deadliest terrorist attack in United States history.


Golden Venture Passengers Are Opting for China Over U.S. Jails
Defeated by nearly two years in jail and fading hopes of release, the first small groups of Chinese passengers from the tramp steamer Golden Venture have abandoned their quest for political asylum and have asked to be deported to China.
The first five left in late February, saying goodbye to the county jail in Pennsylvania that has been home to the largest group of Golden Venture passengers since the ship went aground off Queens on June 6, 1993.


East Harlem Supermarket Is Approved
After what he described as a sleepless night, City Councilman Guillermo Linares switched sides yesterday and cast the decisive vote as the Manhattan Borough Board approved a plan for a 53,000-square-foot Pathmark supermarket in East Harlem.
The $12 million project, which has been in the planning stages for more than four years, became the source of political, ethnic and corporate struggles in recent weeks.
Opponents insisted that the huge store would drive small neighborhood shops out of business, and they criticized the government subsidies called for in the plan.
But proponents said the new store would benefit customers and create jobs in the economically depressed area.


Rebecca Lobo's Burden: More Talent Than Time
REBECCA LOBO had 20 minutes.
Twenty minutes to spill her life story to a reporter, shower and iron the maroon sweater and skirt she planned to wear to meet the Governor.
She would have had more, but the Reebok people called about a sponsorship deal and that ate time.
Time is getting so precious for the most-wanted female athlete in the country that it has come to this: She carried her outfit and iron from her room to her interview at the University of Connecticut's athletic center so that she could press her clothes while she answered nosy questions.


Man Sentenced in Robbery Case
Robert Myers, who was accused of holding up nine banks during a a three-state robbery spree that netted him $225,751, was sentenced in Federal Court yesterday to 13 years and 9 months in prison without parole.
Mr.
Myers, 30, pleaded guilty to three robberies and was ordered to pay $122,751 in restitution.
In asking for a lighter sentence, Mr.
Myers contended that he was suffering from gulf war syndrome.


Demons' Eye Problems Compound Creepiness
John Carpenter's best horror film in a long while is one scarifying trip down memory lane.
This is a knowing remake of the spooky 1960 English film featuring demonic platinum-blond children, and one of the things it knows is that a lot of us were scared stiff by the original during our formative years.
Mr.
Carpenter can laugh at that while also revising a potentially quaint story to suit different times.
Chemical weapons, nuclear weapons and Lamaze classes set a new tone for this weird story of demon birth.
"Village of the Damned" has one of the eeriest opening sequences in horror history, and Mr.
Carpenter stages it with relish.
It's a peaceful morning in Midwich, the English village that has become a picturesque American town. (The story comes from "The Midwich Cuckoos," a book by John Wyndham.) Too peaceful.
Folks are going sunnily about their business when suddenly, inexplicably, all activity comes to a stop.
Everyone falls into a simultaneous trance.
Even the cows are in a coma.


State Lags in Income Growth
New Jersey lagged behind the nation and the region in personal income growth last year.
The Commerce Department reported that 1994 per capita income rose 4.3 percent in New Jersey, 4.7 percent in the mid-Atlantic region and 4.9 for the whole country.


Panel Says Indian Point Nears Restart
The last substantial obstacle to restarting the trouble-plagued Indian Point 3 nuclear power plant to service was overcome tonight when a panel of inspectors from the Federal Nuclear Regulatory Commission said the plant was nearly ready for "safe restart and continued operation."
The plant, which is 35 miles north of Manhattan, has been shut down for nearly half its 19-year existence because of a string of problems with safety procedures, management, or equipment.
But S. David Freeman, president of the New York Power Authority, which owns the plant, said he was confident it would be producing power this spring.


Corliss Lamont Dies at 93; Socialist Battled McCarthy
Corliss Lamont, the Socialist author, teacher and humanist philosopher who battled Senator Joseph R. McCarthy, the C.I.A. and other icons of authority in a lifelong fight for civil liberties and international understanding, died on Wednesday at his country home in Ossining, N.Y.
He was 93 years old and lived in New York City.
Dr. Lamont died of heart failure, his family said.


Times Co. Describes Strategy In Detail to Wall St. Analysts
In what analysts said was a clear effort to win over skeptics on Wall Street, The New York Times Company provided new details about its businesses and described its strategic plans to securities analysts yesterday.
In the most detailed Wall Street presentation by the Times Company in years, several analysts said, company executives described plans to maintain profitability at The New York Times by increasing the proportion of the paper's revenues from circulation, thus decreasing the proportion of revenue from advertising.
Some analysts have expressed concern over The Times's heavy reliance on the uncertain advertising market in the New York City area.


In U.N.'s Future, a Leaner Budget
For the first time in years, the United Nations, an organization not celebrated for penny-pinching, will find its new budget significantly reduced -- 4.2 percent less than the current one.
The leaner budget, which needs the General Assembly's approval before it takes effect in January, was devised by Joseph E. Connor, a retired American business executive with 38 years' experience in public accounting and auditing.
In the year since he was hired as the new Under Secretary General for Administration and Management, Mr.
Connor has moved quietly to tighten up an organization with a sometimes cavalier disregard for thrift.


Philip Morris Annual Meeting Snubs Protests
At an often combative annual meeting of the Philip Morris Companies that was a magnet for anti-tobacco activists who tried to transform the proceedings into a cigarette circus, stockholders voted overwhelmingly today to elect management's slate of 14 directors.
The victory trounced a symbolic protest vote that had been spearheaded by some of the company's large institutional shareholders.
In addition, voters rejected by a wide margin six shareholder proposals that had been opposed by Philip Morris management.


Corrections
An article yesterday about a dispute over expelling a member of the American Civil Liberties Union misstated the year Dr.
Alan Bell was censured by the group's New Jersey chapter.
It was 1992, not 1993.


Babe 101 Course Has A Ruthian Reach
Babe Ruth, the chronic truant, would have chuckled.
Nearly 47 years after his death, a conference at Hofstra University celebrating his cosmic essence (or excess) is outdrawing the college's earlier examinations of Presidents Roosevelt, Truman, Eisenhower, Kennedy, Johnson, Nixon and Carter.
Did Ruth presage such grandiose treatment when he suggested that he had earned a greater salary than President Hoover because he had a better year?


Mystery Writers Name Spillane a Grand Master
Mickey Spillane, the mystery writer whose two-fisted private eye, Mike Hammer, solves rough-and-tumble crimes while charming beautiful women, was named a Grand Master of the Mystery Writers of America last night.
Mr.
Spillane, whose real name is Frank Morrison and whose works include "I, the Jury" and "Kiss Me Deadly," received the group's highest honor at its 50th annual awards dinner at the Sheraton New York Hotel.
The mystery writers' group has 2,500 members; about 600 people attended the awards dinner, among them the film director Quentin Tarantino, who was honored with an award for the movie "Pulp Fiction."


Restaurants
Remember when American food was a joke?
When women bragged about how little time they spent in the kitchen, when books with titles like "The I Hate to Cook Book" were enormously popular and restaurants served food that was French, Continental or from anywhere but here?
If you don't remember, don't fret; Lex, a restaurant on East 65th Street, would like to remind you of those golden days.


For Children
Need a breather from New York?
A day trip to Philadelphia is convenient even for weary parents.
It may be easier to take an Amtrak train (800-523-8720 or 212-582-6875) from Manhattan than to drive.
Weekend Amtrak fares, one-way, between Manhattan and Philadelphia: for the hourlong trip by Metroliner, $42 for adults and $21 for ages 2 to 15; for the 90-minute trip on an unreserved train, $30 for adults and $15 for children.
These two museums are a 15-minute walk, or a 5-minute cab ride, from the 30th Street Station in Philadelphia.
To reach the museums by foot, leave from the station's 30th Street exit and walk along J. F. K. Boulevard to 20th Street; turn left and walk three blocks to the Franklin Institute.
The Academy of Natural Sciences is catty-corner at 19th Street.


Corrections
An article in The Home Section yesterday about the actress Blair Brown misstated the broadcast date of the first installment of the new talk show on Lifetime for which she and Toukie Smith will be co-hosts.
It was last night; it is not May 3.


CHRONICLE
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON has agreed to give commencement addresses at Brooklyn College, San Francisco State College and the University of Minnesota, the White House said yesterday.
"She does two to three commencement addresses each year," said NEEL LATTIMORE, the First Lady's deputy press secretary.
"We try to cover as much territory as possible, and try to go to places where we've never been."


The Most Dependent Are Hardest Hit
The budget released yesterday by Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani contained broad new cuts in education and social welfare spending, making it far more difficult for mothers with children to get on the welfare rolls and further pushing the Board of Education to make its own set of reductions.
Inmates in city jails would be moved to prisons or freedom more quickly, sanitation workers would become more productive, and the Police Department would have to process arrests more quickly under the new spending plan.


Amgen's Shares Advance 4% As Trials of Hormone Begin
Shares of the Amgen Corporation surged 4 percent yesterday after the company said that it was beginning human clinical trials of a genetically engineered hormone that prompts the production of blood platelets.
Platelets are the cells that make blood clot.
In June, researchers at Amgen, Genentech Inc. and Zymogenetics, a unit of Novo-Nordisk A.S. of Denmark, all published papers in scientific journals disclosing the discovery of a hormone that stimulates the production of platelets.
Platelets are destroyed by chemotherapy or radiation treatments for cancer, a limitation of such therapy, so a compound that could increase their production would find a ready market.


A Post Office for Montclair
The United States Postal Service has agreed to maintain a post office in the Montclair neighborhood where four men were shot dead in a robbery last month.
Senators Bill Bradley and Frank R. Lautenberg and Representative Bill Martini of Clifton, said they had received assurances from postal authorities.


Corliss Lamont Dies at 93; Socialist Battled McCarthy
Corliss Lamont, the Socialist author, teacher and humanist philosopher who battled Senator Joseph R. McCarthy, the C.I.A. and other icons of authority in a lifelong fight for civil liberties and international understanding, died on Wednesday at his country home in Ossining, N.Y.
He was 93 years old and lived in New York City.
Dr. Lamont died of heart failure, his family said.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-13  A MISSION OF HEALING IN HANOI  Three men whose lives tell the history of the Vietnam war came to Hanoi for the 20th anniversary of the fall of Saigon to try to make peace with Vietnam by opening a clinic to help its children.
A3  RWANDA PLANS MASSACRE INQUIRY  The Rwandan Government said it would organize an international inquiry into a massacre of refugees but then began digging up the corpses, a move that drew sharp criticism from the U.N.
A12


A Case for Fire Retardants In Buildings and Also People
What could have possessed Joshua Brand, the gifted creator of the television dramas "Northern Exposure" and "I'll Fly Away," to choose as his first feature film a whimsical grown-up fairy tale that is about as cuddlesome as a tombstone in January?
"A Pyromaniac's Love Story" wants to be a zany urban romance on the order of "Moonstruck," with a bit of "A Midsummer Night's Dream" thrown in.
But its nearly jokeless screenplay by Morgan Ward is so convoluted with plot twists that the characters barely have time to breathe before the story forces them to adopt a new set of caricatured attitudes.
The film, which is set "in a city not too far away," is narrated by Sergio (John Leguizamo), a waifish assistant in a pastry shop run by the kindly Mr.
Linzer (Armin Mueller-Stahl).
Sergio is hopelessly in love with Hattie (Sadie Frost), a mousy, pug-faced girl who works in her father's diner and dreams of seeing the world.
She won't consider Sergio as a lover until he makes some money.


A U.N. Success Story
For years, it was called the Broken Bridge.
Blown up by Communist sappers in 1972, it left a silhouette that ended halfway across the Tonle Sap River, at the edge of this city.
A few months ago, it reopened, repaired by the Japanese, who originally built it.
The American Friendship Highway, which connects the city to its only seaport, is being repaired by the United States.
Nearly two years after the United Nations peacekeeping force left Cambodia, these countries and other guarantors of the 1991 Paris Peace Agreement are still committed to insuring that one of the U.N.'s most ambitious and expensive peace plans protects and rebuilds Cambodia.


Cocteau's Ferocious View Of the Rolls-Royce of Families
DON'T be put off.
The only feeble thing about the otherwise vigorous production that opened last night at the Barrymore Theater is its vaguely camp, 1930-ish title.
"Indiscretions" is still "Les Parents Terribles," Jean Cocteau's remarkable, brilliantly bent boulevard comedy, revived with breathtaking panache by one of England's most audacious new directors, Sean Mathias.
The local producers have stripped "Les Parents Terribles" of its rightful name (fearful that the American public would misread it), but not of its power to shock, delight, disorient and amuse.


A Workers' Compensation Ruling Draws Criticism From Pataki
The state's highest court ruled today that a security guard should get workers' compensation benefits for injuries he received in an after-work automobile accident that occurred after he had dropped his uniform off at a dry cleaner.
Gov.
George E. Pataki joined business lobbyists in expressing amazement at the ruling.
They said it illustrates why New York can be such an expensive place to do business, and they said the case points to the need for changes in the workers' compensation system.


Executive Changes
ASHWORTH INC., Carlsbad, Calif., named Richard Werschkul, the company's current president and chief operating officer, chief executive.
BANC ONE CORP., Columbus, Ohio, said that Michael McMennamin, chairman and chief executive of its Columbus, Ohio, bank unit, had been named to the new position of executive vice president of finance, assuming responsibilities held by Frederick Cullen, its chief financial officer, who was named to the new position of president and chief operating officer.


Where the 45's Keep Spinning
THE singles' bar is dying in Manhattan.
Some say this is because of economics; others say it's because of changing times.
But there is no denying that it's getting harder and harder to find a good single in New York City.
It's all CD's nowadays.
We are talking about jukeboxes, of course, those hulking machines that stand ostentatiously against the wall in most bars night after night, sucking up quarters and dollar bills and giving back a mood.
It can be a rock-and-roll, hip-hop, oldies, jazz, disco, Latin or opera mood.
Jukeboxes offer interactive entertainment in its rawest form, giving patrons the power of ambiance control, something few other public places allow for.


Death Count Rises to 110 At Blast Site
The death toll in the bombing of the Federal Building rose above 100 today, as searchers dug into the mountain of rubble they call the pit.
It is in the pit, the heap of steel and concrete created by the collapse of nine floors, that the workers have feared they would find the most corpses.
Today they pulled out 11 bodies, 8 of them from the pit, putting the death count at 110, said the state Medical Examiner.
That includes 15 children.


Justice Department Views Microsoft From Both Sides
On Monday, Justice Department officials were in Federal court defending Microsoft against allegations of monopolistic practices.
Today, Justice Department officials went to another Federal court to file suit against Microsoft, contending it would violate antitrust laws with a planned merger.
That peculiar combination gave the Justice Department the appearance of having reversed itself with dizzying speed.
But antitrust law is less a matter of broad philosophy than of individual cases, and the Justice Department argued today that there was no inconsistency in pursuing such apparently different outcomes in different cases.


Stockton Puts the Jazz in the Driver's Seat
Jazz 102, Rockets 100
John Stockton's drive with 2.4 seconds left gave Utah a 102-100 victory over Houston last night in the opener of their Western Conference playoff series in Salt Lake City.
Stockton, who finished with 28 points and 10 assists, slashed in from the top of the key and was among four Rockets when he made the layup.
Vernon Maxwell's long 3-point attempt at the buzzer bounced off the rim.


U.S. Surprises Czechs
The United States clinched a quarterfinal berth in the world hockey championships yesterday in Stockholm by beating the Czech Republic, 4-2, for its third consecutive victory in Pool B.
Brett Hauer, who played for the Swedish Elite League team AIK Stockholm this season, Jon Morris, Paul Stanton and Tim Bergland scored for Team USA, and Pat Jablonski, the Toronto Maple Leafs' third-string goalie, had another outstanding game.
Team USA, composed mostly of minor league and college players, still has to play Sweden and Finland in the round-robin.


Interpublic Plans Shifts for Canada
The Interpublic Group of Companies said yesterday that it would reorganize its operations in Canada by combining two of its shops in Toronto and two of its shops in Montreal, effective May 1.
In Toronto, MacLaren Lintas, with 275 employees and billings estimated at $175 million from clients like Molson and General Motors, will be merged with McCann-Erickson, with 70 employees and billings estimated at $60 million from clients like Coca-Cola and Sega, to form MacLaren McCann, which will be part of the McCann-Erickson Worldwide network.
The two agencies share several clients, including Nestle, Johnson &amp; Johnson and Unilever.
In a related development, Ammirati &amp; Puris in Toronto, Lintas Worldwide's other agency there, will be renamed Ammirati &amp; Puris/Lintas and will be aligned with the Lintas network.


Sports of The Times; Knicks Set For Another Long March
NOTE to my social secretary: Make no appointments for the next two months.
I can't do lunch.
Much as I'd love to meet those folks from out of town, you know how things are.
Take names and phone numbers and tell people I'll call them back.
In July.
The Knicks and the Rangers are running my life.
It's that time of year again.
Hideous flashbacks keep popping up.
Being stuck in Indianapolis on Memorial Day weekend, hearing the whine of racing cars -- and I wasn't even at the 500.
Being stuck in traffic in Houston, old cow paths serving as main roads.
Long nights at Madison Square Garden.
The circus came and went, but the Knicks and the Rangers played on.


F.B.I. Chief Seeks Orders For Inquiries
The Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation today appealed to elected Government leaders to carefully specify how "pro-active" Federal agents should be in combatting domestic terrorism in the face of civil rights sensitivity.
"It is clear that we were told to investigate domestic terrorists differently from foreign terrorists," Louis J. Freeh, the Director, told a Senate hearing concerned with how to cope with the terrorism threat posed by the bombing of the Federal Building in Oklahoma City last week.


Accounts
*
G.
Heileman Brewing Co., Rosemont, Ill., to Bayer Bess Vanderwarker, Chicago, to handle advertising for the Old Style and Rainier beer brands, previously handled by the Richard Group, Dallas.
The billings were estimated at $5 million. *
Kash n' Karry, Tampa, Fla., to David Cravit CME, Chicago, to handle the grocery store chain's account, previously at FKQ Advertising, Tampa.
The billings were estimated at $3 million to $4 million.


Next, a Long Approval Process
The release of Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani's budget proposal sets off a long approval process.
In the next few weeks, budget officials and the heads of city agencies will appear before City Council committees to discuss the details of the Mayor's budget proposals.
In addition, administration officials, as well as City Council leaders, are expected to keep lobbying state legislators until a budget is passed in Albany.


Saigon in the Final Hours Before the Surrender
"The Fall of Saigon" is a vivid, exciting, painful account of the final hours before the unconditional surrender of South Vietnam, 20 years ago this weekend.
Meshing newsreel clips with first-person accounts, the two-hour documentary brings back the desperate efforts to save the Vietnamese who had worked with the United States and still trusted their allies not to desert them.
The overriding feeling is one of shame over the many who were left behind to the mercies of the triumphant Communists.
A former Central Intelligence Agency man says, "I couldn't look into their eyes."
Most of these two hours is focused on the American Embassy, into which South Vietnamese flocked in hopes of refuge and escape as North Vietnamese troops converged on their city.
What one official calls "a daisy chain of helicopters" carried thousands from the embassy rooftop to waiting aircraft carriers.
As depicted tonight, it was a heroic achievement.
But errors were made and time ran out; hundreds had to be left behind.
Many more Vietnamese remained in the city, waiting for promised pick-ups that never came.


Coliseum's Ready Now
To the Editor:
It was good to read that John S. Dyson, Deputy Mayor for Finance and Economic Development, has put forth plans for use of the New York Coliseum (news article, April 20).
The city has lost millions by allowing that valuable space to remain empty.


The Pariah as Client: Bombing Case Rekindles Debate for Lawyers
It is one of the oldest conundrums of the law: Must a lawyer, should a lawyer, represent the most detested of pariahs?
But seldom has the issue played out with more force than in the question of representation for Timothy J. McVeigh, the suspect arrested in connection with the bombing of the Federal Building in Oklahoma City.
"I've said to many people, the acid test of a criminal defense lawyer is could you represent Hitler or Adolph Eichmann?" said Allen M. Smallwood, a defense lawyer in Tulsa, Okla.
"And, yes, I could have. But the publicity and the downside to my life personally would be far, far greater in representing McVeigh than Hitler."


Senate Delays Voting on Legal Overhaul
While the House acted swiftly last month to overhaul the nation's civil legal system, the Senate today remained in a slow, deliberate debate on the issue.
Senators argued in a desultory fashion over whether there should be limits on the amount of money awarded in medical malpractice suits.
But they decided to put off any votes on this and other major aspects of the issue until next Tuesday at the earliest.


Art in Review
Rigoberto Torres
Lehman College Art Gallery  250 Bedford Park Boulevard West  The Bronx  Through Wednesday
Rigoberto Torres's name is usually associated with that of the artist John Ahearn.
When Mr.
Ahearn began making plaster casts of human figures in the South Bronx in the early 1980's, Mr.
Torres was employed in a factory producing religious statuary.
He began working with Mr.
Ahearn as an assistant and an intermediary with the local Hispanic community, and soon assumed the role of full collaborator.


U.S. SUES TO BLOCK $2 BILLION MERGER MICROSOFT SEEKS
In a major setback for the Microsoft Corporation, the Justice Department filed an antitrust lawsuit here today to block the company's planned $2 billion acquisition of Intuit Inc., maker of Quicken, the leading personal finance software program.
The Justice Department opposes the merger -- which would be the largest ever in the software industry -- on the ground that it could lead to higher prices and fewer consumer choices in the market for personal computer software used for balancing checkbooks, tracking investments and other financial housekeeping tasks.
Intuit's Quicken and a similar Microsoft program called Money together control more than 90 percent of the market.


Peter Wright, British Spy and an Author, 78
Peter Wright, a British intelligence operative whose bestselling spy-and-tell memoir, "Spycatcher," embarrassed and angered the Government of Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher, died on Thursday at a hospital in Australia.
He was 78 and had retired to Tasmania in 1976.
He died in his sleep after many years of ill health, his friend and executor, Peter Murray, told reporters in Sydney.


Mr. Clinton Bows to Farmers
President Clinton's pledge to Iowa farmers this week that he would defend Federal farm subsidies was pointless pandering to special interests.
Farmers are the nation's richest welfare recipients; full-time farmers typically earn four times as much as non-farm families.
The Federal Government pays farmers and huge agribusinesses not to grow crops or send food abroad.
Mr.
Clinton says that is a nifty way to boost exports.
But taxpayers who foot the bill might take exception.


Farrakhan And Shabazz Will Meet
Thirty years after the assassination of Malcolm X, his widow will share the stage of the Apollo Theater next month with a man she considers at least partly responsible for her husband's death -- Louis H. Farrakhan, the leader of the Nation of Islam.
And to complete the paradox, their meeting is part of a rally to raise money for her daughter, who is charged with plotting Mr.
Farrakhan's death.
Mr.
Farrakhan and the widow, Betty Shabazz, have not spoken since Malcolm X was fatally shot in 1965 at the Audubon Ballroom in Washington Heights.
Associates of Mr.
Farrakhan suggested that the rally on May 6 would be the first step in restoring a relationship.


Peter Wright, British Spy and an Author, 78
Peter Wright, a British intelligence operative whose bestselling spy-and-tell memoir, "Spycatcher," embarrassed and angered the Government of Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher, died on Thursday at a hospital in Australia.
He was 78 and had retired to Tasmania in 1976.
He died in his sleep after many years of ill health, his friend and executor, Peter Murray, told reporters in Sydney.


Time for Truth in Argentina
Nearly 15,000 civilians were killed under military rule in Argentina in the late 1970's and early 1980's, victims of a so-called dirty war against subversion.
Most died without formal charge, trial or even official acknowledgment.
They simply disappeared after being kidnapped from their homes or the streets of Buenos Aires.
Until now, the armed forces had refused to talk about these killings.
This week, however, the army Chief of Staff, Gen.
Martin Balza, finally acknowledged that the military had used "illegitimate means, including the suppression of life."


Progress Seen In Auto Talks With Japan
Negotiators from the United States and Japan reported some progress in trade talks on automobiles and auto parts today, raising the possibility that an agreement could be reached next month and avert American sanctions on Japan.
Officials from both sides said, however, that wide differences still remained between the countries following talks here among technical experts on Wednesday and today.


Wells Rich Wins Toys 'R' Us Project
Toys "R" Us said yesterday that it had assigned Wells Rich Greene BDDP Advertising in New York, a unit of the BDDP Group, to handle a second project, after parting ways with its longtime agency, J. Walter Thompson New York, a unit of the WPP Group, in January.
The billings were not disclosed.


May Gore Take Gandhi as Atom Treaty Guide
To the Editor:
In a 1992 election speech, Senator Al Gore gave an illustration from Mohandas K. Gandhi's life along the following lines.
A woman approached Gandhi, wanting him to speak to her diabetic son to dissuade him from having sugar in his diet.
Gandhi listened to her, thought for a while and then asked her to bring her son after a month or so.


Planned Bus and Subway Cuts Result in Protests at a Hearing
At the first of a series of public hearings, politicians and riders last night heatedly protested plans to cut bus and subway service, with many at the Manhattan meeting suggesting that they also expected an increase in the $1.25 fare.
The Metropolitan Transportation Authority has proposed eliminating 14 bus lines, closing a subway station and suspending late-night service on three subway shuttle lines.
The reductions would be the first of such magnitude since the depths of the city's fiscal crisis in the mid-1970's.
A proposed cut of $113 million in state and city financing of the transportation agency's $3 billion budget led to the proposed service cutbacks.


Connecticut Aspirant Faces the Inevitable
Edward W. Munster, who insisted that he was the rightful winner over United States Representative Sam Gejdenson last November, withdrew his challenge.


QUAKER STATE MOVING HEADQUARTERS TO DALLAS
The Quaker State Corporation is leaving the Quaker State after 64 years of business there.
The company, an Oil City, Pa., producer of motor oil and lubricants, said it would move its corporate headquarters and motor oil division to Dallas as part of a restructuring to accommodate the acquisition of the Specialty Oil Companies.
The company said restructuring, relocating its work force and closing its headquarters in Oil City and administrative offices in Shreveport, La., would result in a pretax charge of about $25 million.
Specialty Oil, based in Shreveport, was acquired last year by Quaker State for more than $130 million.


Yeltsin to Stand Atop Lenin's Tomb for Parade
After considerable debate in the Kremlin, President Boris N. Yeltsin has decided to stand atop Lenin's Mausoleum in Red Square to review a May 9 parade of World War II veterans, Kremlin officials said today.
Mr.
Yeltsin, the first popularly elected President in Russian history, will stand where every Communist Party chief has stood before him for state occasions and military parades, his press secretary, Sergei K. Medvedev, said in an interview.


When Laws Fail to Protect Domestic Workers
To the Editor:
The coverage of the execution of Flor Contemplacion and its aftermath (news articles, April 17, 18, 20 and 22, and William Safire's column, April 24) reports on the political repercussions of this event on the Governments of Singapore and the Philippines.
But the real tragedy, reflected in the outrage of the Filipino people, is that thousands of women who leave the Philippines for domestic work overseas suffer cruel injustice in many countries.


McDowell Impressive In His Debut
It's a formula the Yankees hope they can duplicate many more times this season.
Combine good starting pitching with productive middle relief and a door-slamming ninth inning by closer John Wetteland and the Yankees figure to win far more than they lose this year.
The formula worked well in the opener against the Texas Rangers Wednesday at Yankee Stadium, and it worked again tonight at Kauffman Stadium as the Yankees remained unbeaten by defeating the Royals, 4-1, before a paid crowd of 15,026.


Plant to Pay Its Workers For 2 Months After Blast
They may not have a place to work anymore, but the 62 union laborers at the Lodi chemical plant that exploded last week will collect their paychecks for at least two months.
The offer, made today by officials of Napp Technologies Inc., pleased leaders and rank and file alike from the Paterson local of the Amalgamated Clothing and Textile Workers Union.


Building A Better Life


GROW GROUP GETS OFFER TO PURCHASE COMPANY
Grow Group Inc. said yesterday that it had received an offer from an unidentified third party willing to acquire the company for $18.10 a share, or about $291 million.
The New York-based maker of specialty chemical coatings and paints said that Wertheim Schroder &amp; Company would assist it in considering the offer and other strategic alternatives.
In New York Stock Exchange composite trading, Grow Group shares were up 75 cents, to $17.625.


A Benefit for the Kitchen
Philip Glass, Eric Bogosian and other avant-garde musicians and performance artists along with dancers are to perform new work and previews in a gala for the Kitchen at 7 P.M. on Tuesday at the Grand Ballroom at Manhattan Center, 311 West 34th Street.
The benefits from the program, created and to be introduced by Mr.
Glass, are to go to artists and programs at the theater.
Information: (212) 255-5793.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, the Advertising column on Wednesday, about marketing tie-ins with the Broadway musical "How to Succeed in Business Without Really Trying," misidentified the performer in radio ads for Amtrak.
It was Michael David, a producer of the show, not Matthew Broderick, the star.


INTEL IS PLANNING A 2-FOR-1 STOCK SPLIT
The Intel Corporation, a semiconductor manufacturer, announced yesterday that it planned a two-for-one stock split of its common stock and was raising its dividend by a third.
Stockholders of record on May 19 will be entitled to one additional share of common stock for each share of the common stock held on that date.
The new shares will be distributed June 16.
Intel's shares gained $1.75 yesterday, to $102.375, in Nasdaq trading, where almost 8.3 million shares changed hands.


Films and TV Revise Bomb Plots
The bombing of the Federal Building in Oklahoma City on April 19 has forced network and studio executives to take a second look at plans for films and television series whose plots could now appear tasteless or highly disturbing.
In some cases, programs related to bombings or the activities of terrorists have either been canceled or are hastily being revised.
In the case of two films, "Top Dog" and "Die Hard With a Vengeance," executives, after some soul searching, have decided stick to their release schedules.


JAZZ
A Swing Player's Big Tone, Straight On, With Subtleties  Harold Ashby, saxophonist, Village Vanguard


Arbitration Numbers Are Up
Now for the other side of the salary story.
After signing a few dozen free agents in recent weeks for pay cuts exceeding last season's average salary, clubs yesterday received the salary requests of players in arbitration.
Sixteen players on the list of 39 seek salaries of $3 million or more.


CLASSICAL MUSIC
A Competition Winner With a Dual Approach to Chopin  Jon Nakamatsu, pianist Alice Tully Hall


The High Court Loses Restraint
In deciding that Congress lacks the power to outlaw gun possession within 1,000 feet of a school, the Supreme Court has taken an unfortunate historical turn and needlessly questioned previously settled law.
Chief Justice William Rehnquist mustered a 5-to-4 majority for this brake on Congressional power to legislate a wide range of activities under the Constitution's commerce clause, but the dissenters had the better case.
Justice Stephen Breyer made clear the value of judicial restraint, of deferring to Congress when Congress showed a rational basis for finding an interstate commercial impact in its law.
Justice David Souter warned that the Court might be repeating past mistakes when justices obstructed Congress by substituting their judgments about commerce for the legislature's.


Columbia Buys Playwright's Papers
Columbia University has acquired the library and personal archive from Tennessee Williams's home in Key West, Fla.
The materials, purchased from Williams's estate for $90,000, include letters, manuscripts, typescripts, annotated books and photographs documenting the last years of the playwright's life.
There are also 66 pieces of art, including paintings by Williams and his sister, Rose.
Williams died in 1983.
Columbia's Rare Books and Manuscript Library already has a large Williams collection that includes the manuscripts of "A Streetcar Named Desire," "Summer and Smoke," "The Rose Tattoo," "Cat on a Hot Tin Roof," "Suddenly Last Summer" and other plays.
Harvard University and the University of Texas also have important Williams collections.


Connecticut House Race Is Really Over
Edward W. Munster, who insisted despite repeated recounts that he was the rightful winner over United States Representative Sam Gejdenson in last November's election in Connecticut's second district, withdrew his challenge today and accepted defeat.
More or less.


Leonard Seidenman, Refugee Worker, 80
Leonard Seidenman, a leader in the Jewish refugee movement for nearly four decades, died on April 20 at St.
Vincent's Hospital and Medical Center in Manhattan.
He was 80 and a resident of Manhattan.
The cause was cancer, said his daughter, Nina Seidenman of Milton, Mass.


CHRONICLE
Dallas cannot stop celebrating the birthday of STANLEY MARCUS, the former chairman of Neiman Marcus who turned 90 on April 20.
All weekend, the Dallas Symphony Orchestra will pay tribute at its concerts, and the flagship department store will hold an open house.
Last night, a black-tie party was held in the store for 1,300 guests.
"The whole city is plastered with the Al Hirshfeld pictures of him," said HENRY RAYMONT, one of Mr.
Marcus's sons-in-law, in a phone interview from a celebration lunch.


Corrections
A brief review in the Art in Review column in Weekend yesterday referred incorrectly to the artist whose work is at the Paul Kasmin Gallery in SoHo.
The artist, Elliott Puckette, is a woman.


William A. Feder Pollution Expert, 74,
William Adolph Feder, a retired university professor who was an authority on acid rain, sewage sludge and pollution from cooling towers at power plants, died on April 20 at his home in Brookline, Mass.
He was 74.
The cause was lung cancer, the Levine Funeral Home in Brookline said.


Bridge
Study the diagramed deal and try to answer this question: If the contract is four hearts by South and the lead is the spade jack, would you prefer to play or defend?
A splendid array of 52 such deals has been collected by Dr.
Andrew Diosy under the title "There Must Be a Way." It is available for $11.95 postpaid from Master Point Press, 74 Ridelle Avenue, Toronto, Ontario M6B 1J3, or (800) 749-3292.


Bomb Threats Lead to Arrest
Last month, when the first bomb threat came in, the demand was only that the school close for a day.
Things got much more serious this week when two separate threats were faxed to Bridgewater-Raritan High School from the same source, demanding $1.3 million to avoid an explosion "larger than the Oklahoma City incident." A 15-year-old freshman whom classmates heard bragging about the stunt was arrested on charges of attempted extortion and making terroristic threats and is being held in juvenile detention.
The police said that they found copies of the faxes in the boy's home along with bomb-making instructions, but they did not find any explosives or bomb-making materials.


Cellular Phones May Affect Pacemakers
A scientific advisory group financed by the cellular telephone industry said yesterday that it would recommend placing warning labels on hand-held phones or redesigning them if they were found to disrupt cardiac pacemakers.
Two new medical studies conclude that cellular telephones that use digital signals can interfere with the rate of pacemakers.
The studies will be presented on Wednesday in Boston at the annual meeting of the North American Society of Pacing and Electrophysiology.


F.B.I. STRUGGLING TO FIND ANSWERS IN BOMBING CASE
A week after the Federal Bureau of Investigation found Timothy J. McVeigh, a drifting Army veteran, sitting in a county jail in Perry, Okla., the list of questions about him and the Oklahoma City bombing continues to grow.
Who is the second suspect, a mysterious tattooed man known only as John Doe No. 2, a sketch of whom has spawned thousands of telephone calls to the F.B.I. without yielding a solid clue so far?
Who else may have helped to carry out the attack?
What were the plans behind it?
Where did Mr.
McVeigh spend recent months?
When was the bomb built?
What was the specific target of the blast?


Corrections
An article on Wednesday about a letter received by The New York Times from a person who took responsibility for 16 bombings in the Unabom case misstated the location of the first bombing.
It was at Northwestern University in Evanston, Ill., not at the university's Chicago campus.
In some copies the article also misstated the date of that bombing.
It was May 25, 1978.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
9.00
9.00
6.75
DISCOUNT RATE
5.25
5.25
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
6.19
6.04
3.73
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.68
5.67
3.85
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.79
5.77
4.28
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.05
7.03
7.03
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.33
7.33
7.30
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.17
8.17
8.09
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.35
6.30
6.37
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills 8


Executive Changes
DELUXE CORP., Shoreview, Minn., named John Blanchard 3d president and chief executive.
HARRIS CORP., Melbourne, Fla., appointed Phillip Farmer, its president and chief operating officer, to the additional positions of chairman and chief executive.
He succeeds John T. Hartley, who is retiring on June 30 but will continue as chairman of the executive committee.
SMITH BARNEY INC., New York, a unit of Travelers Inc., appointed Kevin L. Bespolka a managing director in charge of European fixed-income sales, trading and derivatives.
He will be based in London.


Troops in Japan May Have Told Sect of Raids
The army acknowledged today that two sergeants were secret members of Aum Shinrikyo, the religious sect suspected in the nerve gas attack last month on the Tokyo subway system, and had leaked information to the cult about planned police raids.
The police then arrested one of the sergeants, a member of an elite paratrooper unit, on suspicion of staging a firebomb attack last month on Aum's own offices.
The firebombing, which at the time seemed to have been the work of the sect's enemies, was apparently ordered by the cult's leaders as a way of diverting police attention from their own actions.


Working Less, And Not Upset; Japan's Slump Cracks Tradition of Long Hours
When Sumitomo Metal Industries began closing its offices and factories for two workdays each month to save money, many employees at first dreaded the loss of income.
A year and a half later, some of the steel company's workers now worry that the shutdowns will end.
"People are getting used to it," said Nobuaki Masuda, an assistant manager in corporate planning.
"We are saying that if we have to work five days a week every week we will die."


Israeli General Says Soldiers Must Kill Wanted Militants
In an unusually frank revelation, the senior Israeli Army commander in the occupied West Bank said in a newspaper interview published today that his soldiers must kill wanted Palestinian militants.
The statement by Maj.
Gen.
Ilan Biran to the newspaper Haaretz was the first time that a top-ranking military officer has publicly defined the army's aim as killing fugitives, rather than arresting them.


Igor Hajek, 64, Dies; Liberal Czech Editor
Igor Hajek, a Czech editor and translator active in efforts to liberalize culture and life in Communist Czechoslovakia in the 1960's, died on April 19 at his home in Glasgow, The Independent reported on Thursday.
He was 64.
The cause was a heart attack, said his wife, the former Marcella Maskova.


FOUNDATION HEALTH WINS CONTRACT WITH MILITARY
The Foundation Health Corporation has won the bidding for a five-year $1.8 billion military health-care contract for Texas, Louisiana, Oklahoma and Arkansas, the Pentagon said yesterday.
The agreement, valued at about $360 million a year, covers managed health care for at least 613,000 military dependents and retirees under the Civilian Health and Medical Program, or Champus.
The contract will supersede Foundation Health's current Champus contract covering Fort Worth, Austin, Tex., and Alexandria, La..


BUSINESS DIGEST
U.S.
Economy Slowed In First Quarter of '95  The economy slowed to a 2.8 percent growth pace in the first three months of 1995 as consumers paused after a year-end spending spree, the Government reported.
As a result of the slowdown in consumer spending, inventories of unsold goods swelled by the biggest amount in a decade.
At the same time, American businesses increased their breakneck rate of investment in equipment and buildings, which analysts said should keep the economy moving satisfactorily ahead until shoppers revive in the next few months.
Page 1.
Appeals Court Overturns E.P.A.'s Ethanol Standard  A Federal appeals court said the Government could not require corn-based ethanol as an additive in a cleaner-burning gasoline now sold in 17 states.
The three-judge panel concluded that while the Environmental Protection Agency had "the authority to set a standard" for cleaner gasoline, it could not "mandate the manner of compliance or the precise formula" for the fuel.
The ruling was in response to a lawsuit filed by the petroleum industry; the E.P.A. said it had not decided whether to appeal. 9.
More Records for Stocks  Recovering from a morning drop, the major stock market indexes rose to highs for the third day this week.
The Dow Jones industrial average ended at 4,321.27, up 6.57 for the day and 51.18 for the week.
The New York Stock Exchange composite index and the S.&amp; P. 500 also broke records. 39.
The dollar rose again against major currencies, despite the news that American economic growth was slowing. 45.
Paine Webber's President Quits  Paul B. Guenther resigned as president of the Paine Webber Group, saying he wanted to spend more time working with charitable and nonprofit organizations. 39.
Taking a Hard Line on Trade Senior American officials decided to rebuff an overture from Japanese trade negotiators to limit the scope of auto trade talks.
The American negotiators' aides continued to draft a list of possible Japanese targets for sanctions. 36.
Turnabout on Lending Law  Bank of America, Chemical Bank, Nationsbank and Home Savings of America broke ranks with the rest of the industry, saying they would not back Republican bills to repeal large sections of the law that requires banks to lend in poor neighborhoods. 38.
Disney and Thorn EMI in Talks  The chairmen of Walt Disney and Thorn EMI met and discussed the possibility of Disney's acquiring the big music company, music industry officials said.
But prospects of a deal are highly uncertain. 37.
Orange County's Suit Continues  The admission by Robert L. Citron, the former Orange County treasurer, that he broke the law by misappropriating millions of dollars and misleading investors is expected to have little impact on litigation between the county, which is in bankruptcy, and its former broker, Merrill Lynch. 37.
Phone-Pacemaker Link Studied  A scientific advisory group financed by the cellular telephone industry said warning labels should be placed on hand-held phones if they disrupt cardiac pacemakers, as two new studies have found. 48.
Circulation Off at New York Papers  Newsday, New York Newsday, The Daily News and The New York Times all lost circulation in the six months ended March 31, their publishers said.
But The New York Post reported a 7 percent gain. 37.
Hospitals Hunt for Patients  With managed care cutting the amount of money that insurers pay for hospital services, major medical centers in New York City are scrambling to find new pipelines for patients, aggressively courting health maintenance organizations, insurers, smaller hospitals, clinics and doctors groups. 25.
Germany's Miners Are Uneasy  Germany's coal miners are the highest paid in the world, but their affluence is at risk as the Government struggles to maintain subsidies in the face of rising opposition. 4.
American Stock Exch. . . . 44 Company Earnings . . . 48 Company News . . . 37 Credit Markets . . . 38 Currency Markets . . . 45 Dividend News . . . 41 Foreign Exchange . . . 45 Foreign Stocks . . . 49 Futures Markets . . . 45 Highs and Lows . . . 41 Index Options . . . 45 International News . . . 36 Media Business . . . 37 Mutual Funds . . . 46 Nasdaq National Mkt. . . . 42 New York Stock Exch. . . . 39 Stock Options . . . 40 Treasury Issues . . . 38


A Biblical Opera, in a New, Jazzier Incarnation
Composers often fuss over their works long after they are finished, and music history is full of examples of revisions that have turned modest works into masterpieces.
But there are times when it makes sense to let a work go.
Noa Ain should probably have done that with "The Outcast" after its Opera Ebony production in 1990.
Based on the biblical Book of Ruth, with ample embellishments, "The Outcast" is an opera about cultural frictions and eventual acceptance.
It set a topical issue (racial tensions) in a distant, timeless frame, and its eclectic score gave it a vital, refreshing edge.


MERGER ACCORD WITH RYKA IS TERMINATED
L.A.
Gear Inc., the athletic apparel and footwear company, said yesterday that it had terminated a merger agreement with Ryka Inc., a Massachusetts-based marketer of women's athletic shoes.
L.A.
Gear, based in Santa Monica, Calif., attributed the deal's collapse to Ryka's recent financial results for 1994 and its short-term outlook.
L.A.
Gear reached its agreement to acquire Ryka in January, but in early April, Ryka sought to renegotiate the merger terms so it could receive short-term financing to help it meet a severe cash shortage.
At the time, Ryka, which was founded by Sheri Poe, said that if it could not revise its deal with L.A.
Gear, the merger agreement could be terminated.


A Traditional Coalition Shows Signs of Wear
With his defection to the Republican Party earlier this month, Representative Nathan Deal of Georgia left a sharp tear in the tattered biracial coalition that many had once thought could save the Democratic Party in the South.
In switching parties, the Congressman from the hilly country of north Georgia had little effect on the balance of power in his state's House delegation, serving only to tip it further toward the Republican Party.
But the shift by Mr.
Deal, who is white, left a stark racial contrast: now all eight Republican Representatives are white and all three Democrats are black.


NATIONAL HEALTH-ROCHE BIOMEDICAL LINK SET
National Health Laboratories Holdings Inc. said yesterday that it had completed its merger with Roche Biomedical Laboratories Inc., a combination that formed the nation's largest operator of medical test labs.
The merger also created a new publicly traded company, the Laboratory Corporation of America Holdings, with a value of about $1.3 billion.
The merger agreement calls for National Health Labs shareholders to receive a 50.1 percent stake in the new company and about $475 million in cash.
Roche Biomedical, a subsidiary of the Swiss drug giant Roche Holding A.G., will contribute its laboratory business and $186.7 million in cash to the new company.
In exchange, Roche received a 49.9 percent stake in the new company.


Pssst! Want to Buy a Reservoir?
The latest budget gambit concocted by City Hall to get a quick supply of funds for construction projects is to sell New York City's entire water system -- to itself.
You could call it an ingenious idea that lowers the cost of city debt.
You could also call it a budget gimmick that increases the amount of debt the city could otherwise issue.
You could certainly call it a complicated act of fiscal legerdemain that might weaken the city's fiscal position unless Mayor Rudolph Giuliani agrees to strict safeguards on the use of the proceeds.
Under the Mayor's proposal, the city's reservoirs, pipes and sewers would be sold for $2.3 billion to a semi-independent agency called the New York Water Board, created 11 years ago to run the water system.
To make the purchase, the Water Board would borrow the money and repay it over many years with revenues from water charges to New Yorkers.
The city would then take $1.3 billion of the payment from the sale to retire its own bonds, previously issued to pay for water projects.
In effect, the city would be refinancing this debt at a lower cost -- a sensible move in these stringent times -- because the new bonds would be serviced by a dedicated stream of revenues.


More Than One Challenge to Microsoft and Intuit
Even if the Justice Department succeeds in blocking the proposed $2 billion merger of the Microsoft Corporation and Intuit Inc., analysts said yesterday, there would probably not be any significant impact on the rapid development of electronic financial services. .
In filing an antitrust suit in Federal District Court in San Francisco on Thursday, the Justice Department argued that the merger -- the largest in software history -- would stifle competition and lead to higher software prices, hurting consumers.


Editorial Notebook; A Day for Daughters
Take Our Sons to Work, too?
The girls around the table groaned.
It was Take Our Daughters to Work Day at The Times, as it was all over the country, and I was in charge of eight girls, ages 13 to 17.
They had signed up to write editorials for the "Girls' Times," the newspaper the girls produce each year.
We were the Girls' Times editorial board, and we were discussing the controversy about whether the day discriminates against boys.
The level of emotion on the subject surprised me.
"They're the center of the universe every other day," one girl said.
"Why can't they let us have just one?"


CAMPBELL SOUP CONSOLIDATING POULTRY OPERATIONS
The Campbell Soup Company said yesterday that it planned to consolidate its United States poultry operations, closing one plant with 240 workers and reducing the work force by about 140 at another.
Campbell, the world's largest soup company, said the consolidation would involve the closing of the Chestertown, Md., poultry plant.
It will also cut about 140 of the 375 workers at its Tecumseh, Neb., poultry plant.
The company said it planned to integrate the operations into existing plants in Minnesota and Georgia.
Campbell's stock rose 37.5 cents, to $51.25, a 52-week high, on the New York Stock Exchange.


THEATER
Early Hitler Was Boring But Better Than Later  'Young Hitler' A Theater


A Business-Hungry Vietnam Forgets . . .
The general yawn provoked in Vietnam by Robert McNamara's controversial mea culpa tells a great deal about the enduring difference between the American and Vietnamese relationships to the war.
In both Hanoi and Saigon, as the bustling southern city is still commonly called, the focus is on the present and future, not on the sins of the past.
"Vietnam is a country, not a war," Deputy Foreign Minister Le Mai is fond of saying.
Mr.
McNamara's tears are not Vietnam's.


At the Top Of Rock, A Coalition
Mike Watt headlined the sold-out show on Thursday night at Tramps, but during his set, the crowd screamed for "Eddie! Eddie!" Eddie Vedder of Pearl Jam was one of the guitarists in Mr.
Watt's band; the others were Dave Grohl, who had been Nirvana's drummer, and sometimes Pat Smear, from the Germs (a pioneering 1970's Los Angeles punk band) and Nirvana's touring band.
Evan Dando, formerly of the Lemonheads, also turned up for a few songs.
Mr.
Vedder had performed earlier in the show, in darkness and wearing a wig, as one of two drummers in Hovercraft, alongside his wife, Beth Liebling, on bass and Mr.
Smear on guitar.
Mr.
Grohl and Mr.
Smear followed with their new band, the Foo Fighters.
The triple bill was both an alternative-rock summit meeting and a coalition of early-1980's California post-punk and 1990's Seattle grunge.
It was a show of alternative rock as a fellowship with wide-ranging tastes and little concern for star status.


Suspect in Rapes Pleads Guilty
A man suspected in a series of rapes in Stuyvesant Town, who was captured last year after being identified by his half-sister, pleaded guilty in State Supreme Court in Manhattan yesterday and faces 40 years in prison.
The case against the suspect, Anthony Monagas, 34, was about to go to trial before Justice Franklin R. Weissberg when he decided to plead guilty, said Barbara Thompson, a spokeswoman for the Manhattan District Attorney's office.
"They picked a jury, pretty much finished the pre-trial hearings and then he pleaded guilty to three counts of first-degree rape," Ms.
Thompson said.
Sentencing was scheduled for May 16.
Under the terms of the plea bargain, Mr. Monagas will receive 20 to 40 years in prison.
But Justice Weissberg said he would recommend to parole authorities that Mr.
Monagas serve the full 40 years.
Mr.
Monagas pleaded guilty to committing three rapes, which occurred on Nov. 18, 1993, Jan. 16, 1994, and Feb. 1, 1994, all in Stuyvesant Town, a rental apartment complex in lower Manhattan.
The authorities said the attacks essentially followed a pattern in which Mr.
Monagas would hold open the door to an apartment building for a woman laden with groceries.
Once inside, he would pull a knife and force the woman to a secluded area where he would rape and sodomize her.
A drawing of the suspect based on descriptions given by victims was distributed around the neighborhood.
Investigators said Mr.
Monagas -- who spent 10 years in Florida prisons for similar crimes and returned to New York in 1993 -- apparently saw the wanted posters of him and fled to Florida.
His half-sister, Michele Monagas, an assistant district attorney in the Bronx, became suspicious when she was told by relatives in Florida that Mr.
Monagas had returned there and had said something about getting into trouble in New York.
She obtained a copy of the poster and identified Mr. Monagas.


Listening to the Japanese Work Ethic
To the Editor:
I just returned from Japan, where I conducted the new La Strada Chamber Ochestra in five concerts (in Kyoto, Osaka and three in Kobe).Because the musicians in this ensemble so clearly epitomize the wonderful Japanese work ethic, I relate the following facts:


Managed Care Leads to Marketing Strategies as Hospitals Compete
One recent afternoon, Barry R. Freedman, the director of Mount Sinai Hospital, traveled to Westchester to speak with administrators and physicians at a hospital there about becoming part of the Manhattan medical center's growing health care network.
As he emerged from the meeting into the reception area, Mr.
Freedman bumped into an old friend, Dr.
Spencer Foreman, director of the Montefiore Medical Center in the Bronx, who was there to make a similar bid on behalf of his hospital.
Like two door-to-door salesmen arriving at the same house, the two laughed, nervously.


Disabilities Act Works
To the Editor:
Roy Spiegel in "A Toothless Law" (Op-Ed, April 24) is right that the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission needs to be better funded to investigate and resolve claims of discrimination effectively.
Even so, the Americans with Disabilities Act is not without bite.


An Owner's Thumbs Up As Devils Clinch Berth
The Devils secured a spot in the playoffs tonight with a 3-1 triumph over the Florida Panthers and made some points with the boss, too.
John McMullen, the team's chairman and majority owner, visited the dressing room after the game at Byrne Meadowlands Arena and shook hands with everyone in sight to celebrate his team's sixth consecutive trip to the Stanley Cup playoffs.


First, Give Rwanda Aid
To the Editor:
"Open Wounds in Rwanda" (editorial, April 25) points out that "What Rwanda lacks most is a spirit of reconciliation and justice."


Sports of The Times; Too Soon For Baseball To Panic
BOBBY BONILLA was expecting his wife, daughter and son for last night's Mets home opener at Shea Stadium.
That meant by late afternoon the anticipated crowd was three, and counting.
"A home opener is a home opener," Bonilla said in the Mets clubhouse, "whether it's 55,000 or 5,000."


QUAKER STATE MOVING HEADQUARTERS TO DALLAS
The Quaker State Corporation is leaving the Quaker State after 64 years of business there.
The company, an Oil City, Pa., producer of motor oil and lubricants, said it would move its corporate headquarters and motor oil division to Dallas as part of a restructuring to accommodate the acquisition of the Specialty Oil Companies.
The company said restructuring, relocating its work force and closing its headquarters in Oil City and administrative offices in Shreveport, La., would result in a pretax charge of about $25 million.
Specialty Oil, based in Shreveport, was acquired last year by Quaker State for more than $130 million.


Newsday's Circulation Decline Is Largest of New York Papers'
Newsday and New York Newsday both lost circulation sharply during the six-month period that ended on March 31, according to data supplied yesterday by the newspapers' publisher.
Newsday's total weekday circulation declined by 50,613, to 669,739, down 7 percent from the comparable six-month period a year earlier.
New York Newsday's average weekday circulation declined by 31,652, or 12.8 percent, to 216,043.


Baby Bells Advance in Long Distance
In a big victory for local telephone businesses, a Federal judge ruled yesterday that the seven regional Bell companies could offer long-distance cellular and other wireless service.
Declaring that "effective, large-scale competition" would lead to rapid progress in wireless communications, Judge Harold H. Greene opened the long-distance market to local companies -- on the condition that they can demonstrate measurable competition in their own markets.


NATIONAL HEALTH-ROCHE BIOMEDICAL LINK SET
National Health Laboratories Holdings Inc. said yesterday that it had completed its merger with Roche Biomedical Laboratories Inc., a combination that formed the nation's largest operator of medical test labs.
The merger also created a new publicly traded company, the Laboratory Corporation of America Holdings, with a value of about $1.3 billion.
The merger agreement calls for National Health Labs shareholders to receive a 50.1 percent stake in the new company and about $475 million in cash.
Roche Biomedical, a subsidiary of the Swiss drug giant Roche Holding A.G., will contribute its laboratory business and $186.7 million in cash to the new company.
In exchange, Roche received a 49.9 percent stake in the new company.


MERGER ACCORD WITH RYKA IS TERMINATED
L.A.
Gear Inc., the athletic apparel and footwear company, said yesterday that it had terminated a merger agreement with Ryka Inc., a Massachusetts-based marketer of women's athletic shoes.
L.A.
Gear, based in Santa Monica, Calif., attributed the deal's collapse to Ryka's recent financial results for 1994 and its short-term outlook.
L.A.
Gear reached its agreement to acquire Ryka in January, but in early April, Ryka sought to renegotiate the merger terms so it could receive short-term financing to help it meet a severe cash shortage.
At the time, Ryka, which was founded by Sheri Poe, said that if it could not revise its deal with L.A.
Gear, the merger agreement could be terminated.


Is Copyright Bill Off-Key?
Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman wants a new arrangement for a bill that would have imposed state restrictions on the way national music-copyright agencies collect songwriters' royalty fees in New Jersey.
In a move that pleased the copyright agencies, the Governor vetoed a measure that sponsors said would protect businesses that play live or recorded music from "unfair" practices by copyright companies.


Without Welfare, Giuliani Suggests, Many Might Move
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani's plan to cut welfare benefits, combined with similar proposals in Albany, could prompt many welfare recipients to move out of New York State, the Mayor said yesterday.
If welfare recipients were able to break free from their dependency on government benefits, enabling them to move freely around the country, the Mayor said, "that would be a good thing" for them.
He did not directly answer a question of whether the city would be better off if many welfare recipients left town.


Alexander Knox, 88, Actor Who Played Woodrow Wilson
Alexander Knox, an actor and playwright who won an Academy Award nomination for his portrayal of Woodrow Wilson in the 1944 film "Wilson," died on Tuesday at the Berwick-Upon-Tweed Infirmary in Northumberland, England.
He was 88 and had homes in London and Berwick-Upon-Tweed.
The cause was bone cancer, said his wife, Doris.


Plea in Orange Co. Is Unlikely to Affect Merrill Dispute
Despite an admission by Robert L. Citron, the former treasurer of Orange County, Calif., that he misappropriated hundreds of millions of dollars and misled investors, neither the bankrupt county nor its former broker, Merrill Lynch &amp; Company, is expected to gain any advantage in their legal dispute.
Orange County is seeking $2 billion in damages from Merrill Lynch in a lawsuit that turns on the question of whether the brokerage firm violated state laws in selling the county billions of dollars' worth of high-powered securities.


A Man Who Doesn't Forget Friends; State Party Hierarchy Is Slowly Filling With Pataki's Allies
In John Powell's swift rise to power, no night could have been sweeter, no event more emblematic of his new clout.
On the dais in the Knights of Columbus Hall last month sat Gov.
George E. Pataki, Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato and other members of New York's Republican royalty, all eager to pay tribute to Mr.
Powell at his swearing-in as Suffolk County's new Republican chairman.
That such a provincial event could attract such a star-studded crowd was a testament not only to Mr.
Powell's political skill but also to Mr.
Pataki's political will.


CHRONICLE
Although JACKIE FARRY has been a veejay on MTV only since February, her fame among the under-20 set is apparently well established.
But she was not prepared for the reception last week when she sat down to sell T-shirts for her friends, members of the band DINOSAUR JR., who were giving a concert at Irving Plaza.
She pitched in because the regular seller was ill, and once she started hawking, a mob of teen-agers began screaming and begging for autographs.


ECONOMY SLOWED TO 2.8% GROWTH IN FIRST QUARTER
The economy slowed to a 2.8 percent rate of growth in the first three months of 1995, the Government reported today.
That was well below the 5.1 percent pace of expansion in the fourth quarter of 1994 as consumers paused after a year-end spending spree.
The fourth-quarter pace was about twice as fast as could be sustained without causing inflation to heat up, and economists generally welcomed today's report.


Playoff Time. Overtime. And, Again, Jordan's Time (48 Points).
In more desperate times, Scottie Pippen picking up his fifth foul midway through the third quarter was cause for great concern in Chicago.
Alonzo Mourning taking over the fourth quarter was a major worry.
Yet because this new No. 45 guy picks up the slack quite well, these are no longer desperate times.


2 Men Shot to Death in Brooklyn Robbery
Two men were shot to death and another was critically wounded last night during a botched robbery attempt at a bodega in the East New York section of Brooklyn, the police said.
The dead men, whose identities and ages were not immediately released, were believed to be a customer and an employee of the bodega, the Chuchi Grocery, at the corner Essex Street and Atlantic Avenue, said Sgt.
Joseph Herbert, of the 75th Precinct detectives squad.


Manual for Terrorists Extols 'Greatest Coldbloodedness'
Since the Oklahoma City bombing, leaders of paramilitary groups have said in dozens of interviews that their groups were organized solely to defend themselves against a Government they view as out of control.
But a number of internal training manuals sold by the most influential of these groups advocate a campaign of terror and lay out specific strategies for actions, including attacking vulnerable Federal buildings, kidnapping important people, sabotaging the food supply and executing enemies.


3 Big Banks Favor Keeping Equal-Lending Law
Three of the nation's four biggest banking companies and the largest savings institution broke ranks today with the rest of the industry, distancing themselves from Republican bills to effectively repeal big sections of the Federal law that requires banks to lend in poor neighborhoods.
Officials of the Bank of America, Chemical Bank, Nationsbank and Home Savings of America, a unit of H. F. Ahmanson &amp; Company, announced at a news conference here today with community-group representatives that they supported last week's revision of Federal community-lending regulations.
The Clinton Administration and the Federal Reserve approved the changes, which eased many paperwork requirements of the basic law, the Community Reinvestment Act of 1977.


Beliefs
In an interview last Sunday on "60 Minutes," President Clinton touched on a connection between the murderous bombing of the Federal Building in Oklahoma City and the deadly conflagration, exactly two years earlier, that ended the Government's two-month siege of the Branch Davidians' compound near Waco, Tex.
When the President expressed hope that no "serious patriotic American believes that the conduct" of the Davidians "justifies the kind of outrageous behavior we've seen here in Oklahoma City or the kind of inflammatory rhetoric that we're hearing all across this country," he was certainly on solid terrain.


Corrections
An answer in the Q&amp;A column of Science Times on April 18 about weather patterns misstated the pattern at the mid-latitudes of the Southern Hemisphere.
Weather systems there tend to move from west to east, not the reverse.


Corrections
An article in Business Day on April 13 about the previous day's trading in the commodity markets misstated the potential impact of a proposal by the United Nations to let Iraq sell as much as $2 billion in oil during a six-month period.
At roughly $18 a barrel, the approximate price of Iraq's type of crude oil, such a proposal would equal roughly 556,000 barrels a day, not every three months -- or more than 200 million barrels a year, not 2.2 million barrels.


Glenn H. Brown Chemist, 79
Dr.
Glenn Halstead Brown, a chemist at Kent State University who helped advance the use of liquid crystals in watches, calculators and other devices, died on April 18 in a nursing home in Hudson, Ohio.
He was 79 and lived in Kent, Ohio.
The cause was Parkinson's disease, a university spokeswoman said.


Commissioner Is Under Fire
A state ethics panel voted to remove the Commissioner of the Board of Public Utilities, Edward Salmon, from his job after allegations that he accepted free meals and other favors from an executive of an electric company.
The panel cited sworn statements from Linda Winikow, a former public relations executive with Orange &amp; Rockland Utilities, that she gave the favors to Mr.
Salmon.
Orange &amp; Rockland is a New York utility that also operates the Rockland Electric Company, which serves 26 towns in Bergen, Passaic and Sussex counties.


Lawyer Gets 5 Years' Probation for Assault
A lawyer who had claimed he was attacked by a Greenburgh police officer without provocation was sentenced today to five years' probation for assaulting the officer, resisting arrest and drunken driving.
In addition, the lawyer, L. Monty Kandekore, now faces disbarment in New York State because of his conviction for a felony.


Disney Is Discussing Acquisition of Thorn EMI
The chairmen of the Walt Disney Company and Thorn EMI P.L.C. of Britain have met and discussed the possibility of Disney's acquiring the big music company, but the prospects of a deal are highly uncertain, music industry officials with knowledge of the companies said today.
Both companies said they would have no comment on reports of the merger discussions.
But several music industry officials said that Michael D. Eisner, the chairman of Disney, and Sir Colin Southgate, the chairman of Thorn EMI, had met and that there had been some preliminary discussions.
Music industry executives said such a deal would have a number of pluses and minuses for both sides.
On the one hand, the music business has been enormously profitable in recent years -- far more profitable, in fact, than the film business.
Disney is a major player in the film, theme park and merchandising businesses, but by not having a large music operation it is missing out on one of the most consistently profitable sectors in the entertainment industry.
It is estimated, however, that Disney would have to pay at least $3 billion for what is widely regarded as one of the weakest of the six major music recording companies.
In addition, some industry executives said that though Thorn EMI has an excellent library, or catalogue, of recorded music, it has faltered lately and needs strong management.
It was not clear, they said, that Disney had the ability to manage a music company.
A music company's catalogue can produce enormous revenues.
In Thorn EMI's case, it includes such evergreen sellers as the early Beatles recordings, Nat King Cole and contemporary musicians like Garth Brooks and Janet Jackson.
Disney is not the only company said to be considering a leap into the music business.
Viacom, which acquired Paramount last year for $10 billion, is said to be contemplating an acquisition of a music company to fill out its portfolio of entertainment industry businesses.
The question is whether Thorn EMI is ready to sell, and if anyone is willing to pay its price.
In Disney's case, the company has enormous financial wherewithal and could easily afford Thorn EMI.
But Mr.
Eisner is said to be wary of large financial commitments after the company's debacle in Euro Disney, which has caused big losses.


CHRONICLE
Let it be said that LINDA RONSTADT, the singer, and ROBIN QUIVERS, the sidekick to the radio personality HOWARD STERN, will probably not be getting together for mai tais.
The two verbally sparred Thursday on NBC's "Tonight" show.
Though JAY LENO, the host, tried to referee, Ms.
Ronstadt said she was so perturbed by Ms.
Quivers, who was promoting her autobiography, that afterward she barely got through her song.


South Korean Gas Blast Kills 100


Mayor Meets Silver but Budget Gap Yawns
A day after proposing a New York City budget that relies heavily on $950 million in help from the state, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani failed yesterday to win any assurance from the Speaker of the State Assembly, Sheldon Silver, that he would get the aid he wanted.
The two men had not met or spoken directly in more than two months.
And yesterday it still appeared that Mr.
Giuliani and Mr.
Silver, a Democrat from Manhattan, differed greatly over how the state's budget could best help the city solve its financial problems.


Clinton Warns Partisan Bickering Could Stall Efforts to Combat Terrorism
President Clinton said today that "we must not dawdle or delay"in expanding Federal powers to investigate terrorists -- a statement aimed at staving off Republican efforts to link anti-terrorism legislation to disputed measures like limits on death-row appeals.
"We must not allow politics to drag us into endless quibbling over an important national item," Mr.
Clinton said at a ceremony honoring teachers in the White House Rose Garden.
"We must not dawdle or delay. Congress must act, and act promptly."


El Salvador, 3 Years Later: A Country Remade by Peace
Throughout El Salvador's 12-year civil war, they were the bitterest of enemies: right-wing death squads who slaughtered thousands of suspected sympathizers of the leftist Farabundo Marti National Liberation Front, and guerrillas who retaliated by executing mayors and other government officials.
Today, though, the Front has the second-largest delegation in the Legislative Assembly, and its deputies occupy offices on the third floor of the national congress building.
The offices of Arena -- the ruling Nationalist Republican Alliance -- are just one floor above them, and legislators from the two groups now greet each other affably in hallways.


Edgar Johnson, 93, Biographer Of Dickens and Scott, Is Dead
Edgar Johnson, the author of biographies of Charles Dickens and Sir Walter Scott, which were hailed as examples of towering and exhaustive scholarship, and a former chairman of the Department of English at City College, died on Wednesday at his home in Albany.
He was 93.
The cause was congestive heart failure, his family said.


Soaking Up the Sun on Fifth Avenue


Margaret A. Rowell, Cellist, 94
Margaret Avery Rowell, a cellist who was one of the country's best-known teachers of the instrument, died on April 21 at Kaiser Medical Center in Oakland, Calif.
She was 94 and lived in Berkeley, Calif.
The cause was pneumonia, said her daughter-in-law, Barbara Rowell.


Treasury Prices Weaken on Some Upbeat Economic Data
Treasury prices were weaker yesterday after economic data on manufacturing and consumer sentiment failed to confirm that economic growth was slowing enough to allay fears of inflation.
The Government reported yesterday that economic growth slowed to a 2.8 percent pace in the first three months of 1995, from 5.1 percent in the previous quarter.
Stuart G. Hoffman, chief economist at PNC Bank in Pittsburgh, noted that the data showed a moderation in economic growth nearer to the level sought by the Federal Reserve, while inflation held steady at around 3 percent.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article yesterday about the O. J. Simpson trial misstated the size of a blood sample from Mr.
Simpson in some editions.
It was about a quarter of a fluid ounce, not two and three-quarters.


Agents Fan Out in a Town in Arizona, Retracing the Trail of the Jailed Suspect
Focusing on this high desert town where Timothy J. McVeigh spent much of the last two years, Federal agents today searched for leads on additional suspects in the bombing of the Oklahoma City Federal Building.
More agents of the Federal Bureau of Investigation moved into town in the late afternoon, setting up a new headquarters in a National Guard armory.
They reinforced a contingent of agents who have been here interviewing Mr.
McVeigh's associates and co-workers and carting off records from the few places he held short-term jobs.


Museum Dusts Off Itself, Its Fop and a Horse's Tail
ONE thing Betsy Gotbaum decided pretty early as she prepared to reopen the New-York Historical Society on May 11 was that the portrait of the cross-dressing Colonial governor definitely deserved a place of honor in the city's oldest museum.
"We're going to put him right there by the front door," said Ms.
Gotbaum, the museum's executive director, referring to the painting of Lord Cornbury in women's clothes.
The British aristocrat had been the crown's first Governor of New York, from 1702 to 1708, and according to historians, he wore and posed in frilly frocks either because he wanted to show off his resemblance to his cousin, Queen Anne, and thereby gain the sympathy of loyalists, or simply because he liked doing it.


Tax Preparer Admits Fraud
Clients who had their 1993 Federal income taxes prepared by Carlos Palacios's Accounting and Tax Service should probably keep their records handy.
Mr.
Palacios, 29, admitted in Federal court in Camden yesterday that he fabricated deductions on the tax returns of 36 clients, costing the Internal Revenue Service $50,610.
And those returns may be just the tip of the iceberg.
At Mr.
Palacios's sentencing on July 28, Federal prosecutors said they plan to present evidence that he obtained fraudulent refunds totaling $500,000 to $800,000 for his clients.
The prosecutors said 1,457 of the 1,485 Federal tax returns Mr.
Palacios prepared for 1993 resulted in refunds.
Mr.
Palacios faces eight years in prison and $500,000 in fines.


Knicks Have Upper Hand
Winning by 24 points can make a team lose concentration.
Losing by 24 points can make a team lose confidence.
Those were the different challenges facing the Knicks and the Cleveland Cavaliers as they prepared for Game 2 of their three-of-five-game playoff series.
New York routed the Cavaliers, 103-79, in Thursday night's series opener.
And the Cavaliers, who were underdogs before the series, were left with little time to regroup for Saturday afternoon's rematch at Madison Square Garden.


Salvaging a Symbol


Republicans Plan Overhaul Of Medicare
Speaker Newt Gingrich said today that Republicans would propose a major overhaul of the Medicare system and challenged President Clinton to come up with recommendations in two weeks to keep the popular health care program for the elderly solvent.
Mr.
Gingrich said the changes would not be tied to the balanced-budget debate.
The Republicans had planned to include the Medicare changes in the Federal budget bill, but the Democrats have asserted that the Republicans would take money away from the elderly as a way of achieving a balanced budget.


Protestantism Shifts Toward a New Model of How 'Church' Is Done
Among America's Protestant churches, a shift of power and influence is under way that is slowly, but profoundly, changing the way an increasing number of the nation's 80 million Protestants worship.
For decades, pastors -- Episcopalians, Presbyterians, Southern Baptists and others -- looked to their denominations' headquarters for leadership and the basics of Sunday worship.
Whether in upper Manhattan or downtown Nashville, those headquarters provided hymnals, Sunday school curriculums, blueprints for church buildings and ideas for services.


STOCK OF CYGNE DESIGNS SLIDES ON EXPECTED DEFICIT
The stock of Cygne Designs Inc. plunged 37 percent yesterday after the company, a clothing maker, said it would incur a first-quarter loss.
Cygne Designs, which is based in New York, said it expected to report a loss of $4 million to $4.7 million, or about 31 cents to 36 cents a share, for the first quarter, which ended yesterday.
For the corresponding period last year, the company had net income of $200,000, or 2 cents a share.
Contributing to the loss will be a pretax charge of about $1.1 million related to the write-off of a bad account from a nonpaying customer.
Cygne's stock dropped $3.75, to $6.25 a share, in Nasdaq trading, where it had the steepest percentage decline of the day.


Moss Joins Dolphins
Running back BRENT MOSS, who was the most valuable player in Wisconsin's Rose Bowl victory in 1994 but was kicked off the team after a drug arrest last season, has signed a free-agent contract with the Miami Dolphins.


In America; Backing Off Bravery
President Clinton forgot himself for a moment on Monday and offered us a glimpse of moral and political courage.
With Oklahoma City grievously wounded and still bleeding, Mr.
Clinton spoke out against the "purveyors of hatred and division" whose "loud and angry" voices have polluted the nation's airwaves and inflamed the discussion of serious national issues.


CRESTAR FINANCIAL TO AQUIRE LOYOLA CAPITAL
The Crestar Financial Corporation agreed yesterday to acquire the Loyola Capital Corporation for $259.2 million in stock.
Under the agreement, Loyola shareholders will receive 0.69 share of Crestar stock, equal to $32, for each Loyola share.
Crestar, a regional bank based in Richmond, will take over 32 branches of Loyola Capital's main subsidiary, Loyola Federal Savings Bank.
Half the offices are in Baltimore, the other half in central and eastern Maryland.
Loyola has $2.5 billion in assets, $1.5 billion in deposits and 800 employees.
Loyola's stock tumbled $3.75, to $28.375, in Nasdaq trading yesterday, and Crestar's stock slipped 50 cents, to $45, on the New York Stock Exchange.


Pope May Say Mass in October On Great Lawn in Central Park
Pope John Paul II is tentatively scheduled to say Mass in Central Park when he visits the United States in October, church and city officials said yesterday.
Catholic New York, the newspaper of the Archdiocese of New York, reported on Thursday that the Pope plans to say Mass at 10 A.M. on Saturday, Oct. 7, on the park's Great Lawn.
But archdiocesan officials said yesterday that the outdoor Mass was still being planned.


Mormons to End Holocaust Victim Baptism
Ernest W. Michel, a survivor of the Holocaust, said that until last summer, he was unaware of a practice within the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints in which dead people are baptized as Mormons by living church members who stand in as their proxies.
That changed when Mr.
Michel, chairman of the World Gathering of Jewish Holocaust Survivors in 1981, discovered that his parents and several other family members, who had died in Nazi concentration camps, had been so baptized in ceremonies many years after their deaths.
The discovery led to a formal complaint last November by the American Gathering of Jewish Holocaust Survivors, an organization of about 100,000 members of which Mr.
Michel is a founder.


A Top Election Spender
Former United States Representative Herbert Klein, a Clifton Democrat, spent $1.1 million -- more than any other New Jersey House candidate -- in the last congressional election, according to Federal figures released yesterday.
He lost his bid for the 8th District seat -- to the man who spent the second-highest amount, Bill Martini, a Clifton Republican who spent $852,000.


Police Accountability Would Stop the Brutality; Review Board Ignored
To the Editor:
Re "The Cost of Police Brutality" (editorial, April 22): The Civilian Complaint Review Board's substantiation of complaints against police officers and recommendations of departmental charges are only advisory.
The Police Commissioner is free to ignore them.


INSIDE
New Link in Japan Attack
Japan's army acknowledged that two of its sergeants were secret members of the sect suspected in the Tokyo subway gas attack.
Page 3.
G.O.P.
Effort Pays Off
A decade-long effort by Republicans to create a network of small campaign donors paid off in the 1994 Congressional elections.
Page 8.
2 Arts


Classical Paces, Classic Fun
American Ballet Theater displayed its versatility on Wednesday afternoon at the Metropolitan Opera House by offering a program that featured this season's first performance of George Balanchine's abstract "Theme and Variations" and Leonide Massine's comic "Gaite Parisienne."
Balanchine's intricately patterned ballet to Tchaikovsky was danced slightly hesitantly, and the sense of caution increased after some performers took accidental slips.


Transactions
Football  National Football League CINCINNATI BENGALS -- Agreed to terms with Tim McGee, wide receiver, on a one-year contract.
CLEVELAND BROWNS -- Signed Dana Hall, safety.
NEW YORK GIANTS -- Signed Geoff Bender, quarterback; Curtis Thomas and Jeremy Burkett, wide receivers; Butch Jennings, fullback; Akili Johnson, defensive back; Todd Yeaman, Chris Mazyck and Matt Storm, defensive tackles; Jesse Palacios, guard.
NEW YORK JETS -- Signed Sean Conley, kicker; Tom Garlick, Brian Sallee and Chad Askew, wide receivers; Marc Lamb and Brian Thompson, centers; Todd Baczek and Colin Cronin, guards; Wilky Bazile and Terry Connealy, defensive tackles; Chad Cascadden, John Knutson, and Don Davis, linebackers; Brian Drummy and Mike Jerichh, offensive tackles; Vance Joseph, defensive back; Eric Marsh, running back; Sheridan May, fullback; Elton Rhoades, cornerback; John Sacca, quarterback; and Jason Seapker, safety.
PHILADELPHIA EAGLES -- Signed Kenrick Jones and Anthony Jordan, wide receivers, and Kerry Pribnow, offensive tackle.
Hockey  National Hockey League NHL -- Reinstated Chicago Blackhawks left wing Bob Probert from his suspension for substance abuse and is eligible to play next season.
OTTAWA SENATORS -- Sent Pavol Demitra and Daniel Guerard, right wings; Michel Picard, left wing, and Darren Rumble, defenseman, to Prince Edward Island of the AHL.
PITTSBURGH PENGUINS -- Signed Richard Park, center, to a multiyear contract.


Changing Landscape Of Protestant Faith
A shift of power and influence is slowly, but profoundly, changing the way many of the nation's 80 million Protestants worship.
Since the 1980's, megachurches have gathered tens of thousands of worshipers into their folds and millions of dollars onto their collection plates, becoming in the process new centers of Protestant influence.


From Haiti, Summoning The Power of Politics
In the mid-1980's, along with other Caribbean groups, bands in Haiti began returning to tradition in their music.
Where Haitian popular music, called compas, had been elegant and subtle, and careful in its relationship to politics, carnival and voodoo music, a new generation of musicians looked directly to the power of rural and religious forms of music for its identity.
Boukman Eksperyans, named after an 18th-century leader of the Haitian fight against French colonialism, is one of the more important bands of the movement, and its story has been integral to the country's political tragedies.
The band performs overtly political music (several of its songs were anthems for anti-government forces during the three years of military rule before President Jean-Bertrand Aristide was restored to power), and the group spent time in exile.
The band's bassist, Michel-Melthon-Lynch, died in Haiti of meningitis during the United States embargo as no medicine could be found to treat him.


JOHNSON &amp; JOHNSON-MERCK CLEARED ON PEPCID SALE
The Johnson &amp; Johnson-Merck Consumer Pharmaceuticals Company said yesterday that United States regulators had cleared the way for it to sell the anti-ulcer drug Pepcid AC over the counter.
The development and marketing alliance, which teams Johnson &amp; Johnson, based in New Brunswick, N.J., and Merck, based in Whitehouse Station, N.J., can begin selling the product in June, said the United States Food and Drug Administration.
On April 19, Merck said first-quarter sales of Pepcid posted a 33 percent increase to $260 million.
In the United States, Pepcid sales increased 45 percent, to $210 million.


Hunt for Bodies Slowed by Falling Debris
The grim search through the rubble of the Federal Building here was slowed this morning when debris began crumbling and endangering the workers.
"We cleared everybody out of there right away," said Maj.
John H. Long of the Oklahoma City Fire Department.
"Nobody was injured. But we are not taking any chances."


CAMPBELL SOUP CONSOLIDATING POULTRY OPERATIONS
The Campbell Soup Company said yesterday that it planned to consolidate its United States poultry operations, closing one plant with 240 workers and reducing the work force by about 140 at another.
Campbell, the world's largest soup company, said the consolidation would involve the closing of the Chestertown, Md., poultry plant.
It will also cut about 140 of the 375 workers at its Tecumseh, Neb., poultry plant.
The company said it planned to integrate the operations into existing plants in Minnesota and Georgia.
Campbell's stock rose 37.5 cents, to $51.25, a 52-week high, on the New York Stock Exchange.


Replacement Umpires Called Out in Toronto
Baseball management suffered another legal loss yesterday when the Ontario Labor Board ruled that the American League cannot use replacement umpires for Blue Jays games in Toronto.
The league received one break: The board made the decision effective next Wednesday, after the Blue Jays' current homestand ends, meaning neither the league nor the team faces a problem until the Yankees play at the Skydome on May 9.


Foreman Thinking One
GEORGE FOREMAN said last night that he wants to fight just once more, then retire.
And if the fight can be made against MIKE TYSON, he will take it.
But Foreman, in New York for last night's annual Boxing Writers Association of America dinner, said: "I also feel I owe MICHAEL MOORER a shot. So if both fights can be worked out, that's a possibility, too."
In fact, Moorer and Foreman's advisers met last night to discuss just such a fight.


Rare Cougar Attack Is No License to Shoot
To the Editor:
Last year's killing of a bird watcher by a cougar in a state park near San Diego was certainly tragic (news article, April 23).
But such incidents are as rare as they are tragic.
Since 1890, there have been only 13 fatal attacks by cougars on people in North America.


CRESTAR FINANCIAL TO AQUIRE LOYOLA CAPITAL
The Crestar Financial Corporation agreed yesterday to acquire the Loyola Capital Corporation for $259.2 million in stock.
Under the agreement, Loyola shareholders will receive 0.69 share of Crestar stock, equal to $32, for each Loyola share.
Crestar, a regional bank based in Richmond, will take over 32 branches of Loyola Capital's main subsidiary, Loyola Federal Savings Bank.
Half the offices are in Baltimore, the other half in central and eastern Maryland.
Loyola has $2.5 billion in assets, $1.5 billion in deposits and 800 employees.
Loyola's stock tumbled $3.75, to $28.375, in Nasdaq trading yesterday, and Crestar's stock slipped 50 cents, to $45, on the New York Stock Exchange.


Bhutto Didn't Come to U.S. Seeking Aid
To the Editor:
"Bhutto Came, She Saw, She Conquered" by Senator Larry Pressler (Op-Ed, April 16) contains a number of inaccuracies besides offering a fundamentally flawed perspective on the nuclear question in South Asia.


U.S. Says Russia Promised Nuclear Gear to Iran
Administration officials disclosed today that Russia's top atomic energy official promised Iran in January that Moscow would sell equipment to Iran that could be used to prepare material suitable for an atomic bomb.
The Administration learned three weeks ago about Moscow's commitment and since then, Washington has implored Russia to drop the plan, saying it jeopardizes American economic aid to Russia.


METRO DIGEST
ARE WELFARE RECIPIENTS WELCOME?
Mayor Giuliani's plan to cut welfare benefits, combined with similar proposals in Albany, could prompt many welfare recipients to move out of New York State, the Mayor said.
If welfare recipients were able to break free from their dependency on Government benefits, enabling them to move freely around the country, the Mayor said, "that would be a good thing." He did not directly answer a question on whether the city would be better off if many welfare recipients left town.
Page 1.
NEW YORK CITY  HELPING SURVIVORS OF THE HOLOCAUST Though Margaret and Armin Krauss appeared to live the middle-class apotheosis in Whitestone, Queens, the Holocaust was a cloud over their home.
For most of their 43-year marriage, Mrs.
Krauss, who survived Auschwitz, and Mr.
Krauss, who survived Dachau, never even mentioned the Holocaust.
Mrs.
Krauss lived on a nervous edge, plagued by waves of nightmares.
Their son Jeffrey sought answers, and counseling.
The Krauss family is not unusual, psychologists say.
Page 27.
QUEENS MAN IS ACCUSED IN KILLING A Queens man shot and killed a fellow bar patron, then barricaded himself inside the bar for seven hours before police officers stormed the place -- only to find him asleep, the police said.
The suspect, Frank Napolitano, 60, of 130-32 117th Street in Ozone Park, Queens, has a long criminal history dating back to 1952, when he served about six years in prison for killing a man in Brooklyn.
Page 27.
A MUSEUM DUSTS ITSELF OFF One thing Betsy Gotbaum decided pretty early as she prepared to reopen the New-York Historical Society on May 11 was that the portrait of the cross-dressing Colonial governor definitely deserved a place of honor in the city's oldest museum.
"We're going to put him right there by the front door," said Ms.
Gotbaum, the museum's executive director, referring to the painting of Lord Cornbury in women's clothes.
"I think the portrait reflects the glorious and incredible ironies of New York," she said as she supervised the countdown to the reopening of the institution.
About New York by Michael T. Kaufman, Page 27.
POPE MIGHT SAY MASS IN CENTRAL PARK Pope John Paul II is tentatively scheduled to say Mass in Central Park when he visits the United States in October, church and city officials said.
Catholic New York, the newspaper of the Archdiocese of New York, reported that the Pope plans to say Mass at 10 A.M. on Saturday, Oct. 7, on the park's Great Lawn.
Page 27.
REGION  PLANT WORKERS TO COLLECT PAY They may not have a place to work anymore, but the 62 union laborers at the Lodi chemical plant that exploded last week will collect their paychecks for at least two months.
The offer, made by officials of Napp Technologies Inc., pleased leaders and rank and file alike from the Paterson local of the Amalgamated Clothing and Textile Workers Union.
Page 28.
MAYOR CONSULTS ASSEMBLY SPEAKER A day after proposing a budget for New York City that relied heavily on $950 million in help from the state, Mayor Giuliani met with the Speaker of the State Assembly, but failed to win any assurance that he would get the aid he wanted.
The two men have not met or spoken directly in more than two months.
Yesterday, the Mayor and Speaker Sheldon Silver, a Democrat from Manhattan, appeared to have made little progress in smoothing out their differences.
Page 26.


France, in a Shift, Reportedly Plans to Reduce Financial Aid to Algeria
In a move that may signal a lessening of support for the Algerian Government, France is planning to reduce a package of loans and easy credit that has propped up the stagnant Algerian economy for years, a French newspaper reported today.
France's financial aid to the former colony, which hovers around $1.2 billion a year, will be cut back next year to 5 about $1 billion, according to an article in the authoritative daily Le Monde.


Kamp-Lintfort Journal; Once-Mighty Miners Now Have Backs to the Wall
This town in the Ruhr Valley, with its immaculate streets, tidy brick row houses, bright flowers and modern cars seems a long way away from its American counterpart, a run-down West Virginia coal-mining town.
But then the German coal industry is perhaps different from that in any other country.
Not only are German miners the highest paid, earning on average almost $40,000 a year.
They also produce the most expensive coal in the world.


Louisiana, a Democratic Rock, Feels the Surge of a G.O.P. Tide
Louisiana has had no Republican senators since Reconstruction.
It has had only two Republican Governors, and one of those was elected as a Democrat and switched while in office.
Even in the Republican tide of 1994, the Democrats here held on to their four House seats.
The legacy of Huey P. Long lives on in a state where the habit of looking to the Government for jobs and prosperity is deeply entrenched.


An Apple for the Teacher in the Rose Garden


Gun-Exchange Plan Pays Off
"We got all kinds of weapons," Police Director William R. Celester said yesterday, pleased with the results of the latest city gun-exchange program, which ran from March 13 to April 14.
People turned in 69 rifles, 168 revolvers, and 74 automatic and assault weapons.
The city paid out $15,975 for the haul.


U.S. Rebuffs Japanese Overture To Limit Scope of Auto Talks
Senior Administration officials today rebuffed an overture from Japanese trade negotiators to limit the scope of auto trade talks, as American negotiators continued to draft a list of possible Japanese targets for American trade sanctions.
Laura Tyson, the head of President Clinton's National Economic Council, said tonight that the officials had unanimously agreed to insist on progress on all three sticking points in the trade talks, and not just on two out of three issues, as urged by the Japanese.


STOCK OF CYGNE DESIGNS SLIDES ON EXPECTED DEFICIT
The stock of Cygne Designs Inc. plunged 37 percent yesterday after the company, a clothing maker, said it would incur a first-quarter loss.
Cygne Designs, which is based in New York, said it expected to report a loss of $4 million to $4.7 million, or about 31 cents to 36 cents a share, for the first quarter, which ended yesterday.
For the corresponding period last year, the company had net income of $200,000, or 2 cents a share.
Contributing to the loss will be a pretax charge of about $1.1 million related to the write-off of a bad account from a nonpaying customer.
Cygne's stock dropped $3.75, to $6.25 a share, in Nasdaq trading, where it had the steepest percentage decline of the day.


Lighter Burden for Tree With a Dark Past


The Jets Take a First Look At Their First-Round Picks
The first ball ever tossed to Kyle Brady as a New York Jet floated toward his hands 7 yards downfield -- just the spot where Boomer Esiason will probably throw it a few dozen times this season.
And Brady, the Jets' No. 1 draft pick, dropped it.


Soderstrom Puts Rangers' Playoff Hopes on Hold
There were no speeches from the captain.
There were no comebacks, either.
As a result, there were no points for the Rangers in a game in which they could have put themselves in a good position to make the playoffs.
No matter that their opponents last night at Madison Square Garden were the Islanders, who are 12-25-5 against the rest of the league and out of the playoffs.
Tommy Soderstrom stopped 45 of 47 shots and improved to 3-1 against the Rangers this season, and Ray Ferraro and Zigmund Palffy teamed up for two scores, as the rival Islanders defeated the Rangers, 4-2.


Observer; Spoilers of the Day
"Line 'em all up against the wall and shoot 'em" was my Uncle Gregory's unvarying advice for handling people who ruffled the public calm.
Whether they were unionized malcontents whose picket line inconvenienced him or political hotheads whose anti-government insolence outraged his sense of patriotism, it did them no good to beg Uncle Gregory for mercy.


No Headline
"This is a new country. After all we have seen in Bosnia and Rwanda and Somalia, it is good for the world to know there is at least one place where a peace process has been successful." -- JOAQUIN VILLALOBOS, a former military strategist in El Salvador.  [ 1:5. ]


Inquiry in Arizona
The investigation of the Oklahoma bombing has focused on Kingman, Ariz., where Timothy J. McVeigh spent much of the last two years and where Federal agents are searching for possible additional suspects.
Article, page 11.


Paine Webber's President, 54, Quits, Talking of a New Career
Paul B. Guenther resigned yesterday as president of the Paine Webber Group to pursue another career, and he said he would spend more time working with charitable and nonprofit organizations.
In an interview, Mr.
Guenther, who will remain as a consultant to Paine Webber for three years, said he had always wanted to make such a move, and felt that with the completion of Paine Webber's $1.96 billion purchase of Kidder, Peabody, now was a good time.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, a picture caption yesterday about Take Our Daughters to Work Day reversed the disabilities of a girl and her sponsor in some editions.
Rosa Otero, 13, has muscular dystrophy; her sponsor, Judge Rosalyn H. Richter of Criminal Court in New York, has spina bifida.


A Survivor Talks About Her Ordeal


Queens Man Is Accused In Bar Killing
A Queens man shot and killed a fellow bar patron, then barricaded himself inside the bar for seven hours before police officers stormed the place early yesterday -- only to find him asleep, the police said.
The suspect, Frank Napolitano, 60, of 130-32 117th Street in Ozone Park, Queens, has a long criminal history dating to 1952, when he served about six years at the Sing Sing Correctional Facility for killing a man in Brooklyn, according to the Queens District Attorney's office.


The Beach Patrol Meets
An annual beach patrol converges on the Jersey shore from Sandy Hook to Cape May today as more than a thousand volunteers are expected to celebrate the 10th anniversary of a program called Clean Ocean Action Beach Sweeps by picking up trash.
Over the years, program coordinators say, there's been less of it.


Gaston J. Sigur Jr., 70, Adviser To Reagan on Japan and Korea
Gaston J. Sigur Jr., a principal counsellor on Asian affairs in the Reagan Administration and professor of East Asian Studies at George Washington University, died on Wednesday at his home in Bethesda, Md.
He was 70.
The cause was cardiac arrest, the university said.


Bonnie Bird Tribute
A memorial tribute for Bonnie Bird, a Martha Graham dancer and teacher, is to be held on tomorrow at 6 P.M. at Buttenweiser Hall at the 92d Street Y. Ms.
Bird died earlier this month at the age of 80.
The program includes films, speeches and a performance by the Young Masters Repertory Ensemble of the Y. Information: (212) 415-5552.


G.M. Will Shed Some Models, Stressing Brand
Ronald L. Zarrella, the outsider hired by General Motors to impart distinct and vivid personalities to its muddled divisions and models, emerged from four months of studying the company today to announce that he agreed with the basic marketing strategy G.M. already had in place.
But he is clearly fine-tuning the strategy.
While General Motors has no plans to kill or merge any of its seven divisions, it will do away with some car or truck models, Mr.
Zarrella said in a speech today to the Automotive Press Association here.


FOUNDATION HEALTH WINS CONTRACT WITH MILITARY
The Foundation Health Corporation has won the bidding for a five-year $1.8 billion military health-care contract for Texas, Louisiana, Oklahoma and Arkansas, the Pentagon said yesterday.
The agreement, valued at about $360 million a year, covers managed health care for at least 613,000 military dependents and retirees under the Civilian Health and Medical Program, or Champus.
The contract will supersede Foundation Health's current Champus contract covering Fort Worth, Austin, Tex., and Alexandria, La..


COMPANY NEWS
AMERICAN VISION CENTERS INC., New York, a franchisor of eye care stores, has agreed to acquire Nuvision Inc., Flint, Mich., a prescription and nonprescroption optical equipment and accessories concern, for $7.60 a share in cash, or about $21 million.
BOISE CASCADE CORP., Boise, said its forest products division had formed a joint venture with Shenzhen Leasing, China, to produce carbonless paper in China.
Boise Cascade will provide 60 percent of the initial $12 million investment in the venture, which will employ 253 people.
MOBIL CORP., Fairfax, Va., increased its regular quarterly dividend 8 percent to 92.5 cents a share from 85 cents.
G.T.C.
TRANSCONTINENTAL GROUP LTD., Montreal, a printing and publishing concern, agreed to acquire Les Hebdos Telemedia, a publishing division of Telemedia Inc., Montreal, a publishing and radio concern, for about $16 million.


Giuliani Seeks Fish Sellers For Market
Turning up the heat in negotiations for new leases and rent increases at the Fulton Fish Market, New York City officials have begun soliciting merchants who might replace some fish wholesalers now at the market.
Randy M. Mastro, chief of staff for Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani, said yesterday that several hundred letters were sent this week to wholesale seafood dealers who had either expressed interest in moving to the market or who the administration believed might be considering doing so.


International Briefs; In Brief
*Banco Santander S.A. and Istituto Bancario San Paolo di Torino S.p.A., the largest private banks in Spain and Italy, respectively, have reached an agreement to develop commercial and investment banking projects.
*Nippon Steel and Kawasaki Steel, two of Japan's largest steelmakers, said yesterday that they should be able to raise steel export prices for the July-to-September period, citing brisk overseas demand.
Spokesmen for both companies declined to comment on a Japanese news report that major steelmakers would raise the average some prices by 10 to 20 percent.


Jerauld Wright, 96, Admiral and Envoy
Jerauld Wright, a naval officer who led American and NATO forces during a period of expansion by the Soviet navy during the 1950's and who later was Ambassador to Taiwan, died on Thursday at his home in Washington.
He was 96.
The cause was pneumonia, a Navy Department spokesman said.


Small Donors Filling G.O.P. War Chests
The Republican Party's decadelong effort to forge a nationwide network of small donors paid substantial dividends in the 1994 Congressional elections, new Federal studies show.
Republican House and Senate candidates raised $50 million more than their Democratic counterparts in 1993-94, with most of the edge -- more than $37 million -- coming from individual contributors who gave less than $500.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-7  PEACE IN EL SALVADOR
Barely three years after United Nations mediators brokered a settlement to end a conflict that killed at least 75,000 people, El Salvador has been transformed by peace. 1  SOUTH KOREA GAS BLAST
Rescuers worked into the night to search for survivors of a gas explosion that killed at least 100, more than half of them teen-agers, in Taegu, South Korea. 3  ARMY LINK TO JAPANESE SECT
The Japanese Army acknowledged that two of its sergeants were secret members of the sect suspected in the nerve gas attack last month on the Tokyo subway system. 3  PARADE PROTOCOL IN MOSCOW
After much debate about symbolism, Russia's President has decided to stand atop Lenin's Mausoleum to review a May 9 parade of World War II veterans. 5  ISRAELI ARMY'S ORDERS
The senior Israeli Army commander in the occupied West Bank said that his soldiers must kill wanted Palestinian militants. 6  CONCERNS ABOUT RUSSIA-IRAN DEAL
U.S. officials said that a top Russian official promised in January to sell equipment to Iran that would enable it to prepare material suitable for an atomic bomb. 6  FRANCE LOOSENS ALGERIA TIE
France is planning to reduce a package of loans and easy credit that has propped up the stagnant Algerian economy for years, a French newspaper reported. 6  Terrorist attacks dropped but casualties rose. 6  In Bogota, a distinctly different kind of mayor. 7  Argentine bishop condemns the church's role in "dirty war." 6  Kamp-Lintfort Journal: Coal miners with their backs to the wall. 4  National 8-12  U.S.
ECONOMY SLOWS
The economy showed to a 2.8 percent growth pace in the first quarter of 1995, the Government said.  1  QUESTIONS ABOUT BOMB SUSPECT
A week after Federal agents found Timothy McVeigh in a jail, questions about him and the Oklahoma City bombing continue to grow.  1  TEACHING TERROR
Training manuals distributed by rightist paramilitary groups outline the means for waging a campaign of terror and guerrilla war.  10  TROUBLE FOR DEMOCRATS
For the first time since Reconstruction, Democrats may lose their grip on Louisiana, reflecting an ominous trend for them in the South. 1  REPUBLICAN GAINS
The Republican Party's long effort to forge a nationwide network of small donors paid substantial dividends in 1994, studies show.  8  SIMPSON WITNESS ASKS OUT
A potential defense witness said he did not want to testify at the Simpson trial because of lawyer tactics and a circuslike atmosphere. 9  MORMONS AND JEWISH BAPTISMS
Mormon authorities said they would reissue an order prohibiting church members from including Jewish Holocaust victims in retroactive baptismal ceremonies.  9  MEGACHURCHES' INFLUENCE
Megachurches are profoundly changing how many of the nation's 80 million Protestants worship.  12  Beliefs: A scholar of religious-liberty issues looks back at Waco. 9  Metro Digest 25  WELFARE EXODUS POSSIBLE
Alexander Knox, actor and playwright.
Gaston J. Sigur Jr., Asian affairs aide in the Reagan Administration.
Editorials/Op-Ed 22-23  Editorials  The high court loses restraint.
Pssst!
Want to buy a reservoir?
Susanna Rodell: Daughters' day.
Letters  Russell Baker: Spoilers of the day.
Bob Herbert: Backing off bravery.
Peter Ross Range: A business-hungry Vietnam forgets . . .
Philip Gourevitch: . . . but it does not forgive.
Chronicle 24  Bridge 17  Crossword 12


CUNY Graduate Center Makes Big Contribution
To the Editor:
Barry R. Gross is sadly mistaken when he argues in "How to Bail Out CUNY" (Op-Ed, April 22) that the City University of New York should eliminate its Graduate Center, the campus that awards CUNY Ph.D.'s.
Such a step would save the university little money, and in fact cut off the flow of advanced graduate students, who, as adjunct faculty members, keep down costs at other CUNY institutions.


GROW GROUP GETS OFFER TO PURCHASE COMPANY
Grow Group Inc. said yesterday that it had received an offer from an unidentified third party willing to acquire the company for $18.10 a share, or about $291 million.
The New York-based maker of specialty chemical coatings and paints said that Wertheim Schroder &amp; Company would assist it in considering the offer and other strategic alternatives.
In New York Stock Exchange composite trading, Grow Group shares were up 75 cents, to $17.625.


Police Accountability Would Stop the Brutality
To the Editor:
Re "The Cost of Police Brutality" (editorial, April 22): New York City's focus on police brutality is prompted by "fiscal problems," rather than concern for victims.
The city avoids facing the root causes of the brutality by conveniently blaming a litigious society and lawyers taking advantage of the jury system.


Hundley Has Best Seat in House at Home
Todd Hundley had the game-winning hit, a bases-loaded, opposite-field double, but that is not what he will remember.
Hundley liked the home run by Rico Brogna, a solo shot to center that re-established New York's love affair with the young first baseman from Watertown, Conn.
He also liked the spectacular throw by Carl Everett, the rookie right fielder who nailed Brian Jordan -- one of baseball's best runners -- with a dead-on throw to Hundley at the plate.


In Colombia, 'Anarchist' Brings Change
The typical candidate for Mayor of Bogota is usually a nationally known politician or a nationally known politician's son.
His campaign funds are plentiful.
His placards, as outsized as his promises, dominate the landscape for months.
But Antanas Mockus, the son of Lithuanian immigrants, was best known for having displayed his naked rear in an effort to silence a crowd of boisterous university art students.
His only pledge was to raise taxes, under the slogan "We All Pitch In."


Eclecticism and Experimentation at Ballet Theater
Excitement filled the house in more ways than one during American Ballet Theater's mixed bill on Thursday night at the Metropolitan Opera House.
The truly eclectic program got off to the right serene start with a new cast in "Les Sylphides" and built in dynamism with "Cruel World," the ever-dazzling and turbulent ballet that James Kudelka created for the company last year.
The nonstop energy of Twyla Tharp's "In the Upper Room," returning after several seasons, was equally awaited by those in the know.
Those who were not, panicked during the second intermission when smoke seemingly seeped into the theater.
Unaware that this haze was part of Jennifer Tipton's lighting for the Tharp work, hundreds of spectators made for the aisles and exits until a public address announcement explained the situation.


Abilene Christian Comes of Age at Relays
Age was served at the expense of youth today in the 101st Penn Relays.
Abilene Christian of Texas, with the 31-year-old Robert Guy of Trinidad running the third leg and the 27-year-old Savieri Ngidhi of Zimbabwe the fourth, won the men's championship sprint medley.
Ngidhi trailed Alex Morgan of George Mason by as much as 15 meters on the 800-meter anchor leg, but he caught him 70 meters from the finish and beat him by 2 meters.
Abilene's time of 3 minutes 12.08 seconds broke the collegiate and meet records.


Marbury Signs Letter
The nation's top-rated high school point guard, STEPHON MARBURY of Lincoln High School in Brooklyn, has signed with Georgia Tech, university officials said yesterday in Atlanta.
His national letter of intent arrived at the school in the morning, a spokesman, MIKE FINN, said.


THEATER
Growing Up, Growing Old And How to Tell the Difference  'Yepeto' Puerto Rican Traveling Theater


Tale of Calamity Jane and Friends
Tomorrow and Monday, CBS's "Buffalo Girls" offers four hours of a robustly muscular performance surrounded by a flabby script and anemic direction.
Anjelica Huston stars in, indeed dominates, this tale from Larry McMurtry ("Lonesome Dove"), playing Martha Jane Canary, better known back in the American West of the late 1800's as Calamity Jane.
Dressed for the most part in a fringed buckskin suit, Ms.
Huston stomps, swaggers and snarls her way through the production, mastering horses and various reprobates when she's not downing shots of whiskey at 10 in the morning.
She's absolutely mesmerizing.
Then there's the rest of the story.
In its eagerness to encompass all of the West's fading glory days, "Buffalo Girls" goes after everything from Custer's last stand, watched from a distance by a horrified Calamity Jane, to environmental threats (save the beavers!).
The story's most fascinating, and carefully unexplored, element is sexual identity.
Thought by some scholars to have been a hermaphrodite, Jane is depicted here as a kind of asexual oddity, her decidedly butch manner softened by the narrative device of having her write loving letters to Janey, the daughter she gave away to an English aristocrat.


INTEL IS PLANNING A 2-FOR-1 STOCK SPLIT
The Intel Corporation, a semiconductor manufacturer, announced yesterday that it planned a two-for-one stock split of its common stock and was raising its dividend by a third.
Stockholders of record on May 19 will be entitled to one additional share of common stock for each share of the common stock held on that date.
The new shares will be distributed June 16.
Intel's shares gained $1.75 yesterday, to $102.375, in Nasdaq trading, where almost 8.3 million shares changed hands.


CLASSICAL MUSIC
A Symphony by Someone Who Did Not Live Long Enough  Boston Symphony Orchestra Carnegie Hall


When Holocaust Lives With Parents
Though Margaret and Armin Krauss appeared to live the middle-class apotheosis in Whitestone, Queens, the Holocaust was a cloud over their home.
For most of their 43-year marriage, Mrs.
Krauss, who survived Auschwitz, and Mr.
Krauss, who survived Dachau, never even mentioned the Holocaust.
Mrs.
Krauss lived on a nervous edge, plagued by waves of nightmares.
Their son Jeffrey sought answers, and counseling.
The Krauss family is not unusual, psychologists say.
The children of survivors often need to sort out their experiences about growing up in America under the specter of the Holocaust.
Some children shudder over their parents' agitation at a sudden siren, or even a creaking floor.
Some are haunted at being named for dead brothers and sisters.


DANCE
Women Who Dream To the Sound of the Blues  Martha Bowers Dance/Theater/Etcetera Dia Center for the Arts


JOHNSON &amp; JOHNSON-MERCK CLEARED ON PEPCID SALE
The Johnson &amp; Johnson-Merck Consumer Pharmaceuticals Company said yesterday that United States regulators had cleared the way for it to sell the anti-ulcer drug Pepcid AC over the counter.
The development and marketing alliance, which teams Johnson &amp; Johnson, based in New Brunswick, N.J., and Merck, based in Whitehouse Station, N.J., can begin selling the product in June, said the United States Food and Drug Administration.
On April 19, Merck said first-quarter sales of Pepcid posted a 33 percent increase to $260 million.
In the United States, Pepcid sales increased 45 percent, to $210 million.


A Birthday Party for Saddam Hussein


A 4-Day Hike Around the Coast Of Cornwall
IN a country as long-inhabited as Britain there are still many places where a visitor can sustain an idea of wilderness.
The coast of Cornwall is one.
In spring, before schools have let out and before the tourists have emerged, one may walk along great stretches of the Cornish coast and meet nobody else at all.
Elbowing the Atlantic from England's southwest, Cornwall is an ancient, isolated place of weathered granite cliffs plunging straight into the sea, of green headland and hard-scrabble farms, and of a stubbornly Celtic culture.
Bronze Age fortifications, standing stones and burial mounds abound, particularly in the far western peninsular called Penwith.
In Cornish penwyth translates roughly as outermost headland.


Honoring a Slain Soldier


Holly Harp, Fashion Designer Inspired by Hippies, Was 55
Holly Harp, the California designer who went from a Sunset Boulevard sensation to a darling of Fifth Avenue salons, died on Monday at Cedars Sinai Hospital in Los Angeles.
She was 55.
The cause of death was cancer, said her fiance, Mark Buchman.


Tune Out Traffic
For me, it's simple: National Public Radio.
In the morning listen to "Morning Edition" and in the afternoon, it's "All Things Considered."


The Chinese Syndrome
At 4 foot 9, Eileen Yin-Fei Lo is as diminutive in stature as she is a giant in her field.
Thanks to her five cookbooks, she has had no small hand in generating an appetite for all things Chinese.
Moreover, her cooking courses at the China Institute in Manhattan have shaped the taste and technique of an entire generation of Chinese-Americans.
To hear her tell it, Eileen Yin-Fei Lo never set out to become the Cantonese Julia Child.
"Not tall enough," she says, as if that would explain everything.


Foreign Affairs; Happy Nation
"Anyway, about eight months ago, I don't know how, he got a share in a small car repair shop," continued Mr.
Pushkov.
"Since then, no more 'Happy Nation,' no more singing all night, no more beating his wife. He leaves every morning at 8:30 for work and he is satisfied. He knows he has some prospects in life now. My wife said to me the other day, 'Hey, look at Happy Nation' -- that's what we call him -- 'he's an owner now.' I think about this guy and ask myself: 'Next year, will he vote for the Communists? No. Will he Vote for Zhirinovsky? No. He will vote for the center.' "


Turn On a Tape
My 45-minute daily drive is tedious at best.
My favorite sanity saver is to pop in a cassette of an old radio show.
"Sherlock Holmes" is the best!
Other shows that are fun are "The Shadow," "Burns and Allen" and "Fred Allen."


Vida Ariaey-Nejad, D. K. Odescalchi
Vida Victoria Ariaey-Nejad, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Reza Ariaey-Nejad of Wappingers Falls, N.Y., was married yesterday to Dominic Kando Odescalchi, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Edmond Odescalchi of Pleasant Valley, N.Y.
The Rev.
Dominick Lagonegro performed the ceremony at St.
Columba Roman Catholic Church in Hopewell Junction, N.Y.
Mrs.
Odescalchi, 28, is the director of corporate communications at St.
Francis Hospital in Poughkeepsie, N.Y.
She graduated cum laude from the State University at New Paltz, N.Y., and is studying for a master's degree in public administration at Marist College.
Her father is an internist in Beacon, N.Y.


Taking Care of Business Before Battle of the Ages
The Battle of the Ages -- George Foreman versus Mike Tyson -- may never occur in the flesh, but the early rounds began to unreel in videotape this past week.
First, Foreman retained his share of the heavyweight championship after a decision that many felt was homage to his longevity and box-office appeal.
On Friday night, he was acclaimed both Fighter of the Year and Manager of the Year at the 70th annual awards dinner of the Boxing Writers' Association.
And last night, on an HBO docudrama, an actor performed many of Tyson's biggest hits, although perhaps not the ones inquiring minds wanted to see.


Saving Money and Offering Pride; To East Harlem, More Than Just Groceries at New Pathmark
The earliest of the weekend shoppers were making their way past the addicts on Lexington Avenue and 124th Street yesterday morning, the police were clearing the day's first illegal sidewalk vendors, and Martha Smith was wheeling her laundry across the street when she paused to contemplate the prospect of a supermarket in her hard-pressed neighborhood.
"Wonderful, wonderful, wonderful," she said, beaming.
"Anytime we can shop and save pennies. The small stores are here, and we go from one to another. The chain stores, it's better for the poor people."
At street level, far from the rhetoric and heat of the Manhattan Borough Board, Ms.
Smith's sentiments were the rule.
The vote on Thursday approving a $12 million Pathmark supermarket on 125th Street and Third Avenue may have been close and hard-fought, but there was no contest in the vicinity of a half-dozen or so bodegas nearby on Lexington Avenue.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
PRINCIPAL PRODUCTS OF PORTUGAL  Prose Pieces. By Donald Hall. Beacon, $23.


Noblesse Oblige . . . With Strings
MAYBE it is better to give than to receive.
But leave it to the very rich to figure out how to do both.
In perhaps no other country are the rich so rewarded for charitable giving as they are in America.
Not only does Uncle Sam give them substantial tax breaks for their largess, but many of the 575,000 not-for-profit institutions in this country cultivate them, lionize them and reward them with seats on boards, names on walls and accolades at candlelight fund-raising dinners.


To Be Sure, Rangers Need 2 Points in the Final 2 Games
The Rangers aren't making it easy on themselves, but they still control their own destiny when it comes to making the playoffs.
And things were made a little bit easier for them when Montreal managed only a 3-3 tie last night at home against the Buffalo Sabres.
After Friday night's loss to the Islanders, Mark Messier said the Rangers would keep their poise and keep fighting for a playoff spot.


The Dark Defile
EDMUND WILSON A Biography.
By Jeffrey Meyers.
Illustrated. 554 pp.
Boston: A Peter Davison Book/Houghton Mifflin Company. $35.


Angier Biddle Duke, Diplomat, 79, Dies; Scion of a Prominent American Family
Angier Biddle Duke, scion of a powerful and aristocratic American family who served as Ambassador to El Salvador, Denmark, Spain and Morocco and who was chief of protocol for two Presidents, died yesterday near his home in Southampton, L.I., after being struck by a car while Rollerblading.
He was 79.


April 23-29: A Fighting Chance; A Socialist Survives France's First-Round Vote
"I'm not the favorite, but in this democratic match, I have nothing to lose." That's how Lionel Jospin, the Socialist candidate in the May 7 French Presidential elections, said he saw his chances last week.
A former Education Minister, he had been plucked from relative obscurity to run as the Socialist Party's candidate after nobody else wanted the job.
After 14 years with the Socialist Francois Mitterrand as President, no pundit or pollster gave Mr.
Jospin a chance.


Correction
An article on April 16 about the singer and songwriter John Prine misidentified the producer of his new album, "Lost Dogs and Mixed Blessings." The producer is Howie Epstein.
Benmont Tench is a keyboardist on the album, along with Mr.
Epstein, a guitarist.


For Searchers, Exhaustion Grows as Hope Fades
As shifting debris and unstable conditions once again frustrated teams combing the rubble of the Federal Building today, officials of the Federal Emergency Management Agency said the grim search was taking a toll on its workers.
Gary Jones, the deputy director of the agency, said he planned to release searchers now working on the site and bring in fresh crews from California to complete the work on the building, where 121 bodies have been recovered from the debris.


PLAYING IN THE NEIGHBORHOOD
FLATBUSH  There's No Lambchop Among These Puppets
Tony and Trixie Triceratops, Bessie Apatasaurus and Terry Dactyl are some of the 12-foot-tall dinosaur puppets featured today in the musical revue, "Mammoth Follies," about the trials and tribulations of evolution.
The show, the last in Brooklyn College's FamilyTime series, will feature bunraku, the traditional Japanese puppetry, said Lois Bohovesky, founder of Hudson Vagabond Puppets of Blauvelt, N.Y., which is staging the show.
Bunraku puppeteers wear black hoods and gloves and work in full view of the audience, she explained.
They appear like shadows that follow the puppets around.
Brooklyn Center for the Performing Arts at Brooklyn College; Campus Road and Hillel Place, Flatbush; today, 2 P.M.; $8; (718) 951-4500.
JACKSON HEIGHTS  A Queens Garden Spot Celebrates Landmark Status
The Jackson Heights Beautification Group plans to celebrate the landmark status of the Jackson Heights District next weekend with walking tours, slide lectures and a reception.
Jackson Heights, a planned community, developed between 1909 and 1945.
It was inspired by England's Garden City movement, but instead of single-family houses, the developer, the Queensboro Corporation, built block-long apartments surrounding an interior garden courtyard.
"It was sophisticated, urbane vision," said Daniel Karatzas, a board member of the beautification group.
In the 1920's, Jackson Heights was something of a country-club community for Manhattan -- it had its own 12-hole golf course and tennis club.
Saturday, May 6: slide lecture and exhibit of vintage photographs, 11 A.M. and 12:30 P.M., Jackson Heights Library, 35-51 81st Street; free; garden tour of private interior gardens, 12 P.M. to 4 P.M., meet at the library; $8.
Sunday, May 7: walking tour, 12 P.M. and 2 P.M., starts at St.
Mark's Church, 33-50 82d Street; $8; reception, 3-6 P.M., refreshments, historic photographs and guest lecturers; $8; (718) 898-7205.
HARLEM  Church Helps Residents Take the Initiative
At Trinity A.M.E.
Church, children from homeless shelters attend after-school programs, single mothers learn to cope with parenting and soup is prepared for needy neighborhood families.
The programs are part of "Harlem Community's Opportunity Knocks Program Initiatives."
"We try to teach Harlem residents how to help themselves," said Kim Fuller, a spokesman.
The not-for-profit organization has been in existence for more than two years and depends on grants from the city's Department of Youth Services and private donations to stay in existence.
More than 4,000 people come through the programs, which range from adult literacy training to math, reading and history tutoring to spiritual guidance.
A fundraiser is scheduled for May 12, at Trinity A.M.E. church, 259 West 126th Street between Seventh and Eighth Avenues.
For information or to volunteer, call (212) 662-1678.
ALSO AROUND TOWN NEW WAVE FUSION Liquid Bliss, combination new wave, folk, acoustic band.
Today, 10 P.M.; at Old Knit, 47 East Houston Street at Mulberry Street; $5 cover; (212) 592-9912.
CHERRY BLOSSOM FESTIVAL Brooklyn Botanic Garden, 1000 Washington Avenue, between Crown and Montgomery Streets, Brooklyn; today, 10 A.M. to 6 P.M.; free; (718) 622-4433.
NATIVE AMERICAN AUTHOR Sherman Alexie, a young native American poet and fiction writer, will perform with songwriter Jim Boyd; Wednesday, May 3, 8 P.M.; Miller Theater, Columbia University, Broadway at 116th Street, $8; students and seniors, $5; (212) 854-7799.
MONIQUE P. YAZIGI


Stop Me Before I Invest Again
MARY FROEB loves to shop, but the 48-year-old nurse, who lives with her husband, a surgeon, and four children in West Hartford, Conn., doesn't spend much time browsing at department stores or flipping through catalogues.
She buys mutual funds.
Since taking over her family's finances 13 years ago, she has talked with her stock broker, devoured newspaper and magazine articles and even attended investment courses en route to creating a diversified portfolio.
"It's become a little sideline for me," she said.


Direct Flights
To the Editor: I, too, long believed what was stated in the Practical Traveler article, "Clearing the Air a Bit in the Skies" (Feb. 5): "By common usage, a 'direct flight' is one identified by a single flight number that is not a nonstop flight. In practice, if a change of planes is involved, the second plane will not take off until the first one has landed -- not the case in a 'connecting flight.' "
For many years, I selected direct flights believing they gave greater assurance of arriving.
However, American Airlines taught me that the concept of a direct flight is just a marketing ploy.


Ms. Wallace And Mr. Milgram
Catherine Elizabeth Wallace, a daughter of Robert and Carol Wallace of Spring Lake, N.J., was married yesterday to Kevin Louis Milgram, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Louis K. Milgram of Fort Salonga, L.I.
The Rev.
Dr.
Murray Neumeyer performed the ceremony at St.
Andrew's United Methodist Church in Spring Lake.


'American Buffalo' in Chappaqua Revival
IN 1975, David Mamet was known by virtue of his popular double bill "Duck Variations" and "Sexual Perversity in Chicago." That was the year the galvanizing force of the playwright's full-length work first struck, indelibly, with "American Buffalo."
After the play's Off Broadway premiere, Mel Gussow wrote in The New York Times: "Actors, as well as ordinary theatergoers, should be interested in Mr. Mamet. He is a writer to be encouraged."


ON THE TOWNS
MUSIC BERGEN PHILHARMONIC ORCHESTRA Rafael Figueroa, cellist, is the featured guest artist of the Bergen Philharmonic as part of "Music as Poetry." The program includes Beethoven's Symphony No. 8 in F major, Debussy's "Prelude to the Afternoon of a Faun" and Elgar's Cello Concerto in E minor (Op. 85).
Saturday at 8:30 P.M.
Tickets: $20; students and the elderly, $17.50.
John Harms Center for the Arts. 30 North Van Brunt Street, Englewood. (201) 567-3600.
BRISTOL CHAPEL The Westminster Conservatory of Music will present a spring musicale featuring Hindemith's "Variations on a Frog Went a-Courting" and selections from Bernstein's "Bonne Cuisine." Saturday at 8 P.M.
Tickets: $10.
Bristol Chapel on the Westminster Choir College campus, Princeton. (609) 921-7104, extension 260.
BLOOMINGDALE CORNET BAND Under the direction of Bob Norman, the Bloomingdale Cornet Band presents its spring concert.
Saturday at 8 P.M.
Tickets: $3.
Butler High School auditorium.
Bartholdi Avenue, Butler. (908) 464-6800, extension 3691.
BLOOMFIELD COLLEGE The Oratorio Society of New Jersey sponsors a "Spring Sing." Listen or sing along to Handel's "Messiah," Mendelssohn's "Elijah," the Brahms Requiem, the Mozart Requiem and other oratorios.
Jack Sacher conducts.
Today at 2 P.M.
Tickets: $5 and $3, for students.
Robert Van Fossan Theater of Bloomfield College.
Corner of Fremont and Franklin Streets, Bloomfield. (201) 785-4125.
CENTRAL UNITARIAN CHURCH The All Seasons Chamber Players give a program titled "National Portraits: Music of the People." Today at 3:30 P.M.
Free.
Dave Mallett, singer and songwriter, performs at the Hurdy Gurdy Coffeehouse.
Saturday at 8 P.M.
Tickets: $12. 156 Forest Avenue, Paramus. (201) 768-1331.
CHURCH OF ST.
CATHARINE A spring concert featuring the Garden State Concert Band and Dominick Ferrara, conductor.
Today at 4 P.M.
Tickets: $15. 905 South Maple Avenue, Glen Rock. (201) 445-3703.
CONGREGATION BETH EL A benefit concert led by Joseph Kalichstein, pianist, with works by Beethoven and Brahms.
Today at 7 P.M.
Tickets: $25, $12.50 and $6, for students. 222 Irvington Avenue, South Orange. (201) 763-0111.
ENGLEWOOD PUBLIC LIBRARY A jazz concert with the Dan Glasser Trio.
Today at 5:30 P.M.
Free. 31 Engle Street, Englewood. (201) 568-2215.
ELYSIAN SYMPHONY ORCHESTRA Bernstein's film score for "On the Waterfront," Copland's Symphony No. 3 and Tchaikovsky's "1812 Overture" will be performed.
Today at 8 P.M.
Free.
Erie Lackawanna Plaza (in front of the train station), Hoboken. (201) 420-2207.
GLASSBORO CENTER FOR THE ARTS The Candian Brass, which performs everything from Bach and Mozart to Gershwin and Dixieland.
Friday at 8 P.M.
Tickets: $37.50, $25 and $20.
Wilson Concert Hall, on the campus of Rowan College, Glassboro. (609) 256-4545.
JEWISH COMMUNITY CENTER The Orion String Quartet will perform Mozart's String Quartet in D minor (K. 421), Kirchner's String Quartet No. 2 and Beethoven's String Quartet in C major (Op. 59), No. 3.
Sunday at 7:45 P.M.
Tickets: $23 and $21, for students and the elderly.
Maurice Levin Theater at the Jewish Community Center. 760 Northfield Avenue, West Orange. (201) 736-3200.
MONTCLAIR STATE UNIVERSITY The Louis Johnson Dance Theater Ensemble performs as part of the School of Fine and Performing Arts' Great Events Series.
Saturday at 8 P.M.
Tickets: $25, $18 for the elderly and $10 for students.
Memorial Auditorium, Montclair State University, Upper Montclair. (201) 655-4333.
NEW JERSEY SYMPHONY "Audience Favorites" offers pieces chosen by audience members through a survey conducted last spring.
The composers include Wagner, Tchaikovsky, Strauss and Bizet.
Today at 3 P.M.
Symphony Hall in Newark.
Tickets: $42, $32, $28, $20 and $12.
Winter Pop Series with Mitch Miller, conductor, featuring Gershwin's "Porgy and Bess." Friday at 8 P.M. at the State Theater in New Brunswick, Saturday at 8:30 P.M. at the Crescent Temple in Trenton and next Sunday at 3 P.M. at Symphony Hall in Newark.
Tickets: $40, $37, $29 and $23. (201) 624-8203.
PLAINFIELD SYMPHONY The final "Season of Celebration" concert, with an original composition by Sabin Pautza, musical director.
Saturday at 8 P.M.
Tickets: $12 and $8, for the elderly.
Crescent Avenue Presbyterian Church.
Watchung and Crescent Avnues, Plainfield. (908) 561-5140.
RARITAN RIVER CONCERTS The Newman and Oltman Guitar Duo, with Michael Newman and Laura Oltman.
Saturday at 7:30 P.M.
Clinton Presbyterian Church. 91 Center Street, Clinton. (908) 213-1100.
RIDER UNIVERSITY PLAYHOUSE The Westminster Opera Theater presents Monteverdi's "Coronation of Poppea." Today at 8 P.M.
Tickets: $10, or $8 for and students and the elderly.
Westminster Choir College of Rider University. 101 Walnut Lane, Princeton. (609) 921-2663.
RIDGEWOOD LIBRARY "Young Artists Concert Series," with Anne Marie Church, soprano.
Today at 3 P.M., followed by a meet-the-artist reception.
Free. 125 North Maple Avenue, Ridgewood. (201) 670-5611.
RUTGERS UNIVERSITY The Kirkpatrick Choir of Rutgers presents its annual spring concert, with works from the late Renaissance through the present.
Today at 4 P.M.
Tickets: $5, $3.
Kirkpatrick Chapel, George and Somerset Street, New Brunswick. (908) 932-7808.
ST.
THOMAS EPISCOPAL CHURCH A recital by David Owsenfort, tenor, and Robert Fertitta, pianist, featuring works by Mozart, Brahms, Schumann and others.
Today at 5 P.M.
Free.
Sky Manor Road, Pittstown. (908) 996-4098.
SETON HALL UNIVERSITY New Jersey Concert Pianists Series with Ruth Kotik, performing works by Scarlatti, Scriabin, Ravel and Ginastera.
Today at 3 P.M.
Free.
Main Lounge of the Bishop Dougherty Student Center, South Orange campus. (201) 761-9418.
STATE THEATER The Orchestre Philharmonique de Monte Carlo, led by James DePreist, conductor, and Nadja Salerno-Sonnenberg, violinist, will perform Berlioz's "Corsaire Overture," Tchaikovsky's Concerto in D for Violin and Orchestra (Op. 35) and Stravinsky's "Firebird Suite." Saturday at 8 P.M.
Tickets: $16 to $35. (908) 246-7469.
ST.
GEORGE'S-BY-THE-RIVER The St.
George's Adult Choir with Orchestra presents Mozart's Requiem and Bach's Concerto for Oboe and Violin in C minor.
Next Sunday at 5 P.M.
Free.
Waterman Avenue, Rumson. (908) 842-0596.
UNITY CONCERTS Tomohiro Okumura, violinist, will make his first appearance for Unity Concerts, performing compositions by Bach, Schubert and Milstein.
Next Sunday at 3:30 P.M.
Tickets: $25, $20 and $15.
Montclair High School Community Auditorium, Park and Chestnut Streets, Montclair. (201) 744-6770.
WILLIAM PATERSON COLLEGE The Wayne Chamber Orchestra performs with Andre Watts, pianist.
Saturday at 8 P.M.
Tickets: $100, including a reception with Mr.
Watts; $50 and $25.
Wayne. (201) 595-2371.
THEATER ALGONQUIN ARTS THEATER The Red Oak Music Theater presents "Seesaw," a musical directed by Jerry Yoder.
Friday, Saturday, May 12 and May 13 at 8 P.M.
Tickets: $20.
Old Square Plaza, Manasquan. (908) 367-1515.
CIRCLE PLAYERS "Lettice and Lovage," a comedy by Peter Shaffer.
Friday and Saturday at 8:30, next Sunday at 2 P.M.
Tickets: $10, $8 matinee. 416 Victoria Avenue, Piscataway. (908) 968-7555.
CIVIC THEATER OF HUDSON COUNTY "Jesus Christ Superstar," directed by Brian Waggoner.
Today at 3 P.M., Friday and Saturday at 8 P.M. and next Sunday at 3 P.M.
Tickets: $10, or $8 for the elderly and students.
Raphael J. Cordero School, 158 Erie Street, Jersey City. (201) 823-2085.
CROSSROADS THEATER COMPANY "Two Hah Hahs and a Homeboy," with Ruby Dee, Ossie Davis and their son, Guy Davis.
Today and Saturday, 3 P.M.; Tuesday through Saturday, 8 P.M.
Through May 21.
Tickets: $20, $25. 7 Livingston Avenue, New Brunswick. (908) 249-5560.
GEORGE STREET PLAYHOUSE "Off-Key," a musical by Richard Adler and Bill C. Davis.
Today, 2 and 7 P.M.
Tickets: $30. 9 Livingston Avenue, New Brunswick. (908) 246-7717.
IRON MOUNTAIN STAGE COMPANY "Vital Signs" by Jane Martin, a collage of contemporary women in a series of 3o monologues.
Thursday through Saturday, 8 P.M. and next Sunday at 4 P.M.
Tickets: $11, $9 matinee.
Community Presbyterian Church of Ringwood, 145 Carletondale Road.
Ringwood. (201) 962-9007.
JOHN HARMS THEATER Gilbert and Sullivan's "Mikado." Today at 3 P.M.
Tickets: $34, $28, $25 and $20. 30 North Van Brunt Street, Englewood. (201) 567-3600.
LITTE FIREHOUSE THEATER The Bergen County Players present "A Few Good Men." Starts Friday.
Through May 21.
Friday and Saturday, 8:30 P.M., and Sunday, 1 and 5 P.M.
Tickets: $12, or $10 for matinees. 298 Kinderkamack Road, Oradell. (201) 261-4200.
McCARTER THEATER Brian Friel's "Wonderful Tennessee." Tuesday through Friday, 8 P.M.; Saturday, 4 and 8:30 P.M, and next Sunday, 2 P.M.
Tickets: $14 and $17, Tuesday through Thursday; $26 to $30, Friday through next Sunday. 91 University Place, Princeton. (609) 683-8000.
MOUNT HEBRON SCHOOL THEATER The Montclair Operetta Club presents "Cabaret." Today at 2 P.M.; Thursday, Friday and Saturday at 8 P.M. and next Sunday at 2 P.M.
Tickets: $17.50 ($12.50 on Thursdays).
Bellevue Avenue, Montclair. (201) 669-5588.
PAPER MILL PLAYHOUSE Lerner and Loewe's "Brigadoon." Through May 28.
Tickets: $29 to $44.
Wednesday through Sunday, 8 P.M.; matinees Thursday, 2 P.M., and Saturday and Sunday, 3 P.M.
Brookside Drive, Millburn. (201) 376-4343.
PLAYERS GUILD "A Grand Night for Singing," by Rodgers and Hammerstein.
Friday and Saturday at 8 P.M. and next Friday and Saturday at 8 P.M.
Tickets: $12, $11.
The Little Theater at Leonia High School.
Willtree Road, Leonia. (201) 947-9606.
ST.
FRANCIS PLAYERS Rodgers and Hammerstein's "Carousel." Sunday at 3 P.M., Friday and Saturday at 8 P.M. and next Sunday at 3 P.M.
Tickets: $10.
Bergen Avenue and Park Street, Ridgefield Park. (201) 440-1829.
VILLAGE PLAYERS Neil Simon's "Sunshine Boys." Friday and Saturday at 8:30 P.M.; next Sunday at 3 P.M., May 12 and May 13 at 8:30 P.M.
Tickets: $10, or $8 for the elderly and students.
Ho-Ho-Kus School Auditorium, Lloyd Road in Ho-Ho-Kus. (201) 652-6872.
MUSEUM AND GALLERIES BERGEN MUSEUM A series of photography exhibitions created by local teen-agers.
Through May 21.
Tuesday through Saturday, 9:30 A.M. to 4:30 P.M.; Sunday, 1 to 5 P.M.
Suggested admission: adults, $2.50, children, $1. 327 East Ridgewood Avenue, Paramus. (201) 265-1248.
JOHN HARMS CENTER FOR THE ARTS The John Harms Theater's Intermission Gallery presents "Sitting Pretty," an exhibition in acrylics and mixed media by Ann Hadley Lasusas.
Opens Thursday.
Through May 4.
Free.
Monday through Saturday, 11 A.M. to 6 P.M. 30 North Van Brunt Street, Englewood. (201) 567-5797, extension 20.
GALLERY OF SOUTH ORANGE "Omaha -- an Artist's Journey: Memories of D-Day," with drawing and collages by Ugo Giannini.
Opens Friday.
Through June 5.
Tuesday through Thursday, 6 P.M. to 8 P.M.; Friday, 10 A.M. to noon; Saturday and Sunday, 1 to 4 P.M.
Baird Community Center, 5 Mead Street, off Ridgewood Road, South Orange. (201) 378-7754.
MONMOUTH MUSEUM "Japanese Expression in Paper." The upper gallery will be devoted to five sculptors from the paper-making town of Imadate in the prefecture of Fukui in Japan.
Through June 11.
Admission: $3.
Tuesday through Saturday, 10 A.M. to 4:30 P.M.; Sundays 1 to 5 P.M.
Brookdale Community College 765 Newman Springs Road, Lincroft. (908) 747-2266.
MONTCLAIR ART MUSEUM "What Is a Print?" features the works of 60 artists and demonstrates the wide range of prints produced in America over the last 150 years.
Admission, $4; the elderly and students with ID, $3. 3 South Mountain Avenue. (201) 746-5555.
MORRIS MUSEUM "Star Trek: Federation Science" is an interactive exhibition based on the futuristic themes of "Star Trek." Today, 10 A.M. to 5 P.M. 30.
Admission: $9, the elderly, $8; students, $7; children under 12, $6. 6 Normandy Heights Road, Morristown. (201) 538-8069.
NEWARK MUSEUM "A World of Their Own: 20th-Century American Folk Art," a show focusing on art made in isolation.
Through May 14.
"Protecting the Pinelands Through Art" illustrates the ecology of the New Jersey Pinelands.
Wednesday through May 21.
"Gods and Goddesses in Indian Art" features paintings, cloth hangings and tiny brass icons dating from the 11th to the 19th centuries.
Through June.
"The Arts of Nepal" includes sculptures and paintings of the Himalayan kingdom.
Through June.
"African Design: Heirs to the Trans-Saharan Trade" examines the shared designs in North and Sub-Saharan African arts in the last 100 years.
Through June 1996. 49 Washington Street. (201) 596-6550.
NOYES MUSEUM "Messages From the Planet: Artists Work to Save the Earth," two- and three-dimensional works by artists in the mid-Atlantic region.
Through June 18.
"Looking Due South: Paintings of South Jersey by Glenn Rudderow." Through July 9.
Wednesday through Sunday, 11 A.M. to 4 P.M.
Admission, $3; the elderly, $1.50; students and children under 18, 50 cents.
Free admission on Fridays.
Lily Lake Road, Oceanville. (609) 652-8848.
SETON HALL UNIVERSITY An exhibition of Ukrainian folk art, showing samples of pysanky (Ukrainian Easter eggs), ceramics, wood carvings, clothing and embroidery.
Through May 28. 9 A.M. to 5 P.M.
Monday through Friday.
Walsh Library Gallery, South Orange. (201) 761-9476.
SHEILA NUSSBAUM GALLERY "Masters' Vision," featuring paintings by Ruth Gikow.
Through May 20.
Monday through Saturday, 10 A.M. to 5 P.M.; Thursday until 8 P.M. 341 Millburn Avenue, Millburn. (201) 467-1720.
TRENTON CITY MUSEUM The Trenton Artists Workshop Association presents the mixed-media work of Katharine Bruce.
Through May 28.
Tuesday through Saturday, 11 A.M. to 3 P.M., and Sunday, 2 to 4 P.M. (609) 989-3632.
UNTITLED (#130), LTD "Member Invitational Exhibit." Paintings, sculpture and photography.
Through May 14.
Friday, 1 to 9 P.M.; Saturday, 10 P.M. to 7 P.M., and Sunday, noon to 5 P.M. 130 Ryerson Avenue, Wayne. (201) 633-6767.
WATCHUNG ARTS CENTER "Shine On," color photographs of last year's solar eclipse.
Starts tomorrow.
Through May 30.
Monday through Saturday, 1 to 4 P.M.
Free. 18 Stirling Road, Watchung. (908) 753-0190.
ZIMMERLI ART MUSEUM The Roving Press Program of the Printmaking Council of New Jersey will teach free printmaking workshops for adults and children.
Each session will offer beginners an opportunity to see a press in use, experiment with printmaking and bring home an original work of art.
Workshops are Saturday, next Sunday and May 13 and 14.
Registration is required.
Rutgers, corner of George and Hamilton Streets, New Brunswick. (908) 932-7237.
SPOKEN WORD BARNERT TEMPLE Elie Wiesel will discuss his experiences during the Holocaust.
Wednesday at 8 P.M.
Free. 747 Route 208 South, Franklin Lakes. (201) 848-1800.
BERGEN COUNTY Y.M.-Y.W.H.A.
Ronald S. Fava, Passaic County Prosecutor, will discuss "Crimes of Hate." Wednesday at 8 P.M.
Free. 605 Pascack Road, Washington Township. (201) 666-6610, extension 208.
BROOKDALE COMMUNITY COLLEGE Susan Zuccotti, author of "The Italians and the Holocaust," will speak about the many Italians who helped Holocaust victims, with excerpts from the film "The Righteous Enemy." Today at 2 P.M.
Free.
Jack Livingston, a presenter of jazz concerts for more than 20 years, offers a three-part lecture on "Jazz: The Original American Art Form." This Friday, May 12 and May 17 at 7:30 P.M.
Tickets: $22. 765 Newman Springs Road, Lincroft. (908) 224-2880.
BURGDORFF CULTURAL CENTER Arts Maplewood sponsors a lecture, "The Seven Extant Wonders of the World," with Joseph Noble, former director of the Museum of the City of New York.
Today at 3 P.M.
Free. 10 Durance Road, Maplewood. (201) 378-2133.
CENTRAL UNITARIAN CHURCH Marie Almeida, former political affairs officer at the United Nations, will speak on the U.N.
Agenda Toward Peace and Development.
Tuesday at 1 P.M.
Free. 156 Forest Avenue, Paramus. (201) 407-0555 ENGLEWOOD PUBLIC LIBRARY Tor Hansen, a Cape Cod artist and naturalist, will present "Symphony Flutterby," a program on butterflies and their habitats.
Tuesday at 7:30 P.M.
Free.
Argentina Palacios, a writer and translator, will speak about her book "Standing Tall: The Stories of 10 Hispanic Americans." Wednesday at 4 P.M.
Free.
Nancy Bogen, author, will give a reading of her latest book, "Bobe Mayse: A Tale of Washington Square." Wednesday at 8 P.M.
Free. 31 Engle Street, Englewood. (201) 568-2215.
REEVES-REED ARBORETUM "The Wisdom of Walden," lecture by Sander Zulaf, a member of the Thoreau Society and a professor of English at Morris County College.
Today at 3 P.M.
Free. 165 Hobart Avenue, Summit. (908) 273-8787.
WATERSHED ASSOCIATION Dr.
Joan Goldstein, an author and sociologist, will conduct "Discovering Nature Through Creative Writing," a workshop for adults and high school students.
Saturday at 9 A.M.
Registration: $20. 31 Titus Mill Road, Pennington. (609) 737-3735.
FOR CHILDREN A DAY OF DISCOVERY "Kids Expo." More than 100 cultural, educational and recreational experiences, from manning a D.J. booth to viewing a traveling bug exhibit, for young children and their families.
Today at 10:30 A.M to 5:30 P.M.
Tickets: $6.
Raritan Center Expo Hall, New Jersey Turnpike Exit 10, Edison. (908) 233-2700, extension 320.
CENTER FOR VISUAL ARTS "Jungle Birds Workshop: Acrylic on Canvas." Children will be introduced to a colorful jungle of birds and then paint and draw their favorites on canvas.
Tuesday at 3:45 P.M.
Materials fee: $7.
New Jersey Center for Visual Arts. 68 Elm Street, Summit. (908) 273-9121.
COMMUNITY HOUSE Meet Mr.
Lizard and his large display of snakes, tarantulas, an African cockroach colony, sea life and, of course, lizards.
Saturday at 10 A.M.
Tickets: $3.
Community House, Old Dock Road off Closter Dock Road, Alpine. (201) 767-9886.
JOHN WITHERSPOON SCHOOL The Dryden Ensemble will present a concert for children, "1695: An Introduction to Baroque Music." Saturday at 2 P.M.
Tickets: $5. 217 Walnut Lane, Princeton. (609) 466-8541.
MEADOW THEATER "The Frog Prince and the Princess." Saturday at 11 A.M. and Sunday at 1 P.M.
Through May 14.
Tickets: $6.
Galleria Atrium, Bridge Avenue and West Front, Red Bank. (908) 758-0099.
NEWARK MUSEUM "Cosmic Questions," for ages 6 to 10, at 1 and 3 P.M., and "Journey Through Time and Space," for ages 9 and older, at 2 and 4 P.M.
Saturday and Sunday through June 25.
Adults, $2; children under 12, $1. 49 Washington Street. (201) 596-6550.
NEW JERSEY STATE MUSEUM Take a simulated flight down the 3,000-mile-long Martian Grand Canyon in "Fantastic Sky." Saturday and Sunday at 1 and 3 P.M.
Learn about the greenhouse effect and holes in the ozone layer in "Spaceship Earth." Saturday and Sunday at 2 P.M.
Through July 2.
Tickets: $1. 205 West State Street, Trenton. (609) 292-6308.
STATE THEATER "Cartoons in Concert" with David Buechner, pianist.
"Pigs in a Polka" with the Three Little Pigs, featuring Brahms's Hungarian Dance No. 5, "Dixieland Droopy" with Droopy Dog and "The Cat Concerto" with Tom and Jerry, featuring Liszt's Hungarian Rhapsody No. 2 in F minor.
Tickets: $10. 19 Livingston Avenue, New Brunswick. (908) 246-7469.
ST.
ANDREW'S CHURCH The Canterbury Fair is a medieval marketplace including crafts, children's games, food, madrigal singers and demonstrations of medieval life.
Saturday, 10 A.M. to 4 P.M.
Free. 419 South Street, New Providence. (908) 464-4875.
YOUTH THEATER SERIES The Peddie School presents "Jack and the Beanstalk." Saturday at 1:30 P.M.
With proceeds going to charity, admission is two nonperishable food items.
South Main Street, Hightstown. (609) 490-7550.
ETC.
ANIMAL SHELTER FLEA MARKET The Friends of Bergen County Animal Shelter Flea Market will offer china, glassware, costume jewelry, linens, appliances and toys for children and animals.
Today at 11 A.M. 100 United Lane, Teterboro.
BINS OF BARGAIN BOOKS Today is the last day of the Woodbridge Public Library book sale.
A bag filled with books can be purchased for $3. 1 P.M.
At George Frederick Plaza, Woodbridge. (908) 634-4450.
If that's not enough, visit the Morristown and Morris Township book sale.
Used hardcovers and paperbacks are available on Saturday at 10 A.M.
South Street and Miller Road, Morristown. (201) 538-6161.
DINNER AND THEATER The $42 ticket price includes a four-course meal and "Deep Space Noir," an interactive and futuristic detective story.
Saturdays. 8 P.M.
Il Giardino Restaurant. 41 Ridgedale Avenue, Cedar Knolls. (201) 301-0562.
HOBOKEN ART AND MUSIC FESTIVAL Artists, photographers, crafts people, community groups and the public can participate in a day of art.
Washington Street will be closed off, and there will be pottery, sculpture, jewelry, woodcarvings, textiles, paintings and homemade chocolates.
Today from 11 A.M. to 10 P.M.
Free.
Washington Street, Hoboken. (201) 420-2207.
NEW JERSEY FILM FESTIVAL "I Am Cuba," Friday; "Don't Look Back," Saturday; A double feature with "Death and the Maiden" and "Mamma Roma," next Sunday.
All show times 7 P.M.
Friday and Saturday tickets: $4.
Rutgers University in New Brunswick, College Avenue campus, Milledoler Hall, George Street and Seminary Place.
Sunday showings are at the State Theater, 19 Livingston Avenue, New Brunswick, and tickets are $7. (908) 932-8482.
SHAD FESTIVAL Lambertville's 14th Annual Shad Festival, celebrating this hard-fighting member of the herring family, which swims up the Delaware each spring to spawn.
Arts and crafts, children's games, music, and, of course, shad.
Today. (609) 344-7855.
CAPE MAY WHALE WATCHER A sightseeing cruise around Cape May with tales of local heroes, legends and the town's history.
Saturdays through June 17.
Tickets: $10 and $5.
Miss Chris Fishing Center, Third Avenue and Wilson. (609) 884-3351.
BOAT SHOW Hundreds of boats ranging in size from 14 to 60 feet.
Showgoers can test-drive many of the boats.
The event will also feature fishing and boating demonstrations.
Today, 10 A.M. to 7 P.M.
Free.
Lincoln Harbor Yacht Club, 1500 Harbor Boulevard.
Weehawken. (800) 940-7642.
A Love Story The New Jersey Ballet performs the second act of "Giselle." Debra Sayles, the company's principal dancer, plays a pretty peasant girl who falls in love with a duke posing as a huntsman.
MORRIS KNOLLS HIGH SCHOOL Saturday at 8 P.M.
Tickets: $25, $20, $15.
Knoll Drive off Franklin Avenue, Denville Township. (201) 538-6413.


Nancy L. Isen, Douglas Roberts
Nancy Louise Isen, the daughter of Alan and Sondra Isen of Penn Valley, Pa., was married there last evening to Douglas Scott Roberts, a son of Flori and Dr.
N.
Craig Roberts of Longboat Key, Fla.
Rabbi Gerald I. Wolpe performed the ceremony at Har Zion Temple.
Mrs.
Roberts and her husband graduated from the University of Pennsylvania, from which the bridegroom also received an M.B.A. degree.
The bride is the executive vice president of Loving &amp; Weintraub, a New York public relations agency.
The bridegroom is the chairman of Roberts Mitani Inc., a merchant bank in New York.


In Family Court, Justice Is Gender-Blind
To the Editor:
Just this morning I completed a decision in which I awarded custody of a 5-year-old child to the father after a hotly contested custody battle.
I then happened to read "Divorced Fathers Make Gains in Battles to Increase Rights" (front page, April 26), in which Sanford N. Katz, a Boston College family law professor, is quoted as follows: "But it is still going to take a generation of judges who are brought up by or married to career women to understand the realities of work and child rearing."


Police Say Careless Drilling Caused Deadly Blast in South Korea


Flower Power


Through Thick and Thin (Thin? I Could Kill Her)
Where would Cybill Shepherd's character on "Cybill" be without her best friend?
Drink in hand, Maryann is always there to share wit and wisdom about Cybill's daughters and ex-husbands.
And Cybill is there for Maryann, who has been known to telephone her friend from her walkin closet, nervous that she is seconds from going to bed with a new man.
Cybill and Maryann lunch together, work out at the gym together, stalk Maryann's ex-husband together and commiserate on the trials of life after 40.
They're part of a long line of sitcom female best friends.
But oh, how those twosomes have evolved!
They've always been women of their times.
ANITA GATES Lucy and Ethel, 1951-57 Era -- Life revolved around home and husbands when Lucy Ricardo (Lucille Ball) and Ethel Mertz (Vivian Vance) were pals on "I Love Lucy" (CBS).
The girls always wanted to go to a nightclub; the boys always wanted to go to the fights.
Living Arrangements -- The same New York Apartment building.
Specialty -- Silly capers.
Balance of Power -- The Mertzes own the building, but Fred (William Frawley) and Ethel are round and middle-aged while Ricky (Desi Arnaz) and Lucy have youth and beauty on their side.
Lucy is a little nuts, but Ethel almost always goes along with her schemes, from dressing up as Martians to sneaking into Richard Widmark's backyard.
Lucy returns the favor at least once, posing as the Mertzes' maid to impress a visiting friend of Fred's.
Togetherness -- The couples go everywhere together (Hollywood, Europe), and when the Ricardos move to Connecticut, the Mertzes soon follow.
Loyalty -- Stong, but when Lucy loses her bit part in an Italian movie by soaking up local color literally (during a fight with a fellow grape stomper), Ethel accepts the movie part herself.
Gleefully.
Mary and Rhoda, 1970-74 Era -- In the 70's, when Mary Richards (Mary Tyler Moore, right) and Rhoda Morgenstern (Valerie Harper) were best friends on CBS's "Mary Tyler Moore Show," working women who were over 30 and single had to stick together.
Living Arrangements -- Apartments in the same Minneapolis house.
Specialty -- Moral support.
Balance of Power -- Mary is prettier and thinner and has a better job (television news producer; Rhoda is a window dresser) and a nicer apartment.
Even Rhoda's mother likes Mary better.
But Rhoda is braver (she even calls Mary's boss by his first name).
Togetherness -- Largely home-base, although Rhoda does turn up at Mary's office now and then.
Loyalty -- Strong.
Mary takes in Mrs.
Morgenstern when Rhoda decides she can't deal with one more maternal visit.
Rhoda stays up all night helping Mary meet a deadline for writing obituaries.
Specialty -- Silly man-hunting capers.
Laverne gets her hand stuck in a crematory urn while trying to impress a handsome mortician.
Balance of Power -- Shirley is naive.
Laverne is manipulative.
Togetherness -- They work together at a brewery and double-date a lot.
When Shirley really, really wants to attend a cocktail party at the Pfister Hotel to meet businessmen, Laverne accompanies her, even though she has just completed a sleep-deprivation experiment and keeps sliding to the floor.
Loyalty -- After the characters relocate to California, Shirley marries and moves overseas, leaving Laverne to face cancellation alone.
Kate and Allie, 1984-89 Era -- On CBS's "Kate and Allie," 1980's women had problems that Lucy and Ethel could barely have imagined.
Living Arrangements -- Kate McArdle (Susan Saint James, right) and Allie Lowell (Jane Curtin), both divorced, live with their total of three children in a big New York apartment.
At one point, they pretend to be lesbians so the landlady won't throw them out for being a two-family household.
Specialties -- Hugs and late-night talks about love, children and life.
Balance of Power -- Kate is cooler, more worldly; Allie is old-fashioned and keeps tranquilizers in the spice rack.
Togetherness -- Allie stays home to cold-shower Kate out of an accidental sedative overdose.
Kate rushes home from work when Allie calls, panicked about her 17-year-old daughter's intentions to have sex.
Eventually the two women open a catering business.
Loyalty -- Even after Allie remarries, Kate moves in with her.
Patsy and Edina, 1992-  Era -- The 90's, but the dissolute, self-indulgent heroines of "Absolutely Fabulous" (BBC; shown here on Comedy Central since 1994) refuse to leave the 60's.
Living Arrangements -- No one understands Edina Monsoon (Jennifer Saunders, left), who lives in a chic London house.
Thank God for Patsy Stone (Joanna Lumley), who lives somewhere within taxicab distance and keeps moving in.
Specialties -- Drinking (Bollinger is a favorite), drug use (Patsy smuggles marijuana into Morocco in her Ivana Trump hairdo), shopping, belittling Eddy's annoyingly sensbile teen-age daughter, Saffron (Julia Sawalha), and complaining in spoken italics ("Why can't life just be made a little easier?" Eddy asks a traffic court judge).
Balance of Power -- Patsy, a magazine fashion director who often can't find her office, has the more glamorous job and looks.
But Eddy, a publicist, holds all the cards, as her daughter and her best friend fight for her love.
Togetherness -- Absolute.
When Eddy was hospitalized for foot surgery (a lost acupuncture needle), Patsy checked in for moral support -- and a face-lift.
Loyalty -- Total.
Who but Patsy would call Saffron pretending to be the Betty Ford Clinic confirming Edina's reservation?
Hope and Gloria, 1995-  Era -- Here and now (NBC's "Hope and Gloria").
Living Arrangements -- The same apartment building in Pittsburgh.
Specialty -- Too soon to tell.
Balance of Power -- Mixed.
Hope Davidson (Cynthia Stevenson), recently dumped by her unfaithful husband, is a television producer so meek she accepts applying cream cheese to her boss's bagel as part of her job.
Gloria Utz (Jessica Luncy) is a twice-divorced hairdresser and mother of one who carries a tote bag the size of a coffee table and talks back to just about anyone.
Togetherness -- Growing.
They do visit each other's apartments constantly.
Loyalty -- Promising, but Hope could have been alittle more supportive when she hired Gloria at the television station, then pretty much took the job offer back.


Venerable Nights Out
Celebrating the Brooklyn Museum and the role of the Rockefellers in the U.N.


Allison Robbins, James J. Jennewein
Allison Robbins, a daughter of Norman Robbins of Woodbridge, N.J., and the late Sylvia Robbins, is to be married today in New York to James Joseph Jennewein, a son of Thelma and James Jennewein Sr. of St.
Louis.
Rabbi Marcia Rappaport is to perform the ceremony at the Mark Hotel.
The bride, who is keeping her name, is the executive story editor of the television series "Melrose Place," in Los Angeles.
She graduated from Fairleigh Dickinson University and from Rutgers University.
Her father is a lawyer in Woodbridge.


Have We Got a Film School for You!
SO YOU WANT TO BE IN pictures?
Welcome to the VCR Film School.
No reading is required.
There will be no lectures.
Your instructors will be the movies themselves -- specifically, movies about movies. (Our course guide appears at the end of this brief introduction.)
It is well known that movie makers are primarily interested in two things: movies and themselves.
Witness the release in the last few months of movies about: movie makers in New York ("Living in Oblivion"), movie makers in Hollywood ("Swimming With Sharks"), movie makers in Florida ("Search and Destroy") and movie makers in Iran ("Through the Olive Trees").
In July we will have a movie about movie making in Moscow ("Mute Witness").
These are films about, respectively, a director of a small-budget picture, a mad producer and the assistant he drives to extreme measures, a desperate novice producer, a melancholy amateur actor and a makeup artist who cannot speak.


Lukas to Run Serena's Song in Derby
Under pressure from the horse's owner, trainer D. Wayne Lukas abruptly switched his strategy today and decided that he would run the filly Serena's Song in the Kentucky Derby next Saturday because "she will be 3 years old only once, and let's give her the opportunity to be great."
Serena's Song, who has won her last five races and six of her last seven, including the Jim Beam Stakes against colts, will become the 36th filly to compete against colts in 121 years of the Kentucky Derby.
And, running as an entry with her stablemate Timber Country, last year's juvenile champion, she will be the co-favorite to become only the fourth filly to win it.


In Rio, Sashaying And Moonbathing
This year, the girls in Ipanema sashay the sands by night.
Street lights installed by the city in December are so powerful that they light up the ocean waves, and the beaches brightly beckon all night long as playgrounds for moonbathing.
Now, entire families with dogs, children, coolers, chairs, beach balls -- everything except sunglasses, sun screen, hats and parasols -- have been staking out prime territory for sweltering evenings at the beach.


Four-Letter Words
"WORK IS A four-letter word" was a bumper sticker of the defiantly lazy in the 60's, based on a remark attributed to the Yippie Abbie Hoffman.
That illustrates the meaning of the phrase four-letter word as "vulgar, obscene," not for use in what used to be called mixed company.
Of course, work -- along with hope, love and thousands of other words of four letters -- is not a four-letter word.
That phrase (first used, Merriam-Webster says, in an 1897 book on flags) defines several sexually explicit or scatological terms, sometimes referred to as barnyard epithets or by using the first letter of the shocking term followed by the word -word.


New York Pledge to House Poor Works a Rare, Quiet Revolution
In 1986, Mayor Edward I. Koch made a bold commitment, promising that New York City would spend $4.2 billion in the following decade to build new homes for poor and working-class New Yorkers.
Nine years later, the city has made good on much of that ambitious pledge.
Under Mr.
Koch and his successors, the city has financed and overseen the creation of more than 50,000 new apartments and houses -- enough to fill a small city.


Julia E. Dean, W. E. Massey 3d
Julia Elizabeth Dean, the daughter of Judith T. Dean of New York and the late Dr.
Warren K. Dean, was married yesterday to William Everett Massey 3d, the son of Elizabeth Massey of Haddonfield, N.J., and the late William D. S. Massey.
The Rev.
J.
Barrie Shepherd performed the ceremony at the First Presbyterian Church in New York.
Mrs.
Massey, 27, is an associate producer at Focus Networks, a satellite television network for department store employees, in New York.
She graduated cum laude from New York University, where her father was the W. R. Kenan Jr. professor of Latin American history.


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: April 30, 1995
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
5
THE CHAMBER, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $7.50.) A lawyer represents a racist who is on death row for his part in a 1967 bombing.
2
2
"K" IS FOR KILLER, by Sue Grafton. (Fawcett, $6.99.) Kinsey Millhone investigates the strange death of a waitress's daughter.
3
16
CIRCLE OF FRIENDS, by Maeve Binchy. (Dell, $6.50.) The coming of age of women in an Irish village and in Dublin's academia.
4
5
UNTIL YOU, by Judith McNaught. (Pocket, $6.50.) An American woman who is a chaperone in Georgian England finds romance.
5
14
TOM CLANCY'S OP-CENTER, created by Tom Clancy and Steve Pieczenik. (Berkley, $6.99.) The operations of a secret Government agency.
6
1
HIDDEN RICHES, by Nora Roberts. (Jove, $5.99.) When an antiques dealer buys a cache of curiosities, she becomes the target of an international criminal.
7
14
THE DAY AFTER TOMORROW, by Allan Folsom. (Warner Vision, $6.99.) A doctor stumbles into a tangle of conspiracies.
8
5
DAYBREAK, by Belva Plain. (Dell, $6.99.) Two families are divided and then united by a series of surprising developments.
9
27
CONGO, by Michael Crichton. (Ballantine, $6.99.) Why did archeologists die among ruins?
10
5
ANGEL, by Barbara Taylor Bradford. (Ballantine, $6.99.) The reunion of four people is transformed by two celebrated men.
11
46
THE SHIPPING NEWS, by E. Annie Proulx. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $12.) A man mourns his adulterous wife in Newfoundland.
12
2
DEAR EMILY, by Fern Michaels. (Zebra/Kensington, $5.99.) After her divorce, a middle-aged woman has to choose between two suitors.
13
1
EVERLASTING LOVE, by Jayne Ann Krentz, Linda Lael Miller, Linda Howard, Kasey Michaels and Carla Neggers. (Pocket, $5.99.) Romantic stories with diverse settings.
14
11
ACCIDENT, by Danielle Steel. (Dell, $6.99.) A car collision alters the lives of five families.
15
1
THE COURTSHIP OF PRINCESS LEIA, by Dave Wolverton. (Spectra/Bantam, $5.99.) Romance and power in the "Star Wars" universe.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
NonFiction
1
32
EMBRACED BY THE LIGHT, by Betty J. Eadie with Curtis Taylor. (Bantam, $5.99.) A woman's near-death experience.
2
68
CARE OF THE SOUL, by Thomas Moore. (Harper Perennial, $12.) A psychotherapist discusses spirituality and everyday life.
3
31
HAVING OUR SAY, by Sarah L. Delany and A. Elizabeth Delany with Amy Hill Hearth. (Dell, $5.99.) Two black sisters, both of them over 100, reflect on their lives.
4
5
REVIVING OPHELIA, by Mary Pipher. (Ballantine, $12.50.) The everyday dangers that beset teen-age girls.
5
599
THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $10.95.) Inspiration.
6
9
THE HIDDEN LIFE OF DOGS, by Elizabeth Marshall Thomas. (Pocket, $5.99.) An analysis of canine behavior.
7*
20
SOUL MATES, by Thomas Moore. (Harper Perennial, $13.) Love and relationships.
8
19
SEINLANGUAGE, by Jerry Seinfeld. (Bantam, $5.99.) Observations on life's pleasures and ordeals by the star of "Seinfeld."
9*
8
SAVED BY THE LIGHT, by Dannion Brinkley with Paul Perry. (Harper Paperbacks, $5.99.) An account of two near-death experiences.
10
4
THE AGENDA, by Bob Woodward. (Pocket, $6.50.) The inner workings of the White House in the first year of the Clinton Administration.
11*
10
MAKES ME WANNA HOLLER, by Nathan McCall. (Vintage, $12.) The life of a young black man in America: the memoirs of a Washington Post reporter.
12
14
HOW WE DIE, by Sherwin B. Nuland. (Vintage, $13.) A surgeon reflects on "life's final chapter."
13*
35
A HISTORY OF GOD, by Karen Armstrong. (Ballantine, $14.) The development of monotheism over the past 4,000 years.
14
1
MAYBE (MAYBE NOT), by Robert Fulghum. (Ivy, $6.99.) Essays suggesting that inspiration can be found in most unexpected ways and places.
15
113
I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS, by Maya Angelou. (Bantam, $4.99.) The poet's depiction of her childhood and adolescence.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Advice, How-To and Miscellaneous
1
31
CHICKEN SOUP FOR THE SOUL, compiled by Jack Canfield and Mark Victor Hansen. (Health Communications, $12.95.) Stories meant to "open the heart and rekindle the spirit."
2
209
THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE, by Stephen R. Covey. (Fireside/S&amp;S, $12.) Principles for success.
3
11
THE CELESTINE PROPHECY: An Experiential Guide, by James Redfield and Carol Adrienne. (Warner, $8.99.) Ways to apply the inspirational message of the novel "The Celestine Prophecy."
4
1
TEN STUPID THINGS WOMEN DO TO MESS UP THEIR LIVES, by Laura C. Schlessinger. (Harper Perennial, $10.) Counsel by a therapist.
Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending April 15, at 3,050 bookstores plus wholesalers serving 38,000 other retailers, statistically weighted to represent sales in all such outlets nationwide.
An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.


INSIDE
Angier Biddle Duke Dies
Angier Biddle Duke, a former Ambassador and scion of a powerful American family, died yesterday at age 79 in Southampton, L.I.
Page 44.
Cavaliers Even With Knicks
Cleveland defeated New York at Madison Square Garden, 90-84, to put their N.B.A. playoff series at 1-1.
SportsSunday, section 8.


Immigrant's Search For Logic Leads Him To Top of C.P.A. Class
FOR Vitaly Sorkin, life is not what it used to be.
When he immigrated here from the Soviet Union in 1990 he spoke little English and worked in a deli.
"You want lettuce on that?" he used to say.
"Mustard or mayonnaise? Tomatoes?"
Now Mr.
Sorkin is an accountant with a Big Six firm, KPMG Peat Marwick.
And he says that complicated terms like amortization, depreciation and intangible assets are a piece of cake.


A QUESTION FOR: David Brower
Q: If you were given the chance to take Rush Limbaugh on a field trip, where would you take him?
A: Maybe I'd try the Grand Canyon -- you know, a river trip.
James Watt went in there once, and after three days he was praying to get out.


Underneath the Revolution
CUBA AND THE NIGHT By Pico Iyer. 234 pp. New York: Alfred A. Knopf. $22.


Inside Not-So-Secret Gardens
English-style perennial gardens, primrose paths, crabapple allees and woodlands full of wildflowers are among the vistas offered by a new program that opens private gardens to the public.
The 110 private gardens that can be seen at various times throughout late spring and summer are described in "The 1995 Garden Conservancy Open Days Directory," modeled after a British guide.
Situated in Westchester, Putnam and Dutchess Counties in New York as well as in Connecticut, the gardens were cultivated by both well-known landscape designers and avid amateurs.


[ BREACH OF ]  CONTRACT WITH  [ PART OF ]  AMERICA
For months, near despair, I have muttered: "Which America? What contract? Did I sign something?" Stephen L. Carter's article " [ Breach of ]  Contract With  [ Part of ]  America" (April 9) has given me hope.
ROSEMARIE G. ANDERSON Northville, Mich.


Prison Fund-Raiser


JULIA ORMOND
Was there some reason that Julia Ormond couldn't set and comb her hair before being photographed for your cover ("The Conception, Production and Distribution of Julia Ormond," by David Blum, April 9)?
She isn't so pretty that she can get away with looking like she just got up.


Evelyn Hunter And Cary Granat
Evelyn Marie Hunter, a daughter of Ann and Everett Hunter of Woodstock, Ill., is to be married today to Cary Evan Granat, a son of Phyllis and Harvey Granat of Great Neck, L.I.
Rabbi Mordecai Waxman is to perform the ceremony at Temple Emmanuel in Great Neck, L.I.
The bride, 29, graduated from the University of Illinois and received a law degree from Pepperdine University.
She is a legal ombudsman at the New York City Commission for the United Nations and Consular Corps.


Guns of Academe: Officers' Plea to Bear Arms Stirs Anger at 2 Colleges
As crime becomes more and more a part of life on campus, so does a sight once unfamiliar in what people like to think of as a refuge from the real world: college police officers on patrol, guns at their hips.
Already, officers at about a dozen state and county campuses carry guns.
And at two others, a policy against arming the campus police is causing tension between college officials, who say the presence of guns violates the academic spirit, and police officers, who say the administrators and trustees are naively clinging to the idea of a campus as a sacrosanct place.


Conner To Defend With Boat Of Rival
Like a family about to take its new car for a spin, members of Dennis Conner's Stars &amp; Stripes team today took a sail on Young America.
The outing was precipitated by a deal signed at dawn by the two yachting camps allowing Conner to sail his former opponent's yacht in the America's Cup races.
"Stars &amp; Stripes brought us to where we are today," Conner said.
"However, four months of defender trials have proven Young America's hull speed advantages. This boat and the proven strengths of the Stars &amp; Stripes team will be a winning combination in the upcoming America's Cup."


A Brisk Zairian Rumba Reverberates in America
GIVEN ZAIRE'S RECENT woes -- a decaying government and hordes of war refugees from neighboring countries -- it becomes less likely that another phenomenal band like Wenge Musica will appear there any time soon.
From its earliest performances in 1981, Wenge Musica defined the state of soukous, the rumba-based style that has dominated all others for 20 years in sub-Saharan Africa.
Unlike the social order in Zaire, Wenge Musica is in no danger of fading away.
The recent American release of the group's 1988 debut album, "Bouger Bouger" (NATARI/ Africassette; CD and cassette), offers the band's delicate but muscular charms to a new audience here.
And when the situation at home grows too turbulent, exile in Paris has long been an option for Zairian musicians.
Indeed, a splinter band called Wenge Musica Aile Paris already lives there and has put out as many albums as the originals, no doubt confusing listeners.


The Governor and Race: Off the Cuff, Off Key
When she doesn't have a prepared speech in front of her, Governor Whitman sounds a lot like the rest of us.
She sets out swiftly on one line of thinking until a connecting idea takes hold and directs her train of thought down another, more promising line.
In a governor, it is a pretty fearless way of speaking, and daily Mrs.
Whitman uses her frank, unrehearsed style to win over her audience.
But spontaneity also seems to get her into trouble in the one arena where words are most freighted with history and suspicion: race.
It's odd that this should be so, because Mrs.
Whitman is generally a liberal when it comes to matters of race and its satellite issues -- urban problems, affirmative action and welfare.
Yet welfare was the subject when the Governor set herself up for the latest round of criticism from black Democrats with a remarks about "Jewels in the Crown," a supposed game of bragging rights over fathering illegitimate babies played by young black men in Newark.


Miss Fortenbaugh and Mr. Alemany
Cristina Carlson Fortenbaugh, the daughter of Janice C. Oresman of New York and Samuel Byrod Fortenbaugh 3d of Greenwich, Conn., was married yesterday to Joshua Costen Alemany, a son of Louanne B. Alemany of West Brookfield, Mass., and the late James C. Alemany.
The Rev.
Rebecca Parkhill, a Unitarian Universalist minister, performed the ceremony at the Century Association in New York.
Mrs.
Alemany is a dancer and singer in New York.
She and her husband graduated from Brown University.
Her father is the managing partner of Morgan, Lewis &amp; Bockius, a New York law firm.
Her mother is a private art consultant in New York.


How Talk Radio Gets at What's Real
A national tragedy requires a public response, traditionally provided by government officials and the news media.
But after the bombing in Oklahoma City a week and a half ago, another institution vied for attention: talk radio.
The result was not only a debate about terrorism but a renewed media power struggle over who sets the rules of public discourse.
Talk radio, a remarkably self-conscious medium even under normal circumstances, itself became the major topic of conversation.
The bombing and its aftermath provoked angry diatribes, biased rants, arcane conspiracy theories -- precisely the kind of unfiltered, untempered speech that gives radio its coarse authenticity, delighting its audience and appalling media traditionalists.
The bombing dominated talk radio like no other event since this new medium's rise to prominence.
From the morning the bomb went off, talk-show hosts and callers provided a mass audience with an alternative perspective.


Happy 173d, Ulysses; Tomb's Looking Good!
A year ago, descendants of Ulysses S. Grant filed a lawsuit threatening to remove the 18th President and his wife from their famous tomb and bury them elsewhere: they said the monument had been desecrated by graffiti writers, drug users, skateboarders and homeless people.
But this year, the descendants are happier.
The National Park Service has started a $1 million restoration project, scheduled for completion by the monument's centennial on April 27, 1997.
The roof has been repaired, the walls cleansed, and security patrols have been established to ward off vandals.


Lost in a Prospectus Labyrinth
MUTUAL fund investors are regularly -- and wisely -- warned by regulators to educate themselves about their funds.
But suppose you want to check on the expertise of the directors overseeing your fund?
Where would you look?
If you are a shareholder in the Merrill Lynch Eurofund or Scudder Growth and Income Fund, you can find out by reading the prospectus sent by those funds when you sign up.
If you're a Vanguard Wellington Fund investor, you won't find that information in the prospectus, but you can find it in the annual report you get each year.
But if you own shares of the Franklin Premier Return Fund -- or dozens of other funds -- you can find it only in a supplementary document called the statement of additional information, and you will never even see that document unless you ask the fund company for a copy.


The Napa Valley
Springtime in the Napa Valley this year means hills carpeted in brilliant green after a series of record storms, and skies that are clear and blue.
There are few signs of damage from the floods of January and March.
Tidy rows of vines stand black and gnarled in the vineyards, their new shoots sprouting a paler green, and traces of early spring's mustard flowers still linger.


Just a Sap For Sugar, Love And Sorrow
"SPRING IS HERE! WHY doesn't my heart go dancing?" begins the refrain of a quintessentially bittersweet Rodgers and Hart standard, "Spring Is Here." Written for the 1938 Broadway show "I Married an Angel," Lorenz Hart's lyric offers as distilled an evocation of depression as pop music has produced: "No desire/ No ambition leads me/ Maybe it's because/ Nobody needs me."
This spring (this Tuesday, to be exact) is the centennial of Hart's birth.
Among the events commemorating the occasion is the cabaret singer Mary Cleere Haran's Rodgers and Hart show "This Funny World," which opens a four-week engagement on Tuesday at Rainbow and Stars.
And May 4 through 6, the City Center's Encores! series of great American musicals in concert will present four performances of the 1940 Rodgers and Hart show "Pal Joey," starring Patti LuPone, Peter Gallagher and Bebe Neuwirth.


The Classroom Itinerary of a Harried Road Scholar
Jim Savin no longer drives trucks for a living, but the highway is still his home.
Since he became an adjunct college instructor five years ago, Mr.
Savin, 42, often logged 500 miles a week shuttling between campuses.
To sandwich in six classes, he teaches at Kean College in Union, Raritan Valley Community College in Branchburg and Bergen Community College in Paramus.
Since none of the colleges provide him with an office, the dashboard is his desk, and the back seat his file cabinet.


A Rocker Who Hasn't Gentled With Age
BOB DYLAN HAS JOINED THE parade of well-known rockers who have released albums from "MTV Unplugged." That's as far as his conformity goes.
Dylan's "MTV Unplugged" (Columbia CT67000, cassette and CD), recorded late last year, isn't a tepid, defanged run-through of hits, like Eric Clapton's and Rod Stewart's sessions, or a spontaneity-free recital like Mariah Carey's.
Acoustic guitars in hand, Dylan's new band still rocks, and the sly old master makes his songs crackle and rage and ache.
Dylan, now 53, is as death-haunted as any grunge rocker, as corrosive as most punks, as free-associative as some rappers.
Yet on MTV, as elsewhere in current pop, he's an oddity.
His musical tastes are old-fashioned; he doesn't play folk-rock as currently revived by everyone from R.E.M. to Tom Petty, but folk with a rocker's edge.
And his songs are highly individual yet almost selfless, barely concerned with private gratification.
His best work, like "MTV Unplugged," brings human passion and musical wit to metaphysical struggles.


The Mind of The Assassin
OSWALD'S TALE An American Mystery.
By Norman Mailer. 828 pp.
New York: Random House. $30.


A Show Dominated by Faces and Their Essential Adjuncts
IN China and Chinatowns across the world, 1995 is the Year of the Pig; in the United States it is the Year of the Woman.
But here it is also the year of the Pelham Art Center or, to be precise, the 20th anniversary of its founding as an art gallery and source of information to residents interested in art.
How better to celebrate the event than with the present show of photographs spanning the period, which was assembled by Renata Rainer.
For one thing, Ms.
Rainer brings to bear her career as a photographer and photo historian; for another, she has long graced the center as an instructor and member of its advisory board.


April 23-29; Hillary, Let's Find a Special Place for These


Inside the World Of the Paranoid
WE may never know what part of the shadows of rage and conspiracy Timothy J. McVeigh emerged from.
The man charged with the worst act of terrorism in the nation's history is said to consider himself a political prisoner, telling authorities no more than his name and date of birth.
But anyone who has leafed through the literature of self-styled patriot groups, sampled the worst of anti-Government postings on the computer Internet or looked at hate tracts will find that there is an old root of paranoia that runs deep in the national cellar and has sprouted rage and conspiracy for generations.


A Shaken City, Ever Devout, Turns to God
The night sky here is anchored by a quartet of huge white crosses, one on each side of the tallest building downtown, the Liberty Bank Tower.
And like Washington's monuments to past Presidents, or Dallas's towering Nationsbank Plaza, trimmed in a neon green the color of money, they make a statement about the city's center.
In this deeply religious and heavily Baptist city, this symbol of Christianity, formed by lights that are normally turned on only during the Christmas season, is an expression of a faith that seems to be holding the city together in the aftermath of the bombing of the Federal Building last week.


Gwendolyn Noto, Sean McCormack
Gwendolyn Louise Noto, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Lucio A. Noto of McLean, Va., was married yesterday to Sean Gerard McCormack, a son of Genevieve McCormack of Armonk, N.Y., and the late Edwin McCormack.
The Rev.
Stanley O'Konsky performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at St.
Patrick's Church in Bedford, N.Y.
Mrs.
McCormack, 27, graduated from the Parsons School of Design.
She is a graphics designer for the Conair Corporation, the health and beauty aids company, in Stamford, Conn.
Her father is the chairman and chief executive of the Mobil Corporation in Fairfax, Va.


Corrections
A brief report in the F.Y.I. column last Sunday about the West Fourth Street subway station misstated the location of one of the station's entrances.
It is at Waverly Place, not West Eighth Street.


How Far They'll Go To Defend a Client
NOW, let's see if we've got this straight: Detective Mark Fuhrman, who hates black people and interracial relationships, decides to frame O. J. Simpson for the murder of Nicole Brown Simpson and Ronald L. Goldman.
So he takes a bloody glove from the crime scene and plants it on Mr.
Simpson's property.
Then his buddies in the Los Angeles Police Department cover his back by moving evidence, even taking vials of the victims' blood and splashing them in telltale places.
Then the police and prosecutors decide not to pursue the real killers: Colombian drug dealers who mistook Ms.
Simpson for her friend Faye Resnick, who had stayed with her recently and is a cocaine abuser.


Streetscapes/The Foot of East 53d Street; From 'Dead End' Contrast to Homogeneous Luxury
THE playwright Sidney Kingsley, who died last month, gained enduring fame for "Dead End," a Broadway hit when it opened in 1935 and again as the Humphrey Bogart movie of 1937.
Set at the foot of East 53d Street where the new money of River House rubbed up against the then-squalid waterfront, "Dead End" captured the dramatic social contrasts that New Yorkers take for granted.
Now, six decades later, New York is still a city of contrasts, but the rough edges of Mr.
Kingsley's "Dead End" have been fine-sanded to a homogeneous affluence.


Burwell Espy, Paul Schorr 4th
Mary Burwell Espy, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
John Wilson Espy of New York, was married yesterday in New York to Paul Carl Schorr 4th, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Schorr 3d of Lincoln, Neb.
The Rev.
Dr.
Mark S. Anschutz performed the ceremony at St.
James' Episcopal Church.
Mrs.
Schorr, 25, is known as Burwell.
She is an assistant in the fashion merchandising department of Mademoiselle magazine in New York.
She graduated from Vanderbilt University.
Her father is a clinical professor of ophthalmology at the College of Physicians and Surgeons of Columbia University in New York.
He is also an attending ophthalmologist at the Harkness Eye Institute at Presbyterian Hospital in New York, where he is a member of the board of surgeons and the board of advisers.
Her mother, Mary Fowlkes Espy, is a trustee at Presbyterian Hospital and at the Spence-Chapin Services to Families, both in New York.


Tripping


Felice N. Glaser, Barry Schanzer
Dr.
Felice Naomi Glaser, a resident in pediatrics at Columbia-Presbyterian Medical Center in New York, is to be married today to Dr.
Barry Mark Schanzer, a chief resident in ophthalmology at Kings County Hospital in Brooklyn.
Rabbi Yaakov Luban is to perform the ceremony at the Hilton Tower Center in East Brunswick, N.J.
The bride graduated from Columbia University and received her medical degree from the Albert Einstein College of Medicine.
She is a daughter of Edith and Dr.
Stephen Glaser of Riverdale, the Bronx.
The bride's father is a pediatrician in Riverdale and an assistant clinical professor of pediatrics at the Columbia University College of Physicians and Surgeons in Manhattan.
Her mother is the law clerk to Acting Justice Edward M. Davidowitz of the State Supreme Court in the Bronx.


Kotite Runs a Tight Ship, As Jets Are Finding Out
The basketball court of the aborted Pete Carroll era has been dismantled at the Jets' training camp.
Welcome to the business of football under Rich Kotite.
At midfield, Kotite, the new coach, stares at the practice his assistants are running in small groups.
Kotite reaches into his jacket pocket and pulls out a pad, then a pen.


Christen Lewis, Michael Downey
Christen Jedh Lewis, the daughter of Dolly and Donald Lewis of Park Ridge, N.J., was married yesterday to Michael Joseph Downey, the son of Sally and Paul Downey of Philadelphia.
The Rev.
Blaik Westhoff performed the ceremony at the Pocono Lake United Methodist Church in Pocono Lake, Pa.
Mrs.
Downey, 27, is a sales representative, based in Edgewater, N.J., for Dockers Footwear.
She graduated from Kutztown University.
Her father, now retired, was a partner in Sellers &amp; Josephson Inc., a manufacturer of wallcoverings in Englewood, N.J.
Her mother is the assistant manager of the Park Ridge Pool Commission.


Preserving the Shrines of an Age, Not the Spirit
"UNTIL THE FIRST BLOW fell, no one was convinced that Penn Station really would be demolished or that New York would permit this monumental act of vandalism. . . . We want and deserve tin-can architecture in a tin-horn culture. And we will probably be judged not by the monuments we build but by those we have destroyed."
Those words, first published on the editorial page of this newspaper on Oct. 30, 1963, are among the most important written on architecture in this century.
Though Penn Station was destroyed, the words mourning its demise have been chiseled into the record of the art they sought to protect.
And the spirit behind the words was written into law less than two years later, in April 1965, when the New York City Landmarks Preservation Commission was created.


Vanessa L. Kay, Laurent Bensimon
Vanessa L. Kay, a daughter of Robert and Enid Kay of New York, and Laurent Bensimon, a son of Andre and Michele Bensimon of Paris, are to be married today.
Rabbi David M. Posner is to officiate at the Hotel Plaza Athenee in New York.
The bride, 26, was until recently an assistant vice president at Citibank in Paris and is now studying for an M.B.A. at the European Institute of Business Administration in Fontainebleau, France.
She graduated magna cum laude from Cornell University.
Her father is a senior partner in the New York law firm of Kay Collyer &amp; Boose.


Traffic Alert
TODAY Beginning today, subway service between Manhattan and Brooklyn on the B, M and D lines will be disrupted from 9:45 A.M. to 3:30 P.M. on weekdays and from 4 A.M.
Saturdays to 10 P.M.
Sundays because of structural repairs on the Manhattan Bridge.
The work is scheduled to continue through early November.


If You're Thinking of Living In/Manalapan; Despite Growth, the Ambiance Is Rural
THE name Manalapan means "land that produces good bread" in the language of the Leni Lenape Indians who inhabited the site before the first English and Scottish settlers arrived in the late 17th century.
Indeed, the 31-square-mile township has been a breadbasket for more than 300 years, producing grain, vegetables and livestock.
Today about two dozen working farms hang on amid residential development.


The 3 B's Minus 1


Sheffield Ending Chorus Tenure
IN the framed photograph that hangs above his piano, Ludwig Sheffield is pressing his hands to his forehead in a gesture if not of despair, then of deep concern.
Surrounding the portrait -- taken in a candid moment at a rehearsal of the Pleasantville Cantata Singers -- are the appreciative signatures of members of the group, which Mr.
Sheffield has conducted for 40 years.
He recalls being exasperated with the basses at the moment the picture was taken, but it might just as easily have been the tenors, or the altos or the sopranos.
It is the fate of many choral directors to work with most amateur singers on difficult music that must be performed on a professional level after what often seems like too few rehearsals.
Like many other conductors busy with community choruses in the county, however, Mr.
Sheffield has been grateful for the opportunity to make musicians out of music lovers.


Cydney E. Pranke, Scott A. Kislin
Cynthia E. Pranke, a daughter of Jeanette Pranke and Maynard Pranke, both of Jefferson, Wis., is to be married today to Scott Alan Kislin, a son of Julie Kislin of North Brunswick, N.J., and Stanley Kislin of Piscataway, N.J.
Rabbi Fredric Dworkin is to perform the ceremony at the Shadowbrook in Shrewsbury, N.J.
Mrs.
Kislin, 30, is called Cydney.
She is an account executive at Ludgate Communications, an investor relations concern in New York.
She graduated from the University of Colorado and is studying for an M.B.A. degree at Fordham University.


New Haven Prepares For Special Olympics
The ninth Special Olympics World Summer Games will be held in New Haven, Conn., from July 1 to 9, bringing an expected 7,200 athletes from 140 countries to participate in 250 events in 19 sports.
Special Olympics World Summer Games are held every four years, providing competition for children and adults who are mentally retarded in sports that range from aquatics to golf to volleyball.
The competition will be based mainly on five campuses in the New Haven area: Yale, Southern Connecticut State, the University of New Haven, Quinnipiac College and Albertus Magnus College.
Some events, including cycling, sailing and aquatics, will be held elsewhere in the area.
The opening ceremony will be July 1 at the Yale Bowl.


County's Wealth: Two Sides Of the Coin
FOR the well-to-do, Westchester is the suburb north of New York City known for its rolling hills, pricey real estate and sought-after addresses like Scarsdale and Rye.
But for the struggling middle class -- whose numbers grow smaller each year, according to economists -- and for the poor, the county is a place where the cost of housing is often out of reach and the cost of living daunting.
"Westchester is a fine place if you are one of the haves," said Frank M. Surdey, a regional economist with the State Department of Labor, "but it's not so great if you're a have-not."


Susan G. Wax, Seth Blumenfeld
Susan Gail Wax, an assistant at Table Toppers, a linen-rental company in Stamford, Conn., is to be married today to Seth David Blumenfeld, the president of MCI International in Rye Brook, N.Y., a subsidiary of the MCI Communications Corporation.
Rabbi Alex Goldman is to perform the ceremony at the Greenwich Hyatt Hotel in Greenwich, Conn.
The bride graduated from the University of Bridgeport.
She is the daughter of Tess Goldman of Rockville Centre, L.I., and the late Henry Goldman.


Vaccination Warning For Bali Visitors
People planning to visit Bali should consider being vaccinated against Japanese encephalitis, a severe brain infection transmitted by mosquitoes.
This advice was issued this month in The Lancet, an international medical journal, following the report of a Swedish woman who became ill after 10 days on the Indonesian island.
Despite the new warning, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention does not recommend routine immunization for short-term tourists to Asia, but only for travelers planning to stay for more than 30 days because they are at the highest risk.
Most other people can effectively protect themselves by using mosquito repellent, said Dr.
Theodore Sai, an encephalitis expert at the C.D.C. in Fort Collins, Colo.


Caryl Ciabattoni, F. H. Dyckman 3d
Caryl Mary Ciabattoni, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Louis J. Ciabattoni of Chappaqua, N.Y., and Francis Hamilton Dyckman 3d, the son of Mrs.
Dyckman Jr. of Skillman, N.J., and the late Mr.
Dyckman, were married yesterday in Lawrenceville, N.J.
The Rev.
Patrick Connor, a Roman Catholic priest, officiated in the Edith Memorial Chapel of the Lawrenceville School.
The Rev.
Richard Downes, an Episcopal minister, took part in the ceremony.
Mrs.
Dyckman graduated from the University of Pennsylvania.
She is a senior producer of computer software for the Voyager Company, a multimedia publishing company in New York.
Her father is the team director of computer system support at the National Broadcasting Company in New York.
Her mother, Therese Ciabattoni, is an academic counselor at Westchester Community College in Valhalla, N.Y.


INSIDE
NEWS AND TOPICS  The 'gypsy scholars' put their feet down and cry, 'Enough!' 6 As it renovates rest stops, the Turnpike Authority wants to know what motorists want.
So we asked.7 RESTAURANTS  A sleek new brewery quenches a mighty thirst in Princeton. 12  SOAPBOX  Opening Day for Little League: An outsider's view from the mound.
Plus, letters. 17


For Bombing 'Suspects,' Looks Aren't Everything
Imagine looking like John Doe No. 2, the elusive confederate of Timothy J. McVeigh, the suspect in the Oklahoma bombing.
By today the Federal Bureau of Investigation had received more than 10,000 calls from people offering clues and had interviewed more than a dozen men resembling the sketch of the dark-haired, square-jawed, tattooed man the F.B.I. calls John Doe No. 2.
And while agents have not yet found their man, the hunt has sent jolts -- ranging from annoying inconvenience to harassment to the loss of a job -- into the lives of men whose only bond is a resemblance, whether real or imagined, to the F.B.I. sketch.


When Utility Dividends Drop, What's a Shareholder To Do?; Not Much -- But Some Do Battle With the Board
EDWARD AND EDITH RUDY want their utility to treat them the old-fashioned way.
The Rudys own shares in the New York State Electric and Gas Corporation.
Last October the company dealt the couple and thousands of other stockholders an unexpected blow: It cut the 1994 dividend from $ 2.20 a share to $ 1.40, a reduction of 36.4 percent.
So, in a novel twist on efforts to link executive pay to corporate performance, the Manhattan couple has proposed to cut the salaries and stock options of the utility's managers by the same 36.4 percent.
And if the utility, located in western New York, raises dividends, the managers' pay will rise by the same amount.


Two Years and Waiting for a Sign
Two years ago today, Monica Seles, the tennis celebrity who once drew criticism for her disguises, aliases and ever-changing telephone numbers and hair color, proved her paranoia justified when she was stabbed in the back in midtournament in Hamburg, Germany, by a fanatic who believed getting rid of Seles was the only way to assure his countrywoman Steffi Graf of the No. 1 ranking.
"I can't believe he got what he wanted," Seles sobbed that summer when it became clear, four full months after being attacked, that she was no closer to returning to her profession than she had been the day after she was stabbed.


Summertime in Fresh Air
For thousands of New York City children summer is the time in which the days are sticky, the streets smell like defrosting refrigerators and a swim is a splash or two in an overcrowded pool or under a fire-hydrant sprinkler.
If they are lucky, an air-conditioner cools their nights.
If they are not, their windows are open on the whine of sirens and a breeze that almost never shows up before dawn.
While the parks may provide an oasis, they cannot really provide a getaway.
A true getaway takes time and space.


F.Y.I.
Nests for Squirrels
Q.
In Union Square Park, there are these strange little boxes in some of the trees that don't appear to be there for the birds.
What are these boxes, where did they come from, and who put them there?
A.
The boxes are the result of one man's lasting love for that furry little nut-eater, the squirrel.
Alfonso Santos, a 60-year-old retired handyman who lives on West 19th Street, has been coming to feed the squirrels in Union Square since he came to the United States from Cuba 30 years ago.
In 1985, he came upon the idea of building a shelter for pregnant squirrels in need of, in Mr.
Santos's mind, a good place to bring up a brood.
So he put together eight boxes from scrap wood, bored squirrel-ways in them, stuffed the habitats with shredded newspaper and other creature comforts and mounted them in the forks of trees around the park.
The squirrels, used to hardships of urban living, took to the shelters immediately.
For months, everything seemed rosy.
But one August morning, Mr.
Santos discovered the shelters had been dismantled and taken away by an unknown rodent-hater, leaving the squirrels homeless, their only possessions stuffed in their cheeks.
Aghast, Mr.
Santos wrote to once and future Parks Commissioner Henry J. Stern and pleaded his case.
Mr.
Stern recalls their meeting.
He said he recognized Mr.
Santos as a "friend to all species," and accepted his offer to reconstruct and mount his squirrel-nurseries.
"I guarantee it makes the Union Square squirrels the best-housed squirrels in the city," said Mr.
Stern.
Ten years later, Mr.
Santos is still the super for the Union Square Squirrel Homes, which he visits twice a day, every day, with his wife, Jacqueline.
"I no have a baby," said Mr.
Santos.
"This is my family." Fewer Words the Better Q.  What is the logic behind the disconcerting computerized voice that says "What listing please?" when you call information?
A human voice always comes on right afterward.
A.
Imagine for a moment you are a directory assistance operator. (If you are a directory assistance operator, this part should be easy.) Your average 7.5-hour shift means answering approximately 1,000 requests for numbers.
That means saying "What listing please?" 2.2 times a minute, give or take.
Wouldn't you lose your mind?
Sharon Beadle, a Nynex spokeswoman, said the computerized greeting, now standard on all calls statewide, spares the poor operator a good deal of tedium.
"When you're handling a thousand inquiries a day, it gets a little repetitious," said Ms.
Beadle.
The recording also provides a "clear and easy" introduction to the caller, which, Ms.
Beadle said, expedites the process.
Off the Flight Path Q.  I thought that there was some rule that jets were not supposed to fly directly over Manhattan.
But then I see them from time to time, sometimes at seemingly low altitudes.
So is my memory wrong?
A.
Despite a lot of big, tall obstacles (like the Empire State Building, which was hit by a fog-blind B-25 in 1945), there hasn't ever been a ban on planes flying over Manhattan, says Mike Sammartino, the Air Traffic System manager with the Federal Aviation Administration.
The reason Manhattanites see so few jets overhead has to do with the alignment of La Guardia's runways, where most of the big planes that do pass over Manhattan are headed. (About 2 percent of flights landing at Kennedy use an approach that takes them over the World Trade Center, said Mr. Sammartino.)
La Guardia has two runways: Runway 13-31, which runs at approximately the same east-west orientation as 125th Street, and Runway 4-22, which runs perpendicular to 13-31.
The approach for 13-31 calls for aligning the plane with the runway about 6 miles from the strip.
Approaching from the south, that means passing over the Statue of Liberty, flying up the Hudson, banking right, and flying across Manhattan just above the northern end of Central Park.
In general, flights that land on 4-22 either fly over Brooklyn or toward the Manhattan side of the East River, swing over the Bronx to approach the runway from the north.
The west side of Manhattan also sees a lot of private planes at lower altitudes, using a flight corridor along the Hudson River that lends itself to aerial sightseeing.
JESSE McKINLEY


The Panthers, Still Untamed, Roar Back
IN BLACK COMMUNITIES, THE politics of the 1960's have resurfaced in the renewed popularity of Malcolm X and black nationalism.
The idealism and rebellion of the 60's have been recycled in song lyrics about the Black Panthers, and several recent books have explored the history of the Panther Party.
There has even been a revival of Afros and black leather jackets.
It seems inevitable, then, that the Black Panthers, the most important revolutionary black group to emerge in this century, would roar to life again on the screen.
"Panther," a new feature film by the director Mario Van Peebles and his father, the writer Melvin Van Peebles, tries to recreate the time of the Black Panthers' founding and to dress it in black-is-beautiful garb.
In the movie, which opens on Wednesday, the time is 1966 through 1968 in Oakland, Calif., when Huey P. Newton (played by Marcus Chong, the nephew of Tommy Chong of Cheech and Chong), Bobby Seale (Courtney B. Vance) and a fictional character, Judge (Kadeem Hardison), form the Black Panthers and begin to recruit members.


Speech Disorder
To the Editor:
In her essay on Tom Stoppard's "Arcadia," Margo Jefferson mentions "so many English accents to deliver in clear vocables"  [ "Tom Stoppard, Virtuoso and Show-Off," April 9 ] .
As I was struggling to understand those many English accents at the Vivian Beaumont Theater, it occurred to me how stupid it was for so many American actors to adopt such accents, which merely increase their own problems and make it harder for American audiences to understand what is being said.


Residential Resales
In the following reports, the "listed at" price is the asking price when negotiations began that ended in the sale.
Time on market is from most recent listing to contract.
MANHATTAN
CHELSEA  $280,000
477 West 22d Street  2-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 1,200-sq.-ft. co-op in a brownstone; dining area, 2 fireplaces, private garden; maintenance $1,089, 66% tax-deductible, listed at $324,000, 1 1/2 years on market (Broker: Wells &amp; Gay Stribling)  TRIBECA  $585,000
170 Duane Street  2-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 2,000-sq.-ft. duplex condo in a loft building; private elevator, powder room, Jacuzzi and steam shower in master bath, h/w floors, 600-sq.-ft. private roof space; common charge $213; taxes $5,210, listed at $600,000, 17 weeks on market (Broker: Douglas Elliman)  UPPER WEST SIDE  $412,500
160 Riverside Drive (88th St.)  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,350-sq.-ft. prewar co-op; 24-hr. doormen, dining room, windowed, eat-in kitchen, Hudson River view; maintenance $1,204, 50% tax-deductible, listed at $450,000, 8 weeks on market (Broker: Greenthal West)  WEST VILLAGE  $360,000
63 Downing Street  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,100-sq.-ft. postwar condo; 24-hr. doormen, dining area, marble bath, 2 exposures; common charge $465, taxes $3,804, listed at $399,000, 4 weeks on market (Broker: Kliegerman &amp; Associates)  BRONX
BAYCHESTER  $105,000
3037 Yates Avenue  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 33-year-old semi-attached brick house; dining area, h/w floors, 1-car garage; taxes $1,200, listed at $150,000, 13 weeks on market (Broker: ERA/Wage)  BURKE AVENUE AREA  $236,000
2915 Seymour Avenue  2-family, 30-year-old semi-attached brick house; 3 bedrooms, dining room in primary unit; 2 bedrooms in other; eat-in kitchen, 1 bath in each; 1 bedroom, 1 bath, hospitality suite on ground floor, 2-car garage; taxes $1,600, listed at $240,000, 4 weeks on market (Broker: Marland)  BROOKLYN
FLATBUSH  $260,000
194 Lenox Road  3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath semi-attached legal 2-family brownstone to be used as a one-family residence; dining room, eat-in kitchen, fireplace, private parking; taxes $1,792, listed at $269,000, 16 weeks on market (Broker: Frederick Palmer)  PARK SLOPE  $540,000
642 2d Street  5-bedroom, 3-bath, 5-story brownstone; library, professional office space on the ground floor; taxes $2,700, listed at $599,000, 1 year on market (Broker: F.J. Kazeroid)  QUEENS
ELMHURST  $175,000
51-01 Jacobus Street  2-bedroom, 1-bath, 40-year-old semi-attached brick ranch; dining room, eat-in kitchen, finished basement, 1-car garage; taxes $1,400, listed at $185,000, 48 weeks on market (Broker: Century 21/Best)  REGO PARK  $231,000
99-25 64th Road  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 55-year-old attached brick house; eat-in kitchen, finished basement, 20- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,800, listed at $245,000, 20 weeks on market (Broker: Advantage Forest Hills)  STATEN ISLAND
RANDALL MANOR  $255,000
34 St.
Austin's Place  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 100-year-old Victorian; dining room, eat-in kitchen, florida room, 2 fireplaces, 2-car garage, 75- by 163-ft. lot; taxes $1,300, listed at $299,500, 22 weeks on market (Broker: Vitali-Sunshine)  TOTTENVILLE  $199,900
559 Main Street  3-bedroom, 1 full and 2 half-bath, newly constructed colonial; dining room, eat-in kitchen, family room, rear deck, full basement, private driveway; taxes $400 (abated), listed at $199,900, 2 weeks on market (Broker: Linda Nasta Ltd.)  LONG ISLAND
BELLMORE  $140,000
15 Chicago Avenue  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 66-year-old ranch; eat-in kitchen, basement, 1-car garage; taxes $2,800, listed at $159,000, 23 weeks on market (Broker: Coldwell Banker Sammis)  LOCUST VALLEY  $250,000
20 Ash Street  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 50-year-old Cape Cod; fireplace, finished basement, plus 2-bedroom, 1-bath cottage, 1-car garage; taxes $3,700, listed at $269,000, 2 weeks on market (Brokers: Prudential Long Island; Harmonious Homes)  SHOREHAM  $142,000
43 Cobblestone Drive  3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 5-year-old colonial; dining room, eat-in kitchen, den, pool, 2-car garage; taxes $6,300, listed at $147,900, 1 week on market (Brokers: ERA Hamlet; ERA Albo)  SYOSSET  $313,000
18 Doone Drive, 3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 37-year-old colonial; dining room, eat-in kitchen, finished basement, den, 2-car attached garage; taxes $5,600, listed at $335,000, 4 weeks on market (Broker: ERA Gatewood)  CONNECTICUT
DARIEN  $695,000
42 Hamilton Lane  5-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, 39-year-old colonial; flagstone terrace, 2-car garage, on cul-de-sac, 1 acre; taxes $5,337, listed at $675,000, 1 week on market (Broker: William Pitt)  COS COB  $385,000
1 Ridge Road  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 43-year-old vinyl-sided Cape Cod; family room, solarium window off kitchen, 1-car garage; taxes $2,938, listed at $410,000, 3 weeks on market (Broker: Coldwell Banker/Schlott)  GREENWICH  $1.012 million
85 Dingletown Road  3-bedroom, 3-bath, 29-year-old brick ranch; dining room, library, family room, game room, 2 fireplaces, c/a, pool, 2-car garage, 2.11 acres; taxes $9,663, listed at $1.195 million, 78 weeks on market (Brokers: Preferred Properties)  STAMFORD  $310,000
19 McIntosh Road  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 29-year-old raised-ranch; eat-in kitchen, den, cathedral ceilings, h/w floors, fireplace, rear deck, 2-car garage, 1 acre; taxes $3,875, listed at $329,900, 29 weeks on market (Brokers: William Pitt; Stanton Properties)  NEW JERSEY
HOLMDEL  $230,000
75 Hawthorne Avenue  3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 8-year-old center-hall colonial; 2-car garage, patio, deck, w/w carpeting, on cul-de-sac; taxes, $3,975, listed at $249,500, 4 weeks on market (Broker: Prudential New Jersey Realty)  MAHWAH  $164,000
1074 Cambridge Court  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 5-year-old condo town house; deck, laundry room, 1-car garage, common charge $98; taxes $2,300, listed at $168,000, 2 weeks on market (Broker: Weichert Realtors)  OCEAN CITY  $162,500
13 Bass Court  2-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 10-year-old condo apartment; family room, eat-in kitchen, dining room, first-floor unit; common charge $175; taxes $2,400, listed at $182,500, 7 months on market (Broker: The Richards Agency)  PARK RIDGE  $179,900
78 Fremont Avenue  2-bedroom, 1-bath, 55-year-old Cape Cod; fireplace, h/w floors, 2-car garage, full basement, taxes $3,607, listed at $179,900, 1 week on market (Broker: Prudential Higgins Realtors)  WESTCHESTER
BRONXVILLE  $895,000
36 Summit Avenue  6-bedroom, 3-bath, 74-year-old colonial; music room, covered terrace, 2 fireplaces, computer room, darkroom, 2 maids's rooms; taxes $13,905, listed at $915,000, 2 1/2 months on market (Broker: Houlihan/Lawrence)  MAMARONECK  $231,000
231 Knollwood Avenue  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 67-year-old colonial; entry foyer, modern eat-in kitchen, den, terrace, fireplace, dining room; taxes $5,650, listed at $234,900, 8 months on market (Broker: Merritt Associates)  MOUNT VERNON  $215,000
618 South Fourth Avenue  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 40-year-old colonial; entry hall, den, in-law apartment with separate entrance, 1-car garage; taxes $5,720, listed at $225,000, 5 months on market (Broker: Lindsey))  YONKERS  $530,000
186 Boulder Trail  5-bedroom, 4-bath, 66-year-old colonial; entry hall, dining room, breakfast room, attic, 2-car garage; taxes $6,286, listed at $555,000, 17 weeks on market (Brokers: Miller; Houlihan/ Lawrence)


Greeks Help Serbs Get Oil, U.S. Asserts
American intelligence officials have determined that Greek oil companies are shipping thousands of barrels of fuel to Albania, and that most of it is smuggled into Yugoslavia in violation of international sanctions.
The volume of smuggling tripled in the first three months, despite promises by Albania to control it, intelligence reports show.
The reports have been the focus of closed-door meetings this week of the sanctions committee of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe and the European Union.


And When the Prince Awoke . . . Boy, What a Mess
The Cure  Joseph Mazzello, Brad Renfro, Annabella Sciorra, Diana Scarwid, Bruce Davison Directed by Peter Horton PG-13 95 minutes


Will It Be Kmart Sono Buoni?
The Kmart Corporation has been granted a permit to renovate the old Ronzoni factory, bringing the retail giant one step closer to building a megastore on a strip of Northern Boulevard that is fast attracting large retail outlets.
Kmart officials would not discuss details of the plan to take over the pasta plant (remembered for the slogan Ronzoni Sono Buoni; basically "Ronzoni is good"), but a spokeswoman said Kmart will build on the site if it receives approval.


Rhubarb and Savory Partners
ROSY stalks of fresh rhubarb arrive in the market to coincide with the peak of the season for California strawberries.
They remain on hand when the locally grown strawberry crop is ready.
The popular strawberry-rhubarb pie is the inevitable result.
But forgetting strawberries, there are a number of other partners for rhubarb -- pineapple, for example -- to say nothing of other uses besides pie.


Quick Trips to the Hermitage
RUSSIA has never been famous for sharing its secrets with the West.
But this spring witnessed a notable exception: the opening of "Hidden Treasures Revealed: Impressionist Masterpieces and Other Important French Paintings Preserved by the State Hermitage Museum, St. Petersburg." Both a substantial symbol of the new Russian openness and a major event in the art world, the exhibition consists of 74 paintings that were taken out of Europe by Russian forces during World War II and concealed under lock and key for 50 years.
On view through October 29, the exhibition includes Degas's "Place de la Concorde," which was presumed destroyed during the war; Renoir's "In the Garden," never before exhibited, and one of van Gogh's final paintings, "The White House at Night."
"Every day I get many letters and many phone calls about the exhibition," said Valentin I. Manturov, director, U.S.A., of the newly established Russian National Tourist Office in New York.
"People ask how to go, how to book hotels, and they have many questions about the exhibit."


When Only a Hot Dog Will Do, Just Pull Over to Rocky's
With his little mustard-yellow trailer and unimposing sign saying "Rocky's Hot Dogs," Rocky Trifari is the David of the fast-food business on Route 46 West near Little Falls.
Mr.
Trifari has successfully been battling not one but several Goliaths: McDonald's, Burger King, Wendy's and a brand-new Taco Bell.
Mr.
Trifari, who is 55 years old and has been blind since birth, has been selling hot dogs here since January 1975, and doing it memorably.
His generations of hot-dog eaters are loyal, and many customers are the children of the children to whom he handed those first hot dogs.
His own father claimed this spot, in 1953, selling fruit and vegetables to even earlier generations.


Evelyn Hunter And Cary Granat
Evelyn Marie Hunter, a daughter of Ann and Everett Hunter of Woodstock, Ill., is to be married today to Cary Evan Granat, a son of Phyllis and Harvey Granat of Great Neck, L.I.
Rabbi Mordecai Waxman is to perform the ceremony at Temple Emmanuel in Great Neck, L.I.
The bride, 29, graduated from the University of Illinois and received a law degree from Pepperdine University.
She is a legal ombudsman at the New York City Commission for the United Nations and Consular Corps.


King of the Tories
YOUNG DISRAELI 1804-1846.
By Jane Ridley.
Illustrated. 406 pp.
New York: Crown Publishers. $35.


The Cost of Living (Well)
Every year, the Moet &amp; Chandon Champagne people thoughtfully check price tags on items that rich people might need, and compare those prices with the previous year's.
They put all the items into their Moet Luxury Index, or, as they call it, the "Cost of Really Living." This index rose 4.1 percent in 1994 over 1993, as compared with the consumer price index (made up of more mudane items like milk and gasoline), which rose only 2.6 percent in the same period.
But, in all fairness, Moet should be comparing treats for the wealthy to treats for everyone else.
Below are some of the prices from the Luxury Index weighed against everyday equivalents.


Nancy Assuncao, Michael Sanchez
Nancy Amaro Assuncao, the owner of a New York public relations agency, was married yesterday to Michael Andrew Sanchez, the chairman and chief executive of Sanchez Computer Associates, banking software designers and manufacturers in Malvern, Pa.
Justice Albert Tomei of State Supreme Court in Brooklyn officiated at the Royalton Hotel in Manhattan.
The bride, 39, graduated from the University of Miami.
She is a daughter of Manuel and Maria Assuncao of Colonia, N.J.
The bride's father, now retired, owned Assuncao Brothers Inc., a former concrete construction firm in Colonia.


Heavy Metal Heroes
Maximilian I, Holy Roman Emperor from 1493 to 1519, aptly illustrated the Renaissance concern with individual consciousness when he said, "The man who makes himself no memorial in life is forgotten with the tolling of his death bell." According to Stephen K. Scher, the editor of THE CURRENCY OF FAME: Portrait Medals of the Renaissance (The Frick Collection/ Abrams, $95), the quest for immortality that marked the Renaissance led to the development of the portrait medallion.
For, as Mr.
Scher argues, these medals were considered the perfect vehicle for the sitter's aspirations of immortality.
Emperors, popes, the Medici and wealthy merchants all had their images captured in this medium.
Strangely, however, for all their beauty, the medals have wallowed in art-historical obscurity while Renaissance architecture, painting and sculpture have been studied in great detail.
"The Currency of Fame" seeks to correct this imbalance.
Mr.
Scher, a former chairman of Brown University's art department, has assembled 31 scholars to write entries on 170 medals.
The book is meticulously researched, skillfully written and lavishly illustrated, with 495 photographs, many in color.
Often the writing unlocks the psychological depths possible in these portraits; the brief biographical segments place the works in historical context, the only way these political, social and cultural statements could be fully deciphered.
Unfortunately, the book settles into a predictable pattern, the short entries giving it an encyclopedic flavor; it is, finally, destined more for research than general reading.
DOUGLAS A. SYLVA


And When the Prince Awoke . . . Boy, What a Mess
Bad Boys  Martin Lawrence, Will Smith Directed by Michael Bay R 126 minutes


[ BREACH OF ]  CONTRACT WITH  [ PART OF ]  AMERICA
One savors the discomfiture of the collectivists so exquisitely in Carter's article that one forgives his jejune legal analysis.
The promise was to bring the bills to a vote.
This the Republicans did.
In fact, they passed 9 out of the 10, failing only on term limits, where they needed a two-thirds vote, and the Democrats, having more than one-third of the House, blocked it.


Proposed Aid Cutbacks Darken Mood at Event To Help the Homeless
THE ambivalence that has usually characterized the yearly Hope for the Homeless fund-raising dinner at the Rye Town Hilton here was accompanied last Tuesday night by an undercurrent of fear.
While those who gathered to recognize the plight of the county's homeless have never been in much of a celebratory mood, concern about proposed Federal and state cutbacks cast a shadow over the 600 guests at the 10th event.
Frustration, anger and sadness mingled with pride in the progress that has been made.


Sports of The Times; Knicks Hit The Skids Right Away
WHEN Patrick Ewing -- who used to give only his name, rank and serial number -- uses the word "bickering," you know things are not all glorious with the Knicks.
Ewing volunteered precisely that word yesterday after the Knicks squandered their home-court advantage in this series with a 90-84 loss to the Cavaliers.
Pat Riley had warned his players -- and all Knicks fans -- not to become "complacent" after the 24-point dismemberment of the Cavaliers in the opening game.
That made sense.
But the Knicks were worse than complacent.
They were disoriented as they committed 26 turnovers to the Cavaliers' 24.


Mortgage Rates Nearing Lows of a Year Ago
YOU wouldn't know it from the weak housing market of the last few months, but mortgage rates have been falling steadily to their lowest level in almost a year.
For anyone thinking about buying a home, long-term loans at fixed rates look especially attractive.
The national average rate on a 30-year mortgage fell to 8.48 percent on Wednesday, from a recent peak of 9.41 percent on Dec. 16, according to HSH Associates, a mortgage research company in Butler, N.J.
It is now at its lowest point since June 10.
At current rates, the monthly payment on a standard $100,000 mortgage is $767, versus $834 at the peak.


Hollywood Gothic
FATHER OF FRANKENSTEIN By Christopher Bram. 276 pp. New York: Dutton. $19.95.


Judith A. Goldman, Philanthropist, 70
Judith A. Goldman, who was long active in Jewish cultural, philanthropic and environmental causes, died yesterday at Calvary Hospital in the Bronx.
She was 70 and lived in Manhattan and Westport, Conn.
The cause of death was cancer, family members said.


Julia E. Dean, W. E. Massey 3d
Julia Elizabeth Dean, the daughter of Judith T. Dean of New York and the late Dr.
Warren K. Dean, was married yesterday to William Everett Massey 3d, the son of Elizabeth Massey of Haddonfield, N.J., and the late William D. S. Massey.
The Rev.
J.
Barrie Shepherd performed the ceremony at the First Presbyterian Church in New York.
Mrs.
Massey, 27, is an associate producer at Focus Networks, a satellite television network for department store employees, in New York.
She graduated cum laude from New York University, where her father was the W. R. Kenan Jr. professor of Latin American history.


Before We Rush to Judgment in Bombing Case; Days of Easy Access
To the Editor:
Anthony Lewis writes (column, April 21) of the easy access he had 30 years ago to Government office buildings, but I imagine even he would be astounded by the following.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-17  VIETNAM'S BOOM TOWN  Two decades after Saigon came under the control of Vietnam's Communist North, the city has become more prosperous than at any time in its history.  1  FRENCH RIGHT UNITES  Jacques Chirac, the conservative candidate for President of France, mended fences with a former rival, Prime Minister Edouard Balladur, at a campaign rally.  3


RECORD BRIEF
Lully: 'Alceste'  Soloists; Ensemble Vocal Sagittarius; La Grande Ecurie et la Chambre du Roy conducted by Jean-Claude Malgoire.
Astree 8527; three CD's.


U.S. Enslaves Japanese, Cabinet Official Says
A Cabinet minister has bitterly rebuked the United States, saying it enslaved the Japanese people as it once enslaved Africans, but he then backtracked by saying he had meant his comments to be off the record.
The official, Transport Minister Shizuka Kamei, was expressing Japan's frustration at its predicament as the yen rises against the dollar.


Nancy L. Isen, Douglas Roberts
Nancy Louise Isen, the daughter of Alan and Sondra Isen of Penn Valley, Pa., was married there last evening to Douglas Scott Roberts, a son of Flori and Dr.
N.
Craig Roberts of Longboat Key, Fla.
Rabbi Gerald I. Wolpe performed the ceremony at Har Zion Temple.
Mrs.
Roberts and her husband graduated from the University of Pennsylvania, from which the bridegroom also received an M.B.A. degree.
The bride is the executive vice president of Loving &amp; Weintraub, a New York public relations agency.
The bridegroom is the chairman of Roberts Mitani Inc., a merchant bank in New York.


Don't Blame Unions For Supermarket Sins
To the Editor:
An April 25 Business Day article took a simplistic route to alleged differences between Northeast and Southeast supermarket chains, suggesting a major reason for the differences was the unionization of the Northeast chain, resulting in higher labor costs and less money and attention for customer comfort.


Try Something Completely Different
HOW easy it is to relax and plant the garden the same way it was done last year: In the two window boxes out front are red geraniums, draped with white sweet alyssum and some ivy to trail.
By the driveway is a wide border of marigolds.
In between the house and walk is a border of hostas and the tomato plants are set in a sunny patch along with the herbs by the kitchen door.
Fine.
This kind of arrangement is always a success and demands little effort, imaginative or otherwise.
The spring trip to the garden center is also easy -- just the same things brought home last year.


A Prince Who Is No Melancholy Dane
RALPH FIENNES UNWOUND visibly when Jonathan Kent joined him at the lunch table.
For nearly two hours, Mr.
Fiennes had been struggling to explain the ambiguities of "Hamlet" and the ambivalence of its central figure, whom he portrays in the production directed by Mr.
Kent that opens Tuesday at the Belasco Theater on Broadway.
As Mr.
Kent sat down, Mr.
Fiennes, his expression suddenly lightened, worried out loud about his self-professed lack of cogency, prompting an instant reply: "If you can be articulate about it, what's the point of acting?" Mr.
Kent said.


Q and A
Grand Canyon Rafting
Q.
We would like to take a week's boat trip on the Colorado River in the Grand Canyon.
Do you know any rafting companies that have such tours? -- Ross Stuart, Dallas


Heather A. Lindstrom, Kevin Logan
Heather Ann Lindstrom, a credit-risk manager at Deutsche Bank in New York, and Kevin Logan, the chief United States economist for the Swiss Bank Corporation in New York, are to be married today in Dobbs Ferry, N.Y.
The Rev.
Robert G. Gentile, a Unitarian minister, is to perform the ceremony at the Estherwood mansion.
The bride, 38, graduated from Wellesley College and received an M.B.A. from the University of Chicago.
She is a daughter of Vernon and Virginia Lindstrom of Omaha.
Her father retired as the manager of the J. C. Penney store there.


Man, 19, Slain in Subway
A 19-year-old man was shot and killed yesterday on a northbound  No. 1 train as it pulled into the Chambers Street station in lower Manhattan, the police said.
The man, whose identity was not immediately released by the police, was struck once in the chest at about 7:45 P.M. and was taken to St.
Vincent's Hospital, where he was declared dead at 8:25 P.M., said Officer Arek Tarih, a Police Department spokesman.


Antisocial Inducement?
To the Editor:
Home theater is virtual reality once removed: it provides the illusion that we're in a theater watching a cinematic illusion  [ "The Bijou Comes Home to Roost," April 9 ] .
This makes it an illusion of an illusion.


Neighborhoods: The 'Sacred Sites'
To the Editor:
Our neighborhood hasn't disappeared, its existence is perennially ignored  [ "The 'Sacred Sites' That Make Neighborhoods Work," March 12 ] .
Seaview Village, a unique suburban community within the city, was missing from the map of neighborhoods.
Missing also was the Madison area, one of the most affluent and beautiful communities of Brooklyn.


UNNATURAL HISTORY -- Tar Pit II: The Sequel
About 15 years ago, the Natural History Museum of Los Angeles County inadvertently created a new tar pit.
The museum briefly stored in its basement about 100 metal cans, each containing five gallons of tar and fossils from the famous La Brea Tar Pits.
Those are the sticky pools where saber-toothed tigers and other creatures were trapped in prehistory.
One of the cans leaked, creating a 20-inch-square spill that no one noticed until the cans were moved.
By then the tar had captured about 20 mice and numerous large cockroaches, and had begun to harden.
The photograph above shows skulls, bones, a tail, a bit of brick and insect parts.


There's No Such Thing as a Free Trade
IT was a nice consumer revolution while it lasted.
On May 1, 1975, the New York Stock Exchange put an explosive charge under the fusty old brokerage business by ending its 183-year-old system of fixing commission rates.
At the opening bell that morning 20 years ago, Wall Street began slashing stock-trade commissions and the discount brokerage business was born.
The investing proletariat scored big by dealing with no-frills pioneers like Muriel Siebert &amp; Company, Quick &amp; Reilly and Charles Schwab.
Leslie Quick Jr. remembers that he took out a tiny newspaper ad in 1975 trumpeting his 45 percent discount over the old, fixed rates and that "the phones rang off the hook."


Editorial Notebook; Diamonds Are a Town's Best Friend
There may be more pleasant ways to spend a balmy afternoon than playing hooky and going to opening day at Yankee Stadium, but I can't think of any of them.
After some healthy booing of politicians making pitches, the fans fell back in love with baseball when Joe DiMaggio loped onto the grass to throw out a ball, flashing the same shy, toothy smile that Red Smith described half a century ago.
DiMaggio on the field stirred dreams about his old team, with its glamorous pinstriped history stretching from Babe Ruth, Lou Gehrig, Lefty Gomez and Mickey Mantle to Don Mattingly, Paul O'Neill, Tony Fernandez and Jimmy Key.


Fund Offering More Than Fresh Air
Before last summer, she had never traveled far from her housing project in the Bronx.
In fact, she had never spent a night away from her mother.
But when 8-year-old Alanah Wade returned from two weeks in Pennsylvania's Amish country with a Fresh Air family, she was bubbling with smiles and stories: She had had corn on the cob and ice cream sundaes, picnics by day and fresh berries at night, Sunday rides in a horse-drawn buggy.


Eyes on the Prize
A PRIZE TO HONOR INVENTORS the way the Nobel Prize exalts scientists?
That's what the Massachusetts Institute of Technology thinks is needed.
And last month, with a $500,000 purse from a wealthy inventor, Jerome Lemelson, it chose its first laureate.
A prize committee led by the economist Lester Thurow scoured the nation for a candidate who would "personify American ingenuity." And what cutting-edge invention did they find to honor?
What new Edison was ushered onto the public stage?
The palm went to an automotive engineer employed by General Motors.
His chief gift to civilization: not the phone, the transistor or the Internet, but helping to develop the traction control system of the Saturn automobile.


RESULTS PLUS
HOCKEY  Islanders Fall to Ottawa  Sylvain Turgeon scored two goals last night and the host Ottawa Senators, the National Hockey League's worst team, continued a season-ending hot streak with a 4-3 victory over the Islanders.
Ottawa has only 8 victories in 46 games, but has won 3 in a row.
Scott Lachance, Travis Green and Mathieu Schneider scored for the Islanders, the league's second-worst team, which failed to beat the Senators in four meetings. (AP) SABRES 3, CANADIENS 3: Pat LaFontaine scored with 10 seconds left in the second period to lift visiting Buffalo into the playoffs with the tie.
Alexander Mogilny and Mark Astley also scored for the Sabres, who lead Montreal, their main rival for an Eastern Conference playoff spot, by 4 points.
Each team has two games remaining, and if they end the season tied in points, victories and head-to-head play, Buffalo would get the edge with a superior goal differential.
The Canadiens moved within 2 points of the Rangers for the final playoff spot. (AP) NORDIQUES 4, LIGHTNING 1: Mike Ricci had a power-play goal and an assist for host Quebec, which scored on 4 of its first 12 shots.
The Nordiques, who ended a four-game winless streak, moved 2 points ahead of Pittsburgh atop the Eastern Conference.
Quebec has two games to play, the Penguins three. (AP) RED WINGS 4, STARS 2: Host Detroit clinched the Presidents' Trophy for the league's best regular-season record.
It is the first time the Red Wings have had the league's best record since 1964-65. (AP) TENNIS  Muster Staggers On  Thomas Muster, dehydrated and barely able to stand up at the end of the match, staggered to victory yesterday to reach the final of the Monte Carlo Open against Boris Becker.
The ninth-seeded Muster held on for a 6-3, 7-6 (7-5) victory over Andrea Gaudenzi.
Becker, who is seeded second, defeated No. 4 Goran Ivanisevic, 7-6 (11-9), 3-6, 6-1. (AP) TOP-SEEDED PLAYERS IN FINAL: Top-seeded Arantxa Sanchez Vicario and No. 2 Iva Majoli of Croatia won semifinal matches at the Ford Open in Barcelona, Spain.
Sanchez Vicario, playing in her hometown, beat Amanda Coetzer, 6-3, 6-3.
Majoli beat Katarzyna Nowak, 6-3, 6-1. (AP)


Fund Offering More Than Fresh Air
Before last summer, she had never traveled far from her housing project in the Bronx.
In fact, she had never spent a night away from her mother.
But when 8-year-old Alanah Wade returned from two weeks in Pennsylvania's Amish country with a Fresh Air family, she was bubbling with smiles and stories: She had had corn on the cob and ice cream sundaes, picnics by day and fresh berries at night, Sunday rides in a horse-drawn buggy.


Retiring the Water-Guzzlers of the Toilet World
NO conservation-minded inquisitor is likely to demand that New York City's householders reveal the number of times a day they flush their toilets.
That's fortunate, because even ardent reflection may produce a blank.
But sages at the New York City Department of Environmental Protection say that there are at least four at-home flushes per person a day in the city.
That's an average of 180 million gallons a day, or about 13.5 percent of total water consumption.
The figure doesn't include flushes made in commercial and other nonresidential buildings.


April 23-29: Hide and Seek; A Mysterious Bomber Offers A Glimpse at a Motive
For nearly 17 years now, a serial bomber has been sending bombs in packages, leaving a trail of death and injuries among university professors, scientists, and corporate executives -- and frustrating the efforts of law enforcement officials to track him down. (Officials think the bomber is a man in his 40's who acts alone).
Last week, this so-called Unabom killer struck again; Gilbert B. Murray, the president of the California Forestry Association, died after opening a package addressed to his predecessor.
In several letters sent to news organizations -- one of them to The New York Times -- the serial bomber also offered a hint at his motives.


Transactions
Baseball  American League
KANSAS CITY ROYALS -- Agreed to terms with Tom Gordon, pitcher, on a one-year contract.


Who's Skewering Whom?
To the Editor:
In her review of "Beyond the Double Bind: Women and Leadership" (April 2), Rebecca Pepper Sinkler commends Kathleen Hall Jamieson for "skewering" a book that the reviewer calls "Who Killed Feminism?" Ms.
Sinkler herself skewered my book's name: it is "Who Stole Feminism?" The reader might get the impression that Ms.
Jamieson has much to say about my book, but in fact she only briefly mentions it, using half a page to make baseless criticisms I have answered elsewhere.


The Art of the Neighborhood Deal
BACK in January, when the Parks Department disclosed plans to let a high-priced dinner circus pitch its tent in a small neighborhood park, Ross Graham was not at all pleased.
Few words in a leftist's lexicon have a more odious ring than "privatization," and Ms.
Graham, who chairs a community board on the West Side, was loath to turn over a patch of public space in her park-poor district to commercial use.
But Ms.
Graham is a pragmatist, too, and figured that Community Board 4, an unpaid panel that can advise but not veto, could not count on blocking the $150-a-ticket circus, which happens to be a pet project of Parks Commissioner Henry J. Stern.


WHY SPORTS DON'T MATTER ANYMORE
It's over, guys.
I suggest a nationwide boycott of professional American athletics.
Let's take back our dignity and start again, wide-eyed and innocent.
JOHN DAY Easton, N.H.


Congressional Memo; For G.O.P. Contenders, The Song Is the Same
Which of the eight Republicans running for President promised to tear down the Federal Government, cut taxes, balance the budget, improve the nation's moral standards, crack down on crime and, of course, return leadership to the White House?
Gramm, Alexander, Specter, Buchanan, Dole, Keyes, Dornan or Lugar?
Answer: All of the above.


April 23-29: Army vs. Refugees; A New Slaughter Raises Rwanda's Death Count
Last week, in the days after Rwandan troops opened fire on a panicked crowd of Hutu refugees, the death count remained in dispute but one thing was clear: Rwanda's Government was further than ever from achieving reconciliation between the country's two major ethnic groups, the Hutu and the Tutsi.
The Government was claiming that 300 people were killed after Rwanda's army began forcibly closing down camps where as many as 300,000 Hutu had taken refuge.
The United Nations said the toll was 2,000 dead.


Owning the Name But Not the Fame
Pressed against the cramped bandstand of the Chestnut Room, the plush, woody greenhouse that serves as the nightclub at Tavern on the Green, the headliner came to the moment in the show where performers talk about their latest recordings.
"My record albums are available," said Frank Sinatra Jr., 52, who at birth received the name of one of the most famous singers ever and who, since he was a teen-ager, has pursued the nearly impossible goal of matching his father's famous voice while also ignoring it.
"They're available at the Smithsonian Institution. You can find them right between the Edsel and Walter Mondale's inaugural speech."


Ex-Rival Appears With Chirac at French Party Rally
Jacques Chirac, the Mayor of Paris, mended fences today with his fellow conservative and former rival, Prime Minister Edouard Balladur, at a rally of 20,000 people to unite the right behind his candidacy in the final round of presidential elections on May 7.
Lionel Jospin, his Socialist opponent, had hoped to do something similar on Friday night in Mont-de-Marsan in southwestern France, where 8,000 supporters came expecting to see the ailing incumbent President, Francois Mitterrand, embrace their candidate publicly.


No Headline
"The incidents have always been there; what's different is that there's been an arms race within the white supremacy movement as to who can stockpile the most weapons. Ten or 15 years ago Klansmen or white supremacists would go out and beat someone with a baseball bat. Now they'd just as soon shoot someone with an assault rifle." DANNY WELCH of the Klanwatch project.  [ 27:1. ]


Take the Train
Why take anything but the PATH train? Why even drive? JOSEPH LEVY Jackson, Mich.


Kerin E. Wolfson, Kinson B. Craft
Kerin Eileen Wolfson, the daughter of George and Mornie Wolfson of Darien, Conn., was married yesterday to Kinson Blanchard Craft, the son of Barbara Blanchard of Sea Island, Ga., and Donald Craft of Essex, Conn.
The Rev.
Dr.
James Kowalski performed the ceremony at St.
Luke's Episcopal Church in Darien.
Mrs.
Craft, 29, graduated from the University of Vermont.
Until recently she was an advertising account executive at radio station WRKO-AM in Boston.
Her father is the senior vice president of operations for the radio division at Viacom International, the media company in New York.


100 Years of Nurturing Nature
SPARKS flew; smoke filled the air.
Connecticut's forests were threatened, and a few citizens met in Simsbury to seek solutions, like legislation requiring spark arresters on steam locomotives.
At their meeting, in 1885, they formed the Connecticut Forest Association, to look after forests and other natural resources.
Their efforts went far beyond the spark arrestors, to trails and parks all over the state.


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
A LIBRARY TEA
The New Rochelle Public Library is having its First Annual CelebriTea today from 3:30 to 5 P.M.
Sponsored by the New Rochelle Public Library Foundation, the event combines hob-nobbing with celebrity guests while ingesting an assortment of hors d'oeuvres, savories, sweets, coffees and teas.
The tab is $65 a person.
Today's guest list comprises Terry Anderson, a former hostage in the Middle East and author of "Den of Lions -- Memoirs of Seven Years," published by Crown in 1993; Doris Mortman, author of "True Colors," a Crown publication in 1995, and Rupert Holmes, Tony Award-winner for the music, lyrics and book for "Edwin Drood," which also won a Tony as best musical.
All three authors will talk about their work before mixing with the visitors.


And When the Prince Awoke . . . Boy, What a Mess
Wings of Courage A feature film in Imax 3-D at the Sony Imax theater in Manhattan Craig Sheffer, Tom Hulce, Elizabeth McGovern Directed by Jean-Jacques Annaud G 40 minutes


New Quarters at Last


Rhubarb and Savory Partners
ROSY stalks of fresh rhubarb arrive in the market to coincide with the peak of the season for California strawberries.
They remain on hand when the locally grown strawberry crop is ready.
The popular strawberry-rhubarb pie is the inevitable result.
But forgetting strawberries, there are a number of other partners for rhubarb -- pineapple, for example -- to say nothing of other uses besides pie.


VENTURES: Be Still, My Art
Earthquakes can be good for business.
When the J. Paul Getty Museum's collection of art survived 1994's Northridge earthquake virtually unscathed, people started calling for the secret.
They were directed to Conservation Materials Ltd. of Sparks, Nev., makers of Quake Wax -- a sticky substance that holds art objects in place. (It's Anchor Wax in the East.) Business has since increased 350 percent, according to the company president.


Designing the Rest Stop of Dreams: On the Turnpike, Motorists Have Their Say
In their book "Looking for America on the New Jersey Turnpike," Angus Kress Gillespie and Michael Aaron Rockland sum up the beauty of the turnpike's bland rest areas: "A pit stop where one eats, eliminates, fills one's gas tank, and is gone. There aren't supposed to be any surprises, any deviations."
No deviations, that is, until now.


False Choices on Terrorism
As investigation of the Oklahoma City bombing continues, President Clinton and Congress have started a necessary but hazardous debate about revising Federal law and enforcement to combat domestic terrorism.
Already, the fine balance between preservation of domestic tranquillity and protection of civil liberties is in jeopardy.
Mr.
Clinton and many lawmakers appear far too ready to give up liberty to insure safety.


Was Nursery School Saga An Exercise in Elitism?
To the Editor:
The April 23 article in The City section, "How I Got My Child Into Nursery School," raises the question, whose city?


British Watch Trial Of Simpson
Since it began in January, the O. J. Simpson trial has been beamed here by satellite every night, providing the British with a window into a peculiarly American mix of crime, race and celebrity.
But in a country where cameras are not allowed in courtrooms, the most extraordinary thing about the Simpson trial is that it is shown on television at all.
For Tougay Hassan, a grocery clerk in north London, broadcasts of the trial are exotic and compelling.
But as much as Mr.
Hassan enjoys watching it, he said, he is also distressed by the focus on celebrity, by the chatty analysis and by what he perceives as American overplay.
Although Britain has its tabloid excesses, pretrial publicity is forbidden under British law and lawyers and judges are not allowed to discuss cases out of court.
And Mr.
Hassan said that might not be so bad.


Check Those Stats
To the Editor:
I enjoyed Larry Gelbart's essay "Peering Throught the Tube Darkly . . . "  [ April 16 ] .
However, of the 1951 miracle at Coogan's Bluff, he writes: "In the bottom of the ninth inning, with two out and two on -- and with a count of three balls and two strikes -- Bobby Thompson clinched the pennant for the Giants by hitting the improbable, miraculous home run."


Jefferson's Paris
To the Editor: "Joining Jefferson on a Paris Walk" (March 5) offers an innovative itinerary for exploring the city.
The Hotel de Salm is of special interest to me because it prompted Jefferson to tear down his partly erected Monticello I, which was a tall two-story Palladian-style villa, replacing it with what we see today.
Jefferson wrote to a friend in 1787 that while he was in Paris, "I was violently smitten with the Hotel de Salm" and went almost daily to look at it.


Lucinda Frers, John Rosso Jr.
Lucinda Frers, the operations manager of the Giorgio Armani boutique in New York, was married yesterday to John Rosso Jr., the director of broadcast operations at Westinghouse Broadcasting/Group W in New York.
The Rev.
Francis B. Creamer Jr. performed the ceremony at St.
Luke's Episcopal Church in East Hampton, L.I.
Mrs.
Rosso, 25, graduated from the State University at Stony Brook, L.I.
She is the daughter of Irene and Robert Frers of Brooklyn.
Her father retired as the director of international public relations for the International Y.M.C.A. in New York.
Her mother teaches special education at Lafayette High School in Brooklyn.


Blue Jays Take Aim On Belated Chance For 3d Straight Title
Eighteen months have passed since the Toronto Blue Jays won their second successive World Series.
Because no one won a World Series six months ago, the Blue Jays are the only team this year that can win the Series for a third consecutive time.
"Doing it twice is a remarkable achievement," Gord Ash, the Jays' general manager, said.
"Doing it a third time would be even more so."


DIARY
TAKEOVERS The Day Chrysler Fever Broke Two weeks ago, Chrysler's stock soared -- simply because one man, Kirk Kerkorian, said he wanted to buy the company.
Since then, the stock has done a tentative dance, with doubts creeping in about the deal but investors, remembering the power of Mr.
Kerkorian's 10 percent stake, not quite ready to bail out.
But last week the company lashed out at its uninvited suitor, saying it had no interest in "gambling with Chrysler's future" and brushing off Mr.
Kerkorian's request for a tripling of the dividend (which would add over $100 million to Mr. Kerkorian's annual income).
For investors, that seemed to settle it, as the stock fell $2.50 on Wednesday, close to its pre-hysteria level, before creeping up again by week's end.
THE ECONOMY  Slowing to a Steady Walk  Surprise!
Interest rates went up -- thanks to the Federal Reserve -- and people stopped buying so much stuff.
At the end of last year, Americans were still spending big, and the economy grew at a fast 5.1 percent pace -- just the type of too-frantic growth the Fed wanted to head off.
But in this year's first quarter, reality set in, wallets closed -- well, part way -- and economic growth slowed to a 2.8 percent rate, the laziest in two years.
Keeping things going were corporations that made big investments in equipment and buildings.
All this was apparently fine with the stock market, as the Dow industrials kept bumping along to new records.
MUTUAL FUNDS  Follow the Money Trail  Mutual funds are where the nation's money is, so their vital signs provide good indicators of what, in an economic sense, is going on.
If, that is, you can make sense of those vital signs.
Last week came word that cash levels in stock funds were down to 7 percent -- the lowest in well over a decade.
What's cash for?
Basically, redemptions and safety.
But with money flowing in and stocks rising, fund managers seem worried about neither.
Fund cash is often what powers the market, though, so is this thin wallet worrisome?
Not as long as new cash keeps coming -- which it certainly did recently, going into retirement accounts before the dreaded April 17.
THE WORKPLACE  Those Vanishing Benefits  Most employees already know this, of course: companies are getting stingier with benefits.
Workers are paying a bigger share of health coverage or being nudged into H.M.O.'s, and must take greater responsibility for retirement through 401(k)'s and the like.
But now it's official.
A report last week showed that benefit costs for the first quarter showed the smallest rise in eight years.
For the past year, in fact, benefit costs rose no faster than overall compensation -- again, for the first time in eight years.
The overall report "confirms that there's no inflation push from wages," said Labor Secretary Reich.
It also confirms that the days of the all-giving, kindly-uncle employer are vanishing fast.
ANTITRUST  One Microsoft, Indivisible  Soon, no doubt, there'll be a Government agency called the Microsoft Department, or at least a Microsoft Division at the Justice Department.
The giant company seems a perennial Washington topic.
Just last week Justice officials were defending Microsoft one minute against being called monopolistic and then going to court to block its acquisition of Intuit, maker of Quicken personal-finance software, saying this dominance could lead to higher prices and fewer choices for consumers.
No inconsistency, the agency said -- different legal issues.
And there's no truth, by the way, to rumors that Microsoft is planning to acquire the Justice Department.
Just the mint.
BANKING  A Human Teller?
Naw!
In the old days, we'll tell our grandchildren (by e-mail, of course), you actually saw people at bank windows, talked to human beings on the phone, not multiple-choice recordings.
They'll smile an indulgent smile, then log on to their sixth-grade math class.
It's true, though.
Until late April of '95, you could walk into any bank and hand a teller a deposit.
But then First Chicago said you had to pay $3 for that honor (unless you had $2,500 stagnating in a checking account) if you could have used an A.T.M. instead.
A teller transaction, you see, costs 6 to 12 times what an A.T.M. transaction does, and they had to watch all those pennies.
Even though, in yet older days, the world somehow muddled through with -- brace yourselves -- no A.T.M.'s at all.
ORANGE COUNTY  Mr.
Citron Takes His Lumps  "The dog ate my homework" may work for a young scholar, but for grown-ups, "the broker ate my lunch" goes only so far.
When you're managing a $7.4 billion government fund, as Robert Citron was in Orange County, you're ultimately responsible.
For a while, Mr.
Citron insisted he was just a blushing victim when the county lost $1.7 billion, blaming Merrill Lynch for leading him astray, but last week that excuse crumbled when he pleaded guilty to felonies like misappropriating funds and misleading investors.
He could get up to 14 years in prison.
In other words, derivatives don't make money vanish; people do.
INNER CITY  Bodegas vs.
Pathmark  You can't win.
In some people's view, the inner city perpetuates poverty partly because a lack of fair-priced supermarkets forces residents to shop at high-priced bodegas.
But when a plan emerged for a Pathmark in East Harlem, opponents cried out that the store would hurt bodega owners.
The plan seemed doomed right up to the last minute, but then a City Councilman switched sides and the Manhattan Borough Board approved it, the lure of low prices and added jobs apparently winning the day.
TECHNOLOGY  High-Tech Coffee Break  Sometimes we seem to be rushing headlong into a world with all the high-tech stuff jumbled together -- television shows coming out of phones, phone calls coming out of computers, information coming from just about anywhere.
But occasionally the world pauses on this mad dash, as when Bell Atlantic decided last week to rethink its idea of offering video services to three million phone customers.
Even though the company was well along in the F.C.C. approval process, it said its executives needed to "to catch our breath." So does this point, as some suggested, to mounting confusion in this whole pile-up of technologies?
Or does Bell Atlantic just want, as it says, to hold out for better fiber-optic technology?
Stay, uh, tuned.
AFFIRMATIVE ACTION  And the Sons Did Homework  Thursday was Take Our Daughters to Work Day, a jubilant little affirmative-action idea cooked up a few years ago by the Ms.
Foundation.
Nationwide, perhaps six million girls played hooky to get a glimpse of the way the adult world works -- or at least the way it works with six million rosy little souls playing hopscotch in the staid hallways of commerce.
But "affirmative action" is a dirty word these days -- O.K., two words -- so the glee is now tempered with dissension.
Why were boys left out?
They get precious little chance to watch Dad -- and Mom -- work.
Not to mention that if they saw women doing all sorts of jobs, a lesson might sink in.
Then again, why shouldn't girls hog the spotlight for a day?
Then again . . . oh, who knows.


Where Hope's Eternal and Jackpots Are Few
"BE HERE by 8:45 sharp," Mary Fasano had warned me when I bought my $18 ticket.
"They wait for nobody."
I'm there by 8:30, and the bus is full of people in late middle-age and beyond -- the cannon fodder of Atlantic City's slot-machine-based casino economy.
Mrs.
Fasano waves me on.
She is a cheerful woman who owns a candy store in Nutley.
She also runs a monthly bus trip to Trump Castle.


Woman of a Certain Age, A Not Uncertain Past
THERE'S no reason why one shouldn't have a perfectly entertaining time sitting through "The Lady and the Clarinet," produced by Stamford Theater Works.
But then there is no reason why one should.
Michael Cristofer's survey of the active sex life of a lady -- his word -- in her middle years is a 90-minute glossy with a gimmick.


Vanessa L. Kay, Laurent Bensimon
Vanessa L. Kay, a daughter of Robert and Enid Kay of New York, and Laurent Bensimon, a son of Andre and Michele Bensimon of Paris, are to be married today.
Rabbi David M. Posner is to officiate at the Hotel Plaza Athenee in New York.
The bride, 26, was until recently an assistant vice president at Citibank in Paris and is now studying for an M.B.A. at the European Institute of Business Administration in Fontainebleau, France.
She graduated magna cum laude from Cornell University.
Her father is a senior partner in the New York law firm of Kay Collyer &amp; Boose.


HMO Or No?
THE VOICE on the home phone was daughter Amy's.
"Dad," she said, "I'm sitting here with a book with a list of doctors: Which one do I choose?"
Her father is Dr.
Stanley S. Bergen Jr., president of the University of Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey.
But despite his long years of experience and exalted position in New Jersey medicine, he could not be of great help to his daughter.
He knew a few of the doctors on the list provided by her new health maintenance organization, her H.M.O., but not well enough to recommend one.
"It's a strange way to have to pick a doctor, isn't it?" he reflected.


Expulsion Seen as Sign Of New Mood
Dozens of trophies collected during seven years in the Scotch Plains-Fanwood schools clog the dresser top and most every surface in Jason McLean's bedroom -- a Most Valuable Player statue from his freshman football team, a plaque honoring his four years as a varsity wrestler.
The room is a shrine to what should be the end of a charmed high school career -- yearbooks the 17-year-old worked on, mementos from two years as class president, his two-toned black and white shoes from the junior prom.


And When the Prince Awoke . . . Boy, What a Mess
Top Dog  Chuck Norris, Reno the dog Directed by Aaron Norris PG-13 90 minutes


On Sunday; Unwelcome Memories Wake Dead
THE old bombardier was defying time and falling earthward once more.
Amid a placid drive in the American countryside last year, the man's memory, uninvited, suddenly reeled back 50 years in perfect detail to the treetops of Hungary, rushing up at him.
His B-24 was aflame and belly-landing again in a field just like the one stretching eerily beyond the car's windshield.
The 74-year-old veteran became the young man falling, shot once more from the skies, with the walls of time obliterated as he gripped the steering wheel in reliving the warplane's crash.


Wendy L. Siegel, Eric D. Siskind
Wendy Leigh Siegel, a daughter of Barry and Laurie Siegel of West Orange, N.J., was married last evening to Eric David Siskind, a son of Laura Taylor of Las Vegas, Nev., and the late Mervyn A. Siskind.
Rabbi Barry Friedman performed the ceremony at the Cedar Hill Country Club in Livingston, N.J.
Mrs.
Siskind, 24, graduated from Syracuse University.
She is a marketing analyst at Bergdorf Goodman, the department store in New York.
Her father is the senior vice president and director of marketing at Sudler &amp; Hennessey, a pharmaceuticals advertising agency in New York.
Her mother is a registered nurse in Livingston.


In Amtrak Cutbacks, Even Legends Suffer
Amtrak is fulfilling the words of Steve Goodman's song "The City of New Orleans": "This train's got the disappearing railroad blues." On June 11, the City of New Orleans train will no longer make a daily trip between Chicago and New Orleans, but will start skipping Tuesdays and Wednesdays.
Then, beginning Sept. 10, the Broadway Limited, the overnight express between New York and Chicago, will operate only between New York and Pittsburgh; passengers traveling between Chicago and Pittsburgh will use the Capitol Limited.
The California Zephyr between Salt Lake City and Oakland, Calif., will not run on Mondays, Wednesdays and Fridays beginning June 11.
What's left of the Hiawatha, now running just between Chicago and Milwaukee, a fragment of the former Chicago-Minneapolis trip, now operates four times a day, instead of seven.
BETSY WADE


First-Name Basis, Upper West Side
CHAZ &amp; WILSON GRILL  ++ (212) 769-0100; 201 West 79th Street; $; all major credit cards
This open, airy bar and grill is a popular neighborhood spot that is reliable for its tasty fare, reasonable prices and friendly service.
Monday and Tuesday nights are a real bargain with every main course offered at $9.95.
To begin, there is warm bread salad with plum tomatoes, black olives, marinated artichokes and goat cheese on a bed of arugula; Buffalo wings with blue cheese sauce; fried calamari with a spicy cocktail sauce, or crab cakes with fresh tartar sauce.
Entrees to consider include the sirloin steak; shepherd's pie made with chicken and topped with Parmesan potatoes, and traditional meatloaf with its mashed potatoes and mushroom gravy.
Other options are grilled red snapper in a mustard crust and garnished with potatoes and sauteed spinach with garlic, and grilled salmon with fresh sweet corn. ($25 and Under: 4/7/95)  JERRY'S UPTOWN ++  (212) 501-7500; 302 Columbus Avenue, at 74th Street; $; American Express, Mastercard, Visa
This spinoff of Jerry's down in SoHo caught on fast with the trendy set.
The setting uptown includes a bleached wood floor, high pressed-tin ceiling, mirrored walls, black Formica tables and red leatherette chairs.
The food is pleasing and filling and includes starters of soft polenta topped with wild mushrooms and shavings of Parmesan; smoked trout with an apple-horseradish cream; and an antipasto plate combining grilled radicchio and endive, mozzarella, roasted peppers and onions.
Among the most popular entrees are seared salmon with a lemon-beet butter, roasted beets and mashed potatoes; grilled sirloin with Roquefort butter and french fries; pot roast with horseradish mashed potatoes; roast chicken with garlic and a puree of root vegetables; and orecchiette tossed with hot sausage, garlic, white beans and broccoli rabe. ($25 and Under: 7/22/94)  JOSIE'S ++  (212) 769-1212; 300 Amsterdam Avenue, at 74th Street; $; all major credit cards
The cooking centers around organically grown ingredients at this unpretentious little spot, and all food is prepared dairy free.
Current appetizers include Manhattan clam chowder; grilled gingered calamari with a red-pepper-pineapple salsa; sweet potato and roasted butternut squash soup with toasted pumpkin seeds; steamed potato dumplings on a truffle and tomato coulis, and seared Thai-style shrimp with peanut-mint-coated udon noodles.
This sprawling, theatrical and clamorous branch of the Dallas-based Sfuzzi chain offers engaging trattoria-style fare.
Among current starters are grilled shrimp and white bean salad with a sun-dried tomato pesto; lump crab meat and vegetable salad seasoned with a lemon-chive dressing; grilled portobello mushrooms and onions drizzled with a tomato vinaigrette, and Caesar salad topped with focaccia croutons.
Pastas and main courses include spaghetti combined with sun-dried tomatoes, broccoli rabe, garlic and Romano cheese; fusilli with tomato, roast eggplant, arugula and mozzarella; roast chicken with lemon sauce, peppers and potatoes; grilled salmon with a citrus-basil sauce, green beans and roasted potatoes, and veal piccata with a white wine sauce and served with fettucine and broccoli rabe. (Review: 4/16/93)  SHUN LEE **  (212) 595-8895; 43 West 65th Street; $$$; all major credit cards
A favorite among Lincoln Center patrons, this Chinese restaurant serves spirited food in a dramatic setting of red-eyed dragons and frolicking papier-mache monkeys.
Among the best appetizers are the assorted steamed and fried dumplings; sweet prawns in black bean sauce; barbecued spare ribs in a light honey glaze, and the cool hacked chicken in a zesty sesame sauce.
Among entrees, the orange beef has a pleasant bittersweet flavor; dry shredded crispy beef comes on sweet and crunchy but is a real scorcher, as are Sichuan scallops in a sauce of garlic, ginger, scallions and hot pepper.
Other dishes include the superior Peking duck; roast pork with scallions in hoisin sauce, and lemon chicken. (Review: 5/4/ 90; revisited: 4/20/95)  TACO MADRE ++  (212) 874-0556; 1991 Broadway, near 67th Street; $; Transmedia
This inexpensive Mexican restaurant serves deliciously fresh and flavorful food to eat in or take out.
The dining area with white plastic chairs and tables is set in the public atrium formerly occupied by Cafe Bel Canto.
Soft tacos, burritos and other filled tortillas make up the menu.
Best are the tacos, fresh flour tortillas with fillings like marinated pork, grilled chicken, grilled beef and black beans.
Other good choices are the tortas, Mexican sandwiches like chorizo and fried egg on a light roll, with refried beans, onions and tomatoes, and sincronizadas, sandwiches made of two flour tortillas held together with melted cheese and stuffed with ingredients like grilled chicken, beef in a spicy chili sauce or black beans and onions. ($25 and Under: 6/24/94)  VINCE AND EDDIE'S *  (212) 721-0068; 70 West 68th Street; $$; all major credit cards
Done in a pastel-toned farmhouse motif and decorated with handsome antiques, this cozy establishment offers pleasing homey fare and caters mostly to a neighborhood clientele.
A good way to begin might be with warm goat cheese over mixed greens; gravlax on a bed of arugula with mustard dill sauce; a salad of endive sprinkled with Roquefort and walnuts, or the barley and lamb soup.
Main courses include seafood risotto with a rich lobster jus; sauteed calf's liver with grilled onions and bacon; grilled tuna in a coriander crust and served with fried sweet potatoes; roast chicken with lentils and wilted spinach, and braised lamb shank with cherry sauce and a puree of turnips. (Review: 10/21/90) Institution  CAFE DES ARTISTES *** (212) 877-3500; 1 West 67th Street; $$$; all major credit cards
The romantic Old World setting and compelling bistro cooking of this Manhattan institution remain a lure.
Handsome wood walls, bursts of fresh flowers and those famous murals add to the charm.
One might start with brandade de morue, a gratine of potato and cod puree with garlic; seafood gazpacho, or fresh-steamed asparagus vinaigrette.
Some of the best entrees are herb-roasted chicken with mashed potatoes; osso buco with polenta and turkish apricots, and roasted rack of lamb in a basil crust. (Review: 4/6/90; article: 1/17/92) Summaries of reviews use the star system; others are culled from articles (indicated by +), the $25 and Under column (++) and Diner's Journal (


Ideas &amp; Trends; How the Other Half Defies Its Image
"WHERE we gonna go?" "How we gonna get there?" "What we gonna do?" "Who we gonna fight?" "If we fight, what we gotta whip?"
This was the caption Dorothea Lange wrote to go with her photograph of five displaced tenant farmers, looking dejected but calm in front of a house in Hardeman County, Tex., in 1937.
But it could just as well have been the caption for Joseph Rodriguez's 1993 picture of four gang members in East Los Angeles, posturing defiantly for the camera -- one with a beer can, one with a knife and two with guns (one of which was pointed directly at the photographer).
Of course, the words would have a completely different meaning.


Waterbury Speedway


Burwell Espy, Paul Schorr 4th
Mary Burwell Espy, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
John Wilson Espy of New York, was married yesterday in New York to Paul Carl Schorr 4th, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Schorr 3d of Lincoln, Neb.
The Rev.
Dr.
Mark S. Anschutz performed the ceremony at St.
James' Episcopal Church.
Mrs.
Schorr, 25, is known as Burwell.
She is an assistant in the fashion merchandising department of Mademoiselle magazine in New York.
She graduated from Vanderbilt University.
Her father is a clinical professor of ophthalmology at the College of Physicians and Surgeons of Columbia University in New York.
He is also an attending ophthalmologist at the Harkness Eye Institute at Presbyterian Hospital in New York, where he is a member of the board of surgeons and the board of advisers.
Her mother, Mary Fowlkes Espy, is a trustee at Presbyterian Hospital and at the Spence-Chapin Services to Families, both in New York.


Westchester Chorale Marking 30th Anniversary
ANOTHER anniversary season, the 30th for the Westchester Chorale, concludes next Saturday at 8 P.M. at Concordia College in Bronxville.
Daniel Paget, celebrating his 10th year as music director, has chosen to repeat Orff's "Carmina Burana," a work he conducted during his first year at the helm, and he has invited back his original soprano soloist, Lauren Flanigan -- then a talented newcomer, now a star of the Metropolitan Opera.
Complementing that score is the "Zigeunerlieder" by Brahms.
The numbers to call for tickets are 725-7507 or 969-5786.
Also next Saturday at 8 P.M., an era ends when the Pleasantville Cantata Singers give their spring concert at Pleasantville High School.
The event not only concludes the choir's 40th anniversary season but also serves as a farewell to the founding director, Ludwig Sheffield, who in 1955 started to work with a small group of singers who wished to read through Bach arias.


Felice N. Glaser, Barry Schanzer
Dr.
Felice Naomi Glaser, a resident in pediatrics at Columbia-Presbyterian Medical Center in New York, is to be married today to Dr.
Barry Mark Schanzer, a chief resident in ophthalmology at Kings County Hospital in Brooklyn.
Rabbi Yaakov Luban is to perform the ceremony at the Hilton Tower Center in East Brunswick, N.J.
The bride graduated from Columbia University and received her medical degree from the Albert Einstein College of Medicine.
She is a daughter of Edith and Dr.
Stephen Glaser of Riverdale, the Bronx.
The bride's father is a pediatrician in Riverdale and an assistant clinical professor of pediatrics at the Columbia University College of Physicians and Surgeons in Manhattan.
Her mother is the law clerk to Acting Justice Edward M. Davidowitz of the State Supreme Court in the Bronx.


A Rude Awakening Gives Knicks Reason to Worry
The Cleveland Cavaliers proved something to the Knicks, and to everyone who had written them off.
The Knicks failed to execute during key moments, lost their poise at times and put themselves in a precarious playoff position.
Recovering from Thursday's embarrassing 24-point loss in Game 1, the Cavaliers stunned the Knicks, 90-84, yesterday afternoon at Madison Square Garden.


Celia Gramkow And John Riggio
Celia M. Gramkow, a daughter of Nancy and Raymond Gramkow of River Edge, N.J., was married on Thursday to John Riggio, a son of Gilda and Jack Riggio of Southampton, L.I.
Judge Luis V. Rosario of the Superior Court in Bayamon, P.R., performed the ceremony on Dorado Beach in Puerto Rico.
Mrs.
Riggio, 34, is the marketing director of Gucci America in Secaucus, N.J.
She graduated from Douglass College.
Her father is the founding partner in Gramkow &amp; Carnevale, an accounting firm in Oradell, N.J.


Strings Entwined


Army of Adjuncts Seeks to Organize on State College Campuses
They call themselves "gypsy scholars," scurrying from campus to campus, often in a single day.
Deprived of office space, they grade papers in parking lots and hold office hours in noisy snack bars.
Although many carry full college teaching loads, they seldom earn more than $12,000 a year.
And now these instructors -- adjuncts, or part-time faculty members, at New Jersey's state colleges -- say they are fed up.


Michigan's New Tactic Just Delays Inevitable
In a track meet with as much talent as there was here this week for the Penn Relays, the good runners rise to the occasion.
That happened today with high-level racing by Graham Hood of Arkansas, Tosha Woodward of Villanova and a controversial 28-year-old Zimbabwean, Savieri Ngidhi of Abilene Christian.
This was the last day of the 101st annual version of America's fabled track and field carnival.
The sunny, 68-degree afternoon attracted a record crowd of 46,810 to Franklin Field.


Rosemary Simari And Bruce Harris
Rosemary Patricia Simari, the director of special market sales at Capital Cities/ABC Video Publishing in Stamford, Conn., was married in New York yesterday to Bruce S. Harris, the president of sales and marketing for the Random House Trade Publishing Group in New York.
The Rev.
James Covington, a Unitarian minister, performed the ceremony at the Loeb Boathouse in Central Park.


CLINTON SEEKS WAY TO RETAIN GUN BAN IN SCHOOL ZONES
President Clinton said today that he was "terribly disappointed" by the Supreme Court ruling this week overturning the Federal ban on gun possession within 1,000 feet of schools.
The President ordered Attorney General Janet Reno to recommend ways to get around the decision, perhaps by linking Federal education aid to states' enforcement of such bans.
"This Supreme Court decision could condemn more of our children to going to schools where there are guns," Mr.
Clinton said in his weekly radio address, in an unusually pointed Presidential comment on a Court ruling.
"And our job is to help our children learn everything they need to get ahead in safety, not to send them to school and put them in harm's way.


April 23-29; Dad, Was That a Strike?


Foreign Aid: Under Seige in the Budget Wars
Foreign aid is one of the least understood -- and least loved -- parts of the Federal budget.
Case in point: 41 percent of Americans said in a recent poll that foreign aid was the largest single item in the budget, even though it represents just 1 percent.
In their search for budget cuts that will generate the least protest, the new Republican majority in Congress has made foreign assistance a prime target.
Treating it as a distasteful form of welfare for foreigners, many Republican leaders are talking of chopping the $15 billion aid budget by 25 percent or more.


That Cuomo Wit
It is not unusual, of course, for American politicians to weave folklore out of the threads of their personal heritage.
But rarely has any leader been as effective at that particular craft of image-making than former Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo when recounting the wit and wisdom of his mother, Immaculata Cuomo.
Mrs.
Cuomo died at age 92 last Sunday, leaving an anthology of anecdotes that gave uncommon life and humor to her youngest son's speeches.
His stories about her, usually told with a thick Italian accent, were always intended to amuse.
But they also had a deeper purpose.


Gwendolyn Noto, Sean McCormack
Gwendolyn Louise Noto, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Lucio A. Noto of McLean, Va., was married yesterday to Sean Gerard McCormack, a son of Genevieve McCormack of Armonk, N.Y., and the late Edwin McCormack.
The Rev.
Stanley O'Konsky performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at St.
Patrick's Church in Bedford, N.Y.
Mrs.
McCormack, 27, graduated from the Parsons School of Design.
She is a graphics designer for the Conair Corporation, the health and beauty aids company, in Stamford, Conn.
Her father is the chairman and chief executive of the Mobil Corporation in Fairfax, Va.


Way More Than 2 Cents' Worth
IN the five years that Michael Harrison, editor and publisher of Talkers Magazine, has tracked the most frequently discussed issues on talk radio, no event has dominated the airwaves so thoroughly as the Oklahoma City bombing did last week.
The bombing and related topics -- militias, Waco, civil liberties, radio hate talk, etc. -- took the top nine spots of his weekly "Talkers Ten" list, pushing the year's long-running No. 1 issue, the O.J.
Simpson trial, to last.
Here is a sampling of comments collected around the country by Mr.
Harrison's network of listeners and by The New York Times.
JOHN TIERNEY


Sea Change at the Seaport


The Mind of The Assassin
OSWALD'S TALE An American Mystery.
By Norman Mailer. 828 pp.
New York: Random House. $30.


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
Ghosts of Buses Past
GRUMMAN buses have come home to die.
In a field in Medford they stand lined up alongside their GMC counterparts.
It's like a Pinelawn for passenger vehicles.
With much fanfare 851 Grumman Flxibles headed off to New York City in the early 1980's.
But there were problems that led to lawsuits and jokes on late-night television.
Last year, when New York City transit officials decided to discard approximately 300 old GMC buses as well as about 20 old Grummans, the Gershow Recycling Corporation of Medford put in a bid.
"We figured we could recycle them," Kevin Gershowitz of the company said.
As scrap metal.


Murdoch Finances New Forum for Right
A group of prominent conservative writers and strategists is starting a weekly national magazine on politics and policy that will be financed by Rupert Murdoch, the global media executive.
William Kristol, an influential Republican strategist who was chief of staff to Vice President Dan Quayle, will be the editor and publisher of the Washington-based magazine, to be called The Standard.


This Rookie Lineman Won't Be Hard to Spot
You will hear about this man time and time again.
His name is Scott Gragg.
You will hear about him because he is a very unusual person.
Some people are odd because of what they do, or how they act.
Scott Gragg is odd because he is so big.
His nickname is Lurch, and he didn't get it because he is 5 feet 2 inches.
The first thing you notice about him is that when you shake hands, his hand encompasses yours.
His fingers wrap around your hand and go up past your wrist.
The hand is swallowed.
Engulfed.
He wears a size 16 shoe and a size 16 ring finger.
His license plate says "LURCH."


La Guardia Creates Limousine Greeting Site
Travelers arriving at one of La Guardia Airport's terminals will not have to squeeze through the usual gantlet of sign-waving limousine drivers or risk a ride with a fare-gouging gypsy-cab driver under an experimental plan that takes effect tomorrow.
The hope is that the 60-day experiment will reduce the illegal solicitations that have long plagued the city's airport, officials of the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey said yesterday.
Other than yellow cabdrivers, who must wait in designated lines, state law forbids drivers at the airports to pick up passengers who have not made previous arrangements.


The Gorton-Hatfield Forest Giveaway
If two Northwest senators have their way, one the biggest timber bonanzas ever could be about to begin, no matter how severe and lasting the damage to public resources.
This month, the Senate passed a bill, introduced by Senators Slade Gorton of Washington and Mark Hatfield of Oregon, that would allow unlimited clear-cutting of publicly owned forests all over the country -- including the last remnants of old-growth forests -- under the guise of "salvage" logging.


Miss Fortenbaugh and Mr. Alemany
Cristina Carlson Fortenbaugh, the daughter of Janice C. Oresman of New York and Samuel Byrod Fortenbaugh 3d of Greenwich, Conn., was married yesterday to Joshua Costen Alemany, a son of Louanne B. Alemany of West Brookfield, Mass., and the late James C. Alemany.
The Rev.
Rebecca Parkhill, a Unitarian Universalist minister, performed the ceremony at the Century Association in New York.
Mrs.
Alemany is a dancer and singer in New York.
She and her husband graduated from Brown University.
Her father is the managing partner of Morgan, Lewis &amp; Bockius, a New York law firm.
Her mother is a private art consultant in New York.


Next Manhattan Board Meetings
DISTRICT 1 Battery Park, TriBeCa.
Next meeting May 17, 5:30 P.M.; Terrace Lounge, 380 Rector Place; (212) 442-5050.
Agenda: T.B.A.
DISTRICT 2 SoHo, Little Italy, West Village, Greenwich Village, parts of Chinatown.
Next meeting May 2, 7 P.M.; Manhattan Developmental Center, 75 Morton Street;  (212) 979-2272.
Agenda: Traffic and transportation


Umpires Stand Alone In Labor Struggle
To the Sports Editor:
Disappointment has now set in for those of us who were very supportive of the position held by the players union and its membership during the recent baseball strike.
The same disappointment holds for Pete Angelos of Baltimore, who broke ranks with the owners and stated his refusal to field a team if scab players were used anywhere.


Poll Finds American Support for Peacekeeping by U.N.
As Congress considers making significant cuts in contributions to United Nations peacekeeping, the findings of a new study show that Americans may not only be supportive of such operations but are also willing to see missions become more aggressive, even when Americans are involved.
The study also found that about 80 percent of those questioned believed that the United Nations had the responsibility to intervene in conflicts marked by genocide.
But Americans in the poll and in group discussions indicated that they knew little about the extent and cost of United States participation in peacekeeping.


'No. 1 Trouble Spot': A Co-op
The five-floor walkup at 406 West 46th became a cooperative 50 years ago, giving its residents pride of ownership and an investment in the future.
But today the co-ops are virtually worthless, and no one living there has anything to celebrate.
Blood has been smeared on the walls, say the residents.
Drug addicts and prostitutes trickle in and out.
The halls have been littered with crack vials, used condoms, discarded tampons and human excrement.


Maureen Sherry and Steven Klinsky
STEVEN KLINSKY met Maureen Sherry on a rainy night six years ago.
He was riding down Second Avenue in a cab and saw her walking along the sidewalk, crying as openly as if she were alone at home with the shades pulled and the answering machine on.
"She's very attractive and she was crying, and it was a strange, misty evening and I said to the driver, 'Stop the cab here,' " recalled Mr.
Klinsky, now 38 and a general partner at Forstmann Little &amp; Company, the New York investment firm.
"I was in a melancholy mood, and to see this woman walking up the street triggered something in me. So I ran after her and tapped her on the shoulder and introduced myself."


SUNDAY, APRIL 30, 1995
Price per cup at Papa's Deli on Amsterdam Avenue, 55 cents. -- A typical American coffee drinker consumes 1.87 6-ounce cups each day, but 10 percent of Americans drink 10 or more cups a day. -- The Food and Drug Administration reports no serious health risks from drinking coffee in moderation (three cups a day).


Whitman, in California, Fields the Vice-Presidency Question
There is an old saying in politics that nobody runs for Vice President.
So just what was it that Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman of New Jersey was doing this week for three long, hard days as she worked the speech and news-conference circuit of vote-rich Southern California?
The Governor denied at every stop that she was running after a spot on the 1996 Republican ticket.


Tales Tall and Tales True, Family-Style
IT'S storytelling time at the Crossroads Theater Company.
But not just that, though the splendid way Ossie Davis, Ruby Dee and Guy Davis tell tales, the tall and the true, is the heady stuff of an evening's abundance.
There is more.


Was Nursery School Saga An Exercise in Elitism?
To the Editor:
How deeply offensive is the unbridled elitism of the nursery school article!
Yet it also rendered me relieved and grateful once again to be an iconoclastic queer who will never have to subject himself or his issue to such unseemly status seeking.


The Shakespearean Sprint
TWO shadowy figures wait in the dim blue backstage light of the Westside Theater, crouched in an area no larger than a tiny closet.
Their heads are human hatracks; their arms bowed with costumes and props.
Their teeth grip flashlights.
An actor, Christopher Duva, dressed as Juliet (yes, Juliet) in "Romeo and Juliet," races backstage to sounds of laughter and applause.
In a blur of motion he divests himself of gown and black wig and snatches a hat from the head of one of the dressers.
In eight seconds he's back on stage, having changed from Juliet to the fiery but luckless nobleman Tybalt.
Seconds later, he returns backstage, to louder laughter and applause; he dons black wig and gown and changes from Tybalt back to Juliet before running to confront the audience once more.
Elapsed time for the change?
Thirteen seconds.


[ BREACH OF ]  CONTRACT WITH  [ PART OF ]  AMERICA
I read the Contract With America, and I liked it precisely because it calls only for a prompt vote on a list of ideas, some of which I think are bad.
I want legislators to take votes and move on.
Let Congress commit to vote promptly on a range of other things important to our country.
MARK GLENNON Chicago


Daniela E. Klare, Stephen A. Elliott
Daniela Ellen Klare, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Frank V. Klare of Tokyo, was married yesterday to Stephen Andrew Elliott, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
A.
Wright Elliott of Bronxville, N.Y.
The Rev.
P.
C.
Enniss performed the ceremony at the Chevy Chase Presbyterian Church in Washington.
Mrs.
Elliott, 29, is an associate at Storch Amini &amp; Munves, a law firm in New York.
She graduated from Williams College and received her law degree from Rutgers University.
Her father is a vice president and general manager of Radisson Hotels International in Tokyo.


NEW YORKERS &amp; CO.
Eat the Meal, Read the Book Anthony Gaskin is a private chef whose great-great grandfather was a slave.
William Rand is a Lower East Side artist and a self-described "stone-cold Yankee." The two are collaborating on a cookbook on Civil War-era cuisine, featuring Mr.
Gaskin's recipes and Mr.
Rand's illustrations.


Hot Ice
For fireworks in July, the cool sheen of iridescence.


Fashion Victims
MODEL The Ugly Business of Beautiful Women.
By Michael Gross.
Illustrated. 524 pp.
New York: William Morrow &amp; Company. $25.


Bowling Like It Ought to Be
FOR one summer, when I was a 15-year-old pinsetter, the sharp clacking explosion of flying pins filled my nights.
Unseen by the bowlers, except for my hands setting pins four at a time, I worked two lanes, hopping over a padded divider that was intended to deflect hurtling pins -- but didn't always do so.
Bruises and an aching back were worth the $8 to $10, including tips, that could be picked up on a busy Saturday night.
There were occasions later in life when bowling served as an inexpensive diversion, on college dates or introducing a child to the bright lights of a bowling alley and the sight of a shiny black ball spinning down a long laminated path to destroy the orderly white wedge at the other end.


Caryl Ciabattoni, F. H. Dyckman 3d
Caryl Mary Ciabattoni, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Louis J. Ciabattoni of Chappaqua, N.Y., and Francis Hamilton Dyckman 3d, the son of Mrs.
Dyckman Jr. of Skillman, N.J., and the late Mr.
Dyckman, were married yesterday in Lawrenceville, N.J.
The Rev.
Patrick Connor, a Roman Catholic priest, officiated in the Edith Memorial Chapel of the Lawrenceville School.
The Rev.
Richard Downes, an Episcopal minister, took part in the ceremony.
Mrs.
Dyckman graduated from the University of Pennsylvania.
She is a senior producer of computer software for the Voyager Company, a multimedia publishing company in New York.
Her father is the team director of computer system support at the National Broadcasting Company in New York.
Her mother, Therese Ciabattoni, is an academic counselor at Westchester Community College in Valhalla, N.Y.


Immigration


Late to Work? Let us Know!
You were at the Throgs Neck Bridge, and your daughter decided she really didn't want to go to Take Your Daughter to Work Day?
I see.
The Times seeks readers' tales of excuses for arriving at work late.
Send your story to On the Job, Money and Business, The New York Times, 229 West 43d Street, New York, N.Y. 10036.
Or by E-mail to onthejob@nytimes.com.
Include your phone number.
All submissions become the property of The Times and may be republished in any medium.


Loss to Lakers Reminds Sonics of a Dark Past
A psychologist would suggest the Seattle SuperSonics need some time to themselves in a dark room -- but they already tried that today.
They trailed the Los Angeles Lakers by 8 points with four precarious minutes remaining when their home away from home -- the Tacoma Dome -- went pitch black.
Lightning had caused a power outage, and although the arena's floodlights were restored in 23 minutes, the Sonics' collective shooting eye was beyond repair.


I Once Admired Hitler
It is half a century today since the suicide of Adolf Hitler, a man I once ardently admired.
Among the memories triggered by this anniversary, one stands out most vividly: the moment when I first began to distrust the Fuhrer.


Jefferson's Paris
To the Editor: Your readers may be interested to learn that a piece of Jefferson's Paris has come to America, specifically to Monticello, in Charlottesville, Va.
Two years ago, the Gilder Lehrman Collection, which focuses on rare Presidential papers, acquired the bust of Jefferson that Jean-Antoine Houdon kept in his Paris atelier.
The bust has been lent to Monticello, where visitors may now see it.


Annenberg School Grants Raise Hopes, and Questions on Extent of Change
It seemed like a dream a year and a half ago when the philanthropist Walter Annenberg came to the White House to announce his $500 million gift to public education, the largest in the nation's history and one designed to generate even more money by provisions requiring matching grants from other donors.
But there are no simple dreams in American education, and the Annenberg money may say as much about the problems of the nation's schools as it does about the solutions.


Waterways Give Up Grim Telltale Signs of Spring
To those who patrol the waterways in this city of rivers, bridges and mobsters, the arrival of spring foretells a phenomenon that is as unpleasant as it is inevitable: floating bodies.
Bodies appear in the waterways year round, but harbor officials estimate that as many as half of those recovered annually are found in April and May.
At this time of year, the water warms to 38 degrees Fahrenheit and higher, and gases are produced inside a submerged body, causing it to float to the surface.


What We Do for Art
THE MATISSE STORIES By A. S. Byatt. Illustrated. 134 pp. New York: Random House. $17.


Mistakes Haunt Company On Eve of Stock Sale
WHEN Gordon P. MacDougall, a lawyer in Washington, opened his quarterly statement from Ariel Mutual Funds this month, he thought he'd witnessed the magic of mutual fund investing.
Without making any deposits or switching any funds in the first quarter, he discovered that his Ariel account had doubled in value.
"I thought, 'Isn't that great!' " Mr.
MacDougall said recently.
"I knew the market was going up, but I didn't know by how much."
Reality set in a few days later, when he received a corrected statement.
Because of a computer programming error at DST Systems, a shareholder services company that helps prepare Ariel's statements, Mr.
MacDougall and thousands of other customers were told inflated account values.


Wrong Man Takes the Right Shot
The play was designed for Mark Price.
In retrospect, maybe the Knicks should have let the hobbled point guard take the shot.
Instead, the ball found itself in Chris Mills's hands.
Mills had already decided that if he touched the ball, he was going to fire it up.
He did.
Charles Smith jumped out just a fraction of a second too late.
Mills buried a 3-pointer from the right perimeter over him with 20 seconds to play.


Deena P. Levy, Ross Hammerman
Deena Phyllis Levy, a daughter of Pommy and Gerald Levy of Rockville Centre, L.I., was married last evening to Ross Martin Hammerman, the son of Alissa and Dr.
Jeffrey Hammerman of Melville, L.I.
Rabbi Jeffrey Sorkin performed the ceremony at the Engineers Country Club in Roslyn Harbor, L.I.
Mrs.
Hammerman, 25, is a customer-service representative at Club Med in New York.
She graduated from the University of Michigan.
Her father is a partner in Kane, Dalismer, Sullivan, Kurucz, Levy, Eisle &amp; Richard, a law firm in New York.
Her mother owns Rockville Realty in Rockville Centre.


'Giant' Anniversary
On May 27, Marfa, Tex., commemorates what one might call the First -- and the Last -- Picture Show.
Forty years ago, the West Texas town was the location for the filming of "Giant," one of the definitive films about that state.
George Stevens directed Rock Hudson, Sal Mineo, Elizabeth Taylor and James Dean in the movie, based on Edna Ferber's novel.
The entire town -- which is at the intersection of U.S. 90 and Route 17, about 200 miles southeast of El Paso -- was taken over by the film crew.


Staying Neighborly, on Top of the Ocean, in Atlantic Highlands
Leonard Edwards moved to Atlantic Highlands in 1961, when he bought the Atlantic Theater on First Avenue.
His old-fashioned movie house continues to thrive, despite the proliferation of multiplexes on nearby highways.
At the age of 72, Mr.
Edwards is a fixture in this Monmouth County shore town of 4,600 people, a fact he credits to being a small business owner who remembers everyone's face.
"People come to my theater because they don't want to feel lost in the crowd," Mr.
Edwards said when we called to ask him a few questions about Atlantic Highlands.
He applies the same philosophy to his town.


Heavy Horse Trials
Americans could be forgiven for thinking that Clydesdales were bred only to pull beer wagons.
But the Boundary Clydesdales Heavy Horse Center, in England's North Country, proves otherwise.
The center is in Tow Law, about 20 miles southwest of Newcastle, on the A68 highway, a popular tourist route to Scotland.
Visitors can watch more than 20 heavy horses haul carriages (but no beer wagons) and give demonstrations of plowing and harvesting in season.


Corrections
An article in the Neighborhood Report last Sunday about a theater company's dismantling a basketball hoop and building a stage in the gym at St.
Ann's Church in Mott Haven, the Bronx, misstated the company's name.
It is the Pregones Theater, not the Pregones Teatro Festival.


Spain's Answer to Versailles
WHEN King Philip V of Spain set about building himself a new palace at La Granja de San Ildefonso, in the hills near Segovia, he could imagine nothing more desirable than a local -- and much enlarged -- adaptation of the Grand Trianon.
He had, after all, been raised at Versailles.
War and a dearth of revenue, however, did not make it easy to build palaces of golden stone and pink marble; and so, although Philip had left France to become Spain's first Bourbon king in 1701, it was not until 1721 that work began.
Just how much Philip had changed since leaving Versailles is immediately evident in the palace's location.
Louis XIV's palace sits in the middle of a vast plain, close to, and easily reached from, Paris.
La Granja is in the midst of a mountain range, and even today, the twists and turns of the road that goes there preclude rapid travel.
The contrast between the extensive French-style park and the majesty of nature is highly dramatic: here, in one glance the visitor can see the refinement of France and the austerity of Castile.


A New Stretch of Green for Bicyclists
THE county's newest park is distinguished by gently rolling hills, stately old trees and a sprinkling of daffodils on an immaculate stretch of newly sodded lawn.
It is intimate in scale -- 7.1 acres -- but when it is dedicated in a ceremony at 11:45 A.M. next week on the first Bicycle Sunday of the year, it will represent a triumph for County Legislators claiming a bit of green for the residents of southern Westchester.
The park is a short distance east of the Bronx River Parkway on Scarsdale Road here, near the southernmost point of the seven-mile bicycle route, which runs from Scarsdale Road north to the County Center in White Plains.
This year, a milelong in-line skating course has been added, running from the County Center north to Fisher Avenue in North White Plains.


April 23-29; Blood, Sweat And Cash
Politics being an uncertain route to financial security, Winston S. Churchill rarely turned down the chance to make a pound, writing prodigiously and charging accordingly.
As Stalin and Roosevelt well knew, he could drive a hard bargain.
And, recognizing that his voluminous collection of pre-1945 papers could one day be worth a fortune, in 1946 he gave the archive to a trust fund he set up to benefit his male heirs.
So it is hard to imagine that Britain's wartime leader would have been anything but pleased to learn that his grandson, Winston Churchill, a 54-year-old Conservative member of Parliament, made a deal last week to sell the collection to the British Government for about $20 million.


Mickey Mouse Practices Old-Time Capitalism
To the Editor:
Re Peter Passell's April 27 Economic Scene, "Disneyland and the old U.S.S.R.: Sharing Something in Common": Mr.
Passell asks, "Why doesn't Disney charge for individual rides according to their popularity, thereby reducing the waste inherent in queuing?"


Before We Rush to Judgment in Bombing Case
To the Editor:
The terrible disaster in Oklahoma City has prompted reactions by the President, the Attorney General and the Speaker of the House that, although entirely improper, appear to have escaped public criticism.


Q. &amp; A.
Getting A Report On a Co-op Q I live in a co-op in Queens.
We were told by the board of directors that in order to receive a stockholders' report the tenants must attend the meeting.
I would like to know if this is legal. . . .
Ruth Freeman, Flushing, Queens.
A Stuart Saft, chairman of the Council of New York Cooperatives, said that if the report referred to is the co-op's annual financial statement, then that statement must be provided to all shareholders within four months of the end of the co-op's fiscal year.


Night Calls
I WAS HAVING trouble sleeping.
It was this script.
First I am dreaming it, which I try to tell myself is promising.
Then I realize what I am dreaming is my characters fighting with my agent, which is not so good.
Then I start waking up at 3 in the morning, every morning, and I call my roommate in L.A.
"You're up late," she says.


U.N. Aid Officials Plead for Food Relief
United Nations officials in charge of funneling relief aid to victims of war and drought are warning of severe food shortages in Central Africa, Bosnia and Herzegovina and other areas because of multiplying crises and cutbacks in donations by wealthy nations.
Relief officials are making emergency pleas for the United States, Japan, the European Union and other donors to contribute additional food to help hundreds of thousands of refugees from wars in Rwanda, Bosnia, Liberia and the Caucasus region who are now receiving a fraction of the normal daily food allotment.


High-Speed Rail Extended
Instead of hurry-up-and-wait, a recent announcement by the French National Railroads is a case of waiting to hurry up.
The railway has announced that it will extend its 168-mile-an-hour T.G.V. line south to Marseilles and Montpellier, adding to the line that connects Paris to Lyons and Valence.
This will cut rail-travel time between Paris and Montpellier from the current 4 hours 20 minutes to 3 hours, and will make an eventual high-speed rail link between Paris and Barcelona more feasible.


Where Jordan Leads, Can the Bulls Follow?
After Michael Jordan opted to dribble the clock out on Friday night rather than go for 50 points, after the Bulls had stolen Game 1 against Charlotte in overtime, a telling scene played out along the Chicago sideline.
Jordan walked slightly ahead of Bulls Coach Phil Jackson, sticking out his hand for Jackson to slap on their way to the locker room.
The Bulls walked behind, everybody following Jordan.
Everybody.


PHOTOGRAPHER'S JOURNAL


Elizabeth Levin, Bruce E. Wolfe
Elizabeth Ann Levin, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Robert Levin of Fairfield, Conn., was married last evening to Bruce Elliot Wolfe, a son of Betty Wolfe of Needham, Mass., and Milton Wolfe of Fort Lauderdale, Fla.
Rabbi Arnold I. Sher officiated at the Birchwood Country Club in Westport, Conn.
Ms.
Levin, 35, is keeping her name.
She is a director of recruitment and placement at Sony Music Entertainment Inc. in New York.
She graduated from Bowdoin College and received a master's degree in education from Columbia University.


Ellen T. Graff, Martin A. Fox
Ellen Toby Graff, a lawyer, is to be married today to Martin Alan Fox, a supermarket executive.
Rabbi Richard Jacobs is to perform the ceremony at Sunningdale Country Club in Scarsdale, N.Y.
Ms.
Graff, 40, is keeping her name.
Until recently she was a partner at Wien, Malkin &amp; Bettex, a law firm in New York.
She graduated from Barnard College, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa, and received her law degree from Columbia University.
She is a daughter of Edith and Henry Graff of Scarsdale.
The bride's father is a professor emeritus of history at Columbia University in New York.


In the Land of No, New Guidelines Will Allow Barbecuing
TECHNOLOGY has finally caught up with the Land of No.
That is how some residents of Ocean Beach on Fire Island see the reversal of one of that community's numerous longstanding restrictions that have earned it its nickname.


A Pollution Danger To Burning Tires
I have lived in Northport on its harbor since the middle 1960's.
Gradually, as time has progressed, we are suffering from more and more pollution.
Unfortunately, we can no longer swim in our harbor.
I read "Smithtown's Plan for Tires: Incineration"  [ April 9 ]  and became rather upset.


Singing of a Beloved Homeland, Fearful of Going Home Again
BLESSED WITH A VOICE THAT calls to mind a flower wavering in the breeze, Khaled, known as the king of the Algerian pop music rai, turns love into an intoxicant.
In his songs, Khaled is haunted by the beauty of former and potential lovers, whose images he sees in all he gazes at.
Over swirling melodies, droning synthesizers and a complex dance beat, he resolves his anxiety in the sweetness of soft caresses or lips touching.
For this and for other offenses of poetry, music and morality, Khaled says he has been condemned to die.
"I know I'm at the top of the list of well-known people the fundamentalists want to kill," he said recently, speaking in French from his home in Paris where he is working on his first album since his voice spooked moviegoers in Roger Avary's recent film "Killing Zoe." "I don't have any bodyguards, just tight security during concerts. Even so, I get scared."


INSIDE
INVESTING IT /Page 6  Twenty years ago, Wall Street created the discount broker.
Now it's hard to tell a discount from an overcharge.
By Susan Antilla.
MUTUAL FUNDS /Page 10  O.K.
The prospectus and annual report are in hand.
There's the Statement of Additional Information.
So why can't you tell what's in your mutual fund?
By Diana B. Henriques.
SPENDING IT /Page 11  These days it's credit cards that are a girl's best friend.
And a boy's best friend.
But not mom and dad's best friend.
By Robert Bryce.
VOICES /Page 15  A father finally faces the moment when he can no longer put off telling his sons about the state of his finances.


From Africa, a Sophisticated Lady of Rhythm
AS MOST COLLECTORS KNOW, THE RIGHT owner's name in the pedigree of an object adds luster to its value: the Duchess of Windsor in emeralds and pearls, Andy Warhol in cookie jars, the Rothschilds in 18th-century French furniture.
To aficionados and auctioneers of African art, today's magical name is Helena Rubinstein.
Twice in this century, an exuberant Cameroon carving of a Bangwa queen, owned for 30 years by the cosmetics tycoon, brought the highest price ever for African art at Sotheby's auctions in New York: $29,000 in 1966 and $3.4 million in 1990, the current record.


Same Land, Same Geography, New Look
HOW easy it is to relax and plant the garden the same way it was done last year: In the two window boxes out front are red geraniums, draped with white sweet alyssum and some ivy to trail.
By the driveway is a wide border of marigolds.
In between the house and walk is a border of hostas and the tomato plants are set in a sunny patch along with the herbs by the kitchen door.
Fine.
This kind of arrangement is always a success and demands little effort, imaginative or otherwise.
The spring trip to the garden center is also easy -- just the same things brought home last year.


By the Numbers, Starks Is Better
To the Sports Editor:
Clifton Brown in "Drive Time for Starks" (The Times, April 16) failed to take into account the effect of good 3-point shooting on team success.
In short, John Starks is having a fine shooting year and he is shooting better this year than last.


A 4-Day Hike Around the Coast Of Cornwall
IN a country as long-inhabited as Britain there are still many places where a visitor can sustain an idea of wilderness.
The coast of Cornwall is one.
In spring, before schools have let out and before the tourists have emerged, one may walk along great stretches of the Cornish coast and meet nobody else at all.
Elbowing the Atlantic from England's southwest, Cornwall is an ancient, isolated place of weathered granite cliffs plunging straight into the sea, of green headland and hard-scrabble farms, and of a stubbornly Celtic culture.
Bronze Age fortifications, standing stones and burial mounds abound, particularly in the far western peninsular called Penwith.
In Cornish penwyth translates roughly as outermost headland.


Bird Lovers, Start Polishing Your Binoculars
SOME 250 species of birds can be found nesting in New York City throughout the year.
To spot as many as possible is the goal of the first citywide Bird-a-Thon sponsored by the Parks Department.
"We want to bring out all the great bird-watchers in this city," Alexander Brash, chief of the department's Urban Park Services, said of the event, which begins Saturday morning.
Expert watchers are to report to Belvedere Castle Nature Center in Central Park at 9 A.M. for registration, amateurs to a city nature centers.


Women's Group Meeting in County
FIVE hundred working women representing a broad spectrum of occupations will gather at the Rye Town Hilton in Rye Brook from Friday through next Sunday to take part in the American Business Woman's Association's 1995 Northeast Spring Conference, being held in Westchester for the first time.
Linda Youngberg, the chairwoman, said the American Business Woman's Association, whose headquarters are in Kansas City, Mo., was founded in 1949 by Hilary A. Bufton, a Kansas City businessman.
"Mr. Bufton realized there was a need for a support organization to help women in business reach their education and career goals," Ms.
Youngberg said.
"He believed strongly in business training and education. The association was founded on the premise that working women together could determine their own future through leadership, education and friendship. We now have more than 545,000 members in chapters across the country."


State Chief Of Parole Is Appointed City Sheriff
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani yesterday appointed Raul Russi, the chairman and director of the state's Board of Parole, to be the new City Sheriff, putting him in charge of an agency the Mayor has proposed merging into the city's Department of Finance.
Mr.
Russi replaces Kerry John Katsorhis, who resigned on Thursday after serving as the sheriff under Mr.
Giuliani for less than a year.
Although Mr.
Katsorhis cited "personal reasons as well as professional" ones for leaving, officials said that his resignation in part reflected plans for the agency's consolidation.


Bantering and Lolling Her Way to the Top
WRAPPED IN SPANDEX AND midlife neuroses, swilling a martini and tossing off tart one-liners, Christine Baranski sparkles in the role of Maryann Thorpe, the madcap, shriekingly chic best friend on "Cybill," a sitcom that is delighting its supporters at CBS.
Ms.
Baranski's zesty banter with Cybill Shepherd, who plays a twice-divorced, almost-over-the-hill actress, recalls the repartee dished up by wisecracking dames in Hollywood's vintage screwball comedies.


Rikki Kohn, James Altman
Rikki Kohn, the daughter of Allen and Merle Kohn of Rye Brook, N.Y., was married last evening to James David Altman, a son of Hanna and Dr.
R.
Peter Altman of New York.
Rabbi Aaron Panken officiated at the Westbury Hotel in New York.
The bride and the bridegroom, both 27, graduated from Syracuse University.


Finding a New Home For Alexander's Mural
To the Editor:
When my then-toddler son, who is now a physician, first saw the mural ("The End Is Near for Alexander's Abstract Mural on Route 4," April 2), he asked, "What's it a map of?"


Where the Italian Fare Is Truly Hearty
NOT too long ago, restaurants were often judged on the quantity of food served.
"All you can eat" was a popular recommendation, which often overlooked quality, emphasizing abundance alone.
At Arturo's Trattoria, a small, dimly lighted Italian restaurant inside Day's Inn in Norwalk, that phrase is not only still operative but also carried to extremes.
But there is often quality as well.
No wonder Arturo's has become a word-of-mouth hit, with crowds on weekends.
Mammoth serving platters, not normal dinner plates, are used for both appetizers and entrees.
In fact, if an appetizer strikes your fancy, consider having it as your main course.
Only one course is necessary for most diners; even then, a doggy bag might be required.


On Saigon's Day of Defeat, a Glitter of Rebirth
In the glittering chaos of Vietnam's boom town, it is difficult to imagine that 20 years ago today, Saigon was a city so defeated that it was forced even to sacrifice its name.
Government-issued maps now identify it as Ho Chi Minh City, the name it was given on April 30, 1975.
That was the morning when a North Vietnamese tank crashed through the gates of the presidential palace of the collapsed, American-backed Government of South Vietnam.


Fashion Victims
MODEL The Ugly Business of Beautiful Women.
By Michael Gross.
Illustrated. 524 pp.
New York: William Morrow &amp; Company. $25.


State Seeks to Preserve More Meadowlands, With Developers Picking Up Part of the Bill
The future of the Hackensack Meadowlands the 32-square-mile region of virgin marshes, 12-lane highways and abandoned dumps that has long stood midway between national treasure and national joke -- is being reshaped by a new master plan meant to strike a balance between construction and conservation.
The plan, essentially a vast zoning map, was carved out after years of negotiation among landowners and state and Federal agencies.
It seeks to preserve fragile wetlands, cut red tape for developers and require them to pay for environmental protection.
If adopted by the state, it will replace a 1972 master plan that was widely regarded as visionary -- with a sleek new city center overlooking fields of waving marsh grasses, the New York skyline shimmering on the horizon -- but has long since been overtaken by economic and environmental realities.


Deena P. Levy, Ross Hammerman
Deena Phyllis Levy, a daughter of Pommy and Gerald Levy of Rockville Centre, L.I., was married last evening to Ross Martin Hammerman, the son of Alissa and Dr.
Jeffrey Hammerman of Melville, L.I.
Rabbi Jeffrey Sorkin performed the ceremony at the Engineers Country Club in Roslyn Harbor, L.I.
Mrs.
Hammerman, 25, is a customer-service representative at Club Med in New York.
She graduated from the University of Michigan.
Her father is a partner in Kane, Dalismer, Sullivan, Kurucz, Levy, Eisle &amp; Richard, a law firm in New York.
Her mother owns Rockville Realty in Rockville Centre.


Conversations / Clifford Stoll; A Disillusioned Devotee Says The Internet Is Wearing No Clothes
EVERYWHERE we turn there is the Internet, shrinking our planet and expanding our horizons, enriching our lives, or at least promising to.
The Internet is, according to "The Internet: Complete Reference," an 800-page guide now in the bookstores, "by far the greatest and most significant achievement in the history of mankind."
Or maybe not.


BENEFITS
Get a Clue  MONDAY -- The 52d Street Project, which seeks to improve the lives of inner-city children, will benefit from an evening of dinner, dancing and mystery at the Copacabana, 617 West 57th Street.
Sam Waterston, James McDaniel and Jerry Orbach will lead children and audience members through the steps of solving a mystery.
Events will begin with cocktails at 7.
Tickets, $100, from (212) 764-1379.
Photography Awards  MONDAY -- The International Center of Photography will honor nine recipients of the Infinity Award at a dinner at the New York Hilton with Charles Kuralt as the master of ceremonies.
Cocktails at 6 will be followed by dinner.
Tickets, $450, from (212) 715-1551.
An Award at the Whitney  MONDAY -- The Whitney Museum American Art Award will be presented to Frederic V. Salerno, the vice chairman of the Nynex Corporation, at a black-tie dinner-dance at the Whitney.
Cocktails will begin at 7.
Tickets, $1,000, from (212) 570-3672.
Music and Fellowship  MONDAY -- Charlotte White's Salon De Virtuosi, an organization that supports and encourages young artists, will give a dinner and performance to benefit the salon's yearly Fellowship Award.
The program will include performances by the pianist Alex Slobodyanik, winner of the Young Concert Artists' Competition, and the oboist Igor Leshishin.
It will begin at 7 P.M. at Steinway Hall, 109 West 57th Street, followed by a Russian buffet and cocktails.
Tickets, $65, from (212) 369-3911.
Ballet Hispanico  MONDAY -- Ballet Hispanico's scholarship program will benefit from a dinner-dance at the Plaza.
Cocktails at 7 in the Terrace Room will be followed by dinner and dancing in the Grand Ballroom featuring performances by the company and students from the school.
Tickets, $300, from (212) 362-6710.
Help Line Benefit  TUESDAY -- The Help Line, which provides emotional assistance to callers, will honor the journalist Terry Anderson at a black-tie dinner at the United Nations.
Drinks at 6 will be followed by dinner.
Tickets, $250, from (212) 684-4480.
For the Asia Society  TUESDAY -- Fifty private dinners with Asian themes will benefit the Asia Society.
Some of the parties will include dancing.
Tickets, $250, from (212) 288-6400, extension 235.
Interfaith Neighbors  TUESDAY -- Interfaith Neighbors, a center for adolescents, will benefit from a dinner at Tatou, the supper club at 151 East 50th Street, beginning with drinks at 6 P.M.
Tickets, $125, from (212) 472-3567.
City Harvest Benefit  TUESDAY -- City Harvest, an organization that donates excess food from local restaurants to emergency food programs, will hold a black-tie dinner at the Waldorf-Astoria.
Guests will include the ABC news anchor Peter Jennings.
Cocktails at 7 will be followed by dinner and dancing.
Tickets, $250, from (212) 874-5457.
A Fund-Raiser for Marymount  TUESDAY -- Marymount College will honor James E. Preston, the chairman and chief executive of Avon Products, at a dinner-dance at the Plaza to benefit Marymount's scholarship program.
The black-tie event will begin with a cocktail reception at 6:30 P.M., followed by dinner at 7:30 and dancing.
Tickets, $350, from (914) 332-8217.
Reception and Auction  WEDNESDAY -- The Agenda for Children Tomorrow, an advocacy group, will benefit from a reception and an auction at Christie's East, 219 East 67th Street.
The reception, which includes drinks and hors d'oeuvres, will begin at 6:30 P.M.
The auction will include original children's murals and a trip to Jamaica.
Tickets, $60 or $10 for children 12 and under, from (212) 788-6751.
V-E Day Commemoration  WEDNESDAY -- The Simon Wiesenthal Center will commemorate the 50th anniversary of V-E Day at a black-tie dinner at the New York Marriott Marquis.
Henry Kissinger will be the keynote speaker.
Drinks at 6 P.M. will be followed by dinner at 7.
Proceeds will benefit the center's Holocaust awareness programs.
Tickets, $500, from (212) 370-0320.
For African Art  WEDNESDAY -- The Museum for African Art will benefit from a reception at the museum, 593 Broadway (between Houston and Prince streets), from 6 to 7 P.M., followed by an auction at the Puck Building, 295 Lafayette Street at Houston Street, and dinner.
The auction will include an Egyptian vacation and a barge trip down the Nile.
Tickets, $250, from (212) 966-1313, extension 102.
For N.Y.U.
Medical Center  WEDNESDAY -- The Kids of the New York University Medical Center, an organization of parents and physicians that raises money for research and clinical care for children, will benefit from an evening of activities starting at 5 o'clock with a champagne reception and a preview of an antique show at the Seventh Regiment Armory, Park Avenue and 67th Street.
Guests will then be shuttled by bus to the Waldorf-Astoria for dinner and cabaret entertainment beginning at 7:30.
Tickets, $250, or $50 for the reception only, from (212) 263-5870.
Conservancy Luncheon  WEDNESDAY -- The Central Park Conservancy will honor Anne Johnson and Tom Lebreque, the chairman of Chase Manhattan Bank, at the annual Frederick Law Olmsted awards luncheon, which will benefit the conservancy's horticultural, security and visitor programs.
A reception at 11:45 A.M. will be followed by lunch at 12:15 P.M. in the Conservatory Garden in Central Park at Fifth Avenue and 105th Street.
Tickets, $300, from (212) 315-0385.
A Gift of Music  WEDNESDAY -- A black-tie dinner-dance at the Plaza will benefit the educational programs of the Orchestra of St.
Luke's and will honor Andre Previn, the conductor.
Cocktails at 7 P.M. will be followed by dinner, a performance by the orchestra and waltzing.
Tickets, $400, from (212) 840-7470.
Honoring Angela Lansbury  WEDNESDAY -- The American Foundation for AIDS Research will benefit from a black-tie dinner-dance that will also honor Angela Lansbury.
The event, on board the passenger ship Crystal Symphony, at Pier 88, 12th Avenue at 54th Street, will start with cocktails at 6:30.
Betty Buckley will perform, and a silent auction including a cruise will be held.
Tickets, $500, from (212) 682-7440.
For Elderly and Homeless  WEDNESDAY -- Encore Community Services, which provides support to the elderly and the homeless, will benefit from a reception beginning at 5:30 P.M. at the Equitable Tower, 787 Seventh Avenue (51st Street).
Tickets, $100, from (212) 581-3490.
Party in Prospect Park  WEDNESDAY -- The Prospect Park Alliance's "Save Our Forest" Fund will benefit from a party given by Macy's from 6 to 9 P.M. at the Brooklyn Park Slope Armory, Eighth Avenue at 15th Street, Brooklyn.
Events will include an auction of Macy's parade memorabilia, entertainment by the Funny Factory Clown Band, face painting, singing, dancing and costumed characters.
Tickets, $25 or $10 for children 14 and under, from (718) 965-8963.
Past Treasures  THURSDAY -- The New-York Historical Society, at Central Park West and 77th Street, will hold a reception and a preview of the three exhibitions that will be on view at the society's official reopening on May 10.
Tickets, $40, from (212) 873-3400.
For Carnegie Hall  THURSDAY -- The choral conductor Robert Shaw will lead the Cleveland Orchestra in Mahler's Symphony No. 8 to benefit Carnegie Hall.
The concert, beginning at 7:30 at Carnegie Hall, will be followed by a black-tie dinner at the Waldorf-Astoria.
Transportation will be provided between the concert hall and the hotel.
Tickets, $1,000, from (212) 903-9650.
Frederick Douglass Dinner  THURSDAY -- The 30th annual Frederick Douglass Awards Dinner to benefit the New York Urban League will honor James E. Preston, the chief executive of Avon Inc.; Edward Lewis, the publisher and chief executive of Essence Communications, and Josie McMillian, the president of the New York Metro Area Postal Union.
The program will begin at 7 P.M., followed by dinner and entertainment, at the Sheraton New York.
Tickets, $350, from (212) 926-8000, extension 27.
Crystal Ball  THURSDAY -- Mount Sinai Medical Center's 10th annual Crystal Ball will raise money for the school of medicine.
The black-tie event will be held at the Nathan Cummings Atrium in the Guggenheim Pavilion of the medical center, Fifth Avenue and 101st Street.
Cocktails at 7:30 will be followed by dinner and dancing.
Tickets, $750, from (212) 241-5762.
Junior Tennis League  FRIDAY -- The New York Junior Tennis League's celebration of its 25th anniversary will benefit the league's scholarship program and the Arthur Ashe Endowment for the Defeat of AIDS.
Honorary chairwomen include Jeanne Moutoussany Ashe.
The event, at the Puck Building, 295 Lafayette Street at Houston Street, begins at 6:30 P.M. with cocktails and a silent auction, followed by dinner and a live auction at 7:30.
A ticket for the Masters of the Universe Tennis Championship tournament on Saturday in Queens will be included in the benefit ticket, which is $125, from (718) 786-7110, extension 22.
A Riverkeeper Picnic  SATURDAY -- Robert F. Kennedy Jr. and Alec Baldwin will be the hosts of a picnic, from 1 P.M. until dusk, to benefit the Hudson Riverkeeper Fund, an environmental organization.
It will be at Riverkeeper headquarters at Routes 9D and 403 in Garrison, N.Y.
Tickets, $60 or $10 for children 10 to 18; free for younger children, from (212) 825-1900.


Ole! A Festive Mexican Grill Makes Debut on L.I.
PANCHO'S MEXICAN GRILL, a tiny festive restaurant in Huntington, has a tortilla lady who wears a fancy ruffled skirt in the window, mariachi music in the air, maracas on the walls and someone who cares about fresh high-quality ingredients in the kitchen.
The 15-seat eat-in and takeout storefront cafe, the first Long Island branch of a Los Angeles restaurant chain, has nothing to do with trendy Southwestern or even Tex-Mex dining.
It is unapologetically Mexican.
There is nothing innovative or cutting edge about the tacos, enchiladas, tostadas, nachos and burritos.
But the portions are large, the prices small and the quality high.
There is also an abundant self-serve supply of free warm chips and mild, hot or spicy salsa made with scallions, radishes and peppers.


Tschetter Tames the Wind With the Words of a Legend
Back in the mid-80's, when she was a student at Texas Christian University, Kris Tschetter used to spend a lot of time at Shady Oaks Country Club watching a certain Fort Worth legend named Ben Hogan as he hit practice balls.
Over time, she and Hogan became fast friends, and he shared some of his secrets about the game with her, including some about how to control the golf ball in the wind.
Since that is exactly what she has been doing this week here across the windblown course at L.P.G.A.
International, shooting rounds of 66-67-72 to take a one-stroke lead in the $1.2 million Sprint Championship, Tschetter was asked to share the secret.


Habitats/313 Hicks Street; Finding a Little Bit of London in Brooklyn Heights
THEY were living just around the corner, on State Street in Brooklyn Heights, renting a two-bedroom garden apartment for $2,000 a month, when they decided to check out what they could buy.
Because they had experienced a garden they wanted to find something with outdoor space: something fun and something that reminded them of London.
Christine E. Baugh didn't know exactly what she wanted; only that she did not, repeat not, want to be in Manhattan.


Commercial Property/Corruption; How Widespread Is Fraud? What Can Be Done?
THIS is a sobering time for many real estate people.
Some are still reeling from last year's expose of corruption among managers of residential buildings.
Others fear that a current investigation will turn up similar improprieties in the commercial property end.
Manhattan District Attorney Robert M. Morgenthau is not expected to hand up indictments, if any, until June.
But real estate companies already are rethinking their internal security systems.


Jefferson's Paris
To the Editor: Ah, such a walk takes me back a few years when I also used to join Jefferson, among others, in my Paris walks.
I believe Jefferson had another residence less than a quarter-mile west of the gardens where he broke his wrist in his fence-hopping caper.
Though this residence was just north of what is now the Champs-Elysees, Jefferson could hear the steam pumps on the Seine that supplied the water for this part of Paris.
The pumps were owned by brothers by name of Perrier.


Debra L. Moses and R. A. Kahn
Debra Lyn Moses, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Alan J. Moses of Cheshire, Conn., has married last evening to Raymond A. Kahn, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Frederick S. Kahn of Boulder, Colo.
Rabbi Scott Hoffman performed the ceremony at the Beth El Synagogue in New Rochelle, N.Y.
Mrs.
Kahn, 27, graduated from the State University at Binghamton, N.Y., and received a law degree from the University of Pennsylvania.
She is an associate at Finn Dixon &amp; Herling, a law firm in Stamford, Conn.


Rooms at the Top; For High Rollers Only: A Suite That's Utterly Merv Griffin
THE BEST rooms in Atlantic City casino hotels have names instead of numbers.
Cher stayed in the Versailles at the Sands; Roseanne lodged in the Trump Castle's Crystal Tower, and Michael Jackson slept in the Alexander the Great Suite at the Taj Mahal.
But only one casino suite is so famous that it might seem suitable for the National Register of Historic Places.
Paradoxically, it has the worst views and, until Merv Griffin decided to renovate it, the worst decor.


Loss to Lakers Reminds Sonics of a Dark Past
A psychologist would suggest the Seattle SuperSonics need some time to themselves in a dark room -- but they already tried that today.
They trailed the Los Angeles Lakers by 8 points with four precarious minutes remaining when their home away from home -- the Tacoma Dome -- went pitch black.
Lightning had caused a power outage, and although the arena's floodlights were restored in 23 minutes, the Sonics' collective shooting eye was beyond repair.


No, Wishing Won't Make Operas Good
PATRIOTISM, SAMUEL JOHNSON TELLS US, IS the last refuge of a scoundrel.
It's not doing American opera a lot of good, either.
How, for example, did "Harvey Milk" come as far as it did: major productions at the Houston Grand Opera and now the New York City Opera, voluminous press coverage from every corner of the country?
"Harvey Milk" is not very good, and the people involved should have known it from the start.
Ambitious to be both a panorama of the gay movement and the story of one man, it succeeds at being neither.
The spectacles are cliches; the man is poorly defined.
"Harvey Milk" offers crude dramaturgy and music pale to the point of nonexistence.


Saying What You Think, Living Where You Want
Uptown -- One topic of conversation at the party on April 26 at the Central Park West apartment of Ann and Mick Jones for Tatler, the English society magazine, was conversation.
"American conversations are much more open," said Ann Jones, who is English and whose husband was touring with his band, Foreigner.
"You don't feel you have to tiptoe around a subject like you're on broken glass."
"American men," observed Emily Lloyd, the young actress, "are much better at flirting. If you've just been insulted at a party by an Englishman, then you know he's interested in you."


A Proposed Definition of Poverty May Raise Number of U.S. Poor
Experts at the National Academy of Sciences will soon recommend to Congress huge changes in the way poverty is defined and measured, and the changes could substantially increase the number of working Americans classified as poor.
The official definition of poverty used by the Federal Government for three decades is based simply on cash income before taxes.
But in a report to be issued on Wednesday, a panel of experts convened by the Academy three years ago at the behest of Congress says the Government should move toward a concept of poverty based on disposable income, the amount left after a family pays taxes and essential expenses.


George III to Springsteen: The 'Jerseyana' Course
In the spring semester, students at Rutgers University can take American Studies 291, a three-credit course in "Jerseyana: New Jersey as a Culture." The professor is Angus Kress Gillespie.
Here are excerpts from the syllabus.


A Show of Support


Role of Visiting Nurse Services Changing
THE more things change, the more they remain the same.
Home health care, newly important in today's health-care system with its emphasis on short hospital stays, prevention and personal responsibility, took root in Westchester nearly 100 years ago.
A visiting nurse association, an outgrowth of the Visiting Nurse and Henry Street Settlement started by Lillian Wald on the Lower East Side of Manhattan in 1893, was established in Yonkers in 1901 to care for the immigrant families of workers who came to build the railroads.
Similarly, the Dominican Sisters Family Health Services in Ossining is the outgrowth of a service that began on the West Side of Manhattan when Mary Walsh and a dedicated band of volunteers brought home care to newly arrived immigrants 115 years ago.


Buckingham Palace For Those on Foot
A new pedestrian viewing area was completed this month outside Buckingham Palace in London.
The $3.8 million project involved the rerouting of traffic to create a triangular haven for tourists between the Palace and the Queen Victoria Memorial opposite.
New traffic lights and more pedestrian crossings have also been installed.


Innocent Abroad


Where the Trains Are
From now through November, subway service across the Manhattan Bridge will be diverted during off-peak hours on weekdays and suspended on weekends while the city Department of Transportation makes structural repairs.
Normal service will be in effect during rush hours and at night.
There will be no B, D or Q service over the bridge from 9:45 A.M. to 3:30 P.M. on weekdays and from 4 A.M.
Saturdays to 10 P.M.
Sundays.
The changes take effect at 12:01 A.M. today.


IT'S A SIN
John Tierney concludes his essay "It's a Sin" (The Big City, April 9) by advising smokers and other sinners that they "might do better in River City." Alas, the neo-prohibitionist Nannies are just as active there.
Last year, the Western Washington city of Puyallup (pronounced "PEW-al-lup" and named for the river that runs through it) enacted a total ban on smoking in restaurants, and toyed with clearing the air in taverns and cocktail lounges as well.
The ban was rescinded when restaurateurs, armed with legal aide from tobacco companies, threatened to sue.
Washington State has also banned smoking in offices and factories.
The rules for secondhand smoke are far stricter than regulations governing exposure of workers to industrial chemicals and other pollutants.
This might lead a cynic to conclude that physical safety is less important to these guardians of the public health than moral purity.


'Forgotten' Commuters
The question ought to be why we have to save our sanity on our daily commute, not how do we do so.
Commuters are New Jersey's forgotten citizens.
We endure traffic jams, construction, equipment problems, weather conditions and more.


Avenue C Vendors Vie With Garden
Following a police crackdown in March, Avenue C vendors squeezed into La Plaza Cultural, a lot on Ninth Street at Avenue C. But the peddlers, most of them poor and some alcohol- or drug-dependent, may have to move soon.
Community Board 3 voted last Tuesday to support the granting of a Green Thumb license to a group of residents who say they want to turn La Plaza into a community garden and park.
At a previous meeting, they complained about debris left behind by peddlers.


Miss Donnem And Mr. Sigety
Elizabeth Prince Donnem, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Roland W. Donnem of Shaker Heights, Ohio, was married yesterday to Robert Griswold Sigety, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Charles E. Sigety of Pipersville, Pa.
The Rev.
Kent Organ performed the ceremony at the Fairmount Presbyterian Church in Cleveland.
Mrs.
Sigety, 31, is an associate at Debevoise &amp; Plimpton, the New York law firm.
She graduated cum laude from Yale University and received her law degree from the University of Chicago.
Her father is the managing partner of Meta Partners, a real estate firm in Beachwood, Ohio.
Her mother, Sarah Donnem, is the chairwoman of the legislative committee of the Ohio Advisory Council on Aging in Columbus.


'Broken Covenant'
To the Editor:
As the chief editor of Who's Who in World Jewry and the executive editor of the forthcoming Oxford Dictionary of the Jewish Religion, I would like to reply to Conor Cruise O'Brien's review of "Broken Covenant: American Foreign Policy and the Crisis Between the U.S. and Israel," by Moshe Arens (March 26).


Evacuating A Plane Safely
WHEN 99 passengers had to make an emergency evacuation from an American Airlines wide-body MD-11 at Kennedy International Airport this month, 47 of them sustained injuries, mostly scrapes and the like from sliding down a chute.
Although 47 injured among 99 passengers and 9 crew members seems to represent a high injury rate, all emergency evacuations are potentially hazardous: they involve leaving a seat quickly while one is frightened, finding the nearest usable exit, jumping correctly into an emergency slide, which sometimes is not positioned right, getting off onto ground of uncertain footing and moving away quickly.
The Dangers of Panic
Flight attendants are trained rigorously in evacuations.
Those attendants who have survived crashes and evacuations usually tell investigators that their responses were ingrained and automatic.
Passengers may panic.
They are unlikely to have paid attention to the safety briefing, which covers some but not all the points of getting out safely.
In the April 2 evacuation of Flight 719 bound for Santo Domingo, Dominican Republic, there were 170 empty seats, and the panic the police described might have been worse had the plane been full.


[ BREACH OF ]  CONTRACT WITH  [ PART OF ]  AMERICA
The contract's language, particularly its promise that the bills "be given a clear and fair vote," cannot plausibly be interpreted as promising to pass the bills.
Carter's crafty attempt to find ambiguity, along with his use of the terms "weasel" and "wriggling" to describe the Republicans' conduct, makes his article a fine example of a brief written by a good lawyer with a weak case.
A court, hearing this breach-of-contract case, would most likely render judgment for the Republicans.
STEPHEN J. WARE Birmingham, Ala.


Tamar Yoseloff, Andrew Lindesay
Tamar Rachel Yoseloff, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas Yoseloff of Colts Neck, N.J., was married yesterday to Andrew Hamilton Lindesay, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Edward Lindesay of Dalbeattie, Kirkcudbrightshire, Scotland.
The Rev.
Peter Elvy, a minister of the Church of England, performed the ceremony at Chelsea Old Church in Cheyne Walk, London.
Mrs.
Lindesay, 29, is the managing director of Golden Cockerel Press in London and a poet.
She graduated from Sarah Lawrence College.
Her father is the chairman of Associated University Presses, a trade association in Cranberry, N.J.
Her mother, Lauretta Yoseloff, retired as a book designer in New York.


Anatomy of a Masterpiece
LES DEMOISELLES D'AVIGNON By William Rubin, Helene Seckel and Judith Cousins.
Illustrated. 280 pp.
New York: The Museum of Modern Art/ Harry N. Abrams. $40.


Middle School at 6th Grade?
Are students ready for the challenge of high school in ninth grade?
Or should they wait till 10th?
Are they better off switching from elementary to middle school in sixth grade or seventh?
Those one-year shifts are critical issues to East Side parents.
Tomorrow, the board of School District 2 meets to hear the parents' final arguments and vote on a proposal to change its two middle schools from the seventh through ninth grades to the sixth through eighth.
The session is at 6:30 P.M. at Junior High School 167, 220 East 76th Street.


75 Years Ago, Terror Hit Home
The explosives where left in a horse-drawn wagon, not a rented truck.
But the blast on Wall Street caused the same destruction and havoc made painfully familiar by the bombings of the Federal Building in Oklahoma City this month and the World Trade Center in 1993.
As in those recent blasts, the target was a symbol of intstitutional power.
The bomb exploded around noon on Thursday, Spet. 16, 1920, outside J. P. Morgan &amp; Company, killing 30 people and injuring hundreds.
The fist-sized holes in the building's marble facade were never repaired.


In Conspiracy Case, Much Evidence That Egyptian Sheik Has a Healthy Ego, at Least
Sheik Omar Abdel Rahman, the militant Muslim cleric, was exultant.
"Did you hear about the press conference?" he asked a follower in Pakistan.
"It was good, God willing."
Many reporters had come to his New Jersey apartment to hear his words, Mr.
Abdel Rahman boasted, and he had even upstaged his archenemy, President Hosni Mubarak of Egypt, who was visiting the White House.
"On the same day when that criminal was meeting with the American President," he gloated in the call taped by the F.B.I.
"At the same time exactly."


April 23-29: States' Rights; High Court Re-Examines A Long-Standing Basis For Federal Powers
One popular constitutional law textbook, after reviewing the Supreme Court's dramatic shift in the 1930's toward an expansive view of Congress' authority to regulate interstate commerce, has this to say: "The Supreme Court today interprets the commerce clause as a complete grant of power."
No longer.
"It was right when we wrote it," one of the authors, Professor Ronald D. Rotunda of the University of Illinois, said ruefully last week.
But, he said, a new edition of "Constitutional Law" (West Publishing) is now at the publisher and, with luck, there will still be time to excise the obsolete sentence.


Ellen T. Graff, Martin A. Fox
Ellen Toby Graff, a lawyer, is to be married today to Martin Alan Fox, a supermarket executive.
Rabbi Richard Jacobs is to perform the ceremony at Sunningdale Country Club in Scarsdale, N.Y.
Ms.
Graff, 40, is keeping her name.
Until recently she was a partner at Wien, Malkin &amp; Bettex, a law firm in New York.
She graduated from Barnard College, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa, and received her law degree from Columbia University.
She is a daughter of Edith and Henry Graff of Scarsdale.
The bride's father is a professor emeritus of history at Columbia University in New York.


Proceed, but Beware of Thin Ice
After the Rangers lost to the Islanders on Friday night at Madison Square Garden, Pat Verbeek lingered in the dressing room, studying a score sheet, asking about out-of-town results and calculating his new team's playoff chances.
"There's nothing you can do about this one now," he said, referring to the 4-2 defeat.
"We've got Philly on Sunday. And each game is a big one for us now."


Through the Eyes of Clinic Escorts
A year ago this month, Lincoln Women's Services, the only abortion clinic on the Upper West Side, closed, following a legal battle its landlord.
The clinic moved to the East Side, leaving the West Side with no abortion providers south of Harlem Hospital.
A dozen escorts worked at the clinic, guiding patients past protesting abortion opponents; some are doing the same at the new site.
The 12 are gathering today, to be honored for their work by West Side Democratic leaders.
In interviews with a reporter, Jennifer Kingson Bloom, three escorts recall experiences at the old location.


Here's a Course in Personal Finance 101, the Hard Way
NICOLE WALTERS, a 20-year-old junior at the University of Texas, carries two Visa cards, two Mastercards, two department store credit cards -- and two part-time jobs to dig herself out of debt.
"I was buying things here and there and all of a sudden, $4,000 later, those little things added up," Ms.
Walters said.
She recalls buying a $600 car stereo, some clothes and gas for her car, but nothing else major.


The Navigators of Seventh Avenue
BUD KONHEIM, chief executive officer of Nicole Miller Ltd., the women's fashion manufacturer, has a vision that a million years from now archaeologists may excavate the present garment district.
They will find odd skeletal forms, made mainly of metal.
All will have flat bottoms, some will have tall frames.
Likely, the rubber wheels will have long ago rotted away.
The archaeologists may never figure out that these were the lifeblood of one of the world's busiest urban industries, the human-powered workhorse of Seventh Avenue.
All are "piece movers," but those that transport garments are "racks," the ones with the structured poles moving cut work are "flats" and the "box flats" move -- what else? -- boxes.


Bergen's Misguided Rush To Rebuild a Railroad
To the Editor:
Bergen County's planning director, Chester P. Mattson, says he wants better rail service ("Getting There  [ and Paying for It ]  in the Year 2000," April 16).
But while we have advocated this goal since 1957, we cannot go along with his department's plans for attaining it.


Sufferers of Severe Anxiety To Receive Free Screening
IT seems the sort of thing a person would be aware of: anxiety so debilitating it stands in the way of daily living.
Yet many who have symptoms -- continual worry, panic attacks, obsessive thoughts, difficulty concentrating and more -- might not realize that they can zero in on the type of anxiety disorder they are suffering and get help, said Dr.
R.
Timothy Kearney, a psychiatrist and director of the Sterling Mental Health Clinic in the Mental Health Association of Westchester County in White Plains.


Problem in Poland
To the Editor: In "Remembering Poland's Jews" (Jan. 29) you refer to Our Roots, a travel agency based in Warsaw.
We had a negative experience with this agency in July and August 1990.
We were required to pay in Warsaw, in advance, and in United States dollars, for accommodations at the Grand Hotel in Crakow.
Upon arrival we discovered that the rate posted in our room was nearly 50 percent lower.
The management of the Grand Hotel told us that the ratehad been lowered nearly a month earlier; we had paid Our Roots only two days earlier in Warsaw.
In addition, the agency had purchased the wrong train tickets, thereby booking and charging for an extra night at the hotel, which was unused since we had to change our tickets in Crakow and leave as planned.


New &amp; Noteworthy Paperbacks
MOSES SUPPOSES By Ellen Currie.
Scribner Paperback, $10.
The characters in the author's first short-story collection come from all walks of life and range in age from 5 to 50-plus; frequently they are Irish-American.
What most have in common is a tendency to carry love to its extremes, no matter how much it hurts.
"Unflinching but tender, cruel and loving as a candid snapshot of a difficult relative, Ms. Currie's stories take us by surprise," Michael Malone said here last year.
COLORED PEOPLE: A Memoir By Henry Louis Gates Jr.
Vintage, $11.
The West Virginia panhandle in the 1950's and 60's is the setting for many of the author's reminiscences.
He reflects on the early days of desegregation, which were as bittersweet as they were welcome: they signaled the demise of beloved black rituals and institutions as well as of exclusionary white ones.
Last year our reviewer, Louis D. Rubin Jr., praised the "rich and often comic detail" to be found among "the considerable pleasures in this splendidly told memoir." A slightly earlier era comes to life in WHEN WE WERE COLORED, by Clifton L. Taulbert (Penguin, $8.95), which re-creates the author's boyhood in Glen Allan, Miss., a small town where separate facilities for whites and blacks were all he knew.
Originally published as "Once Upon a Time When We Were Colored," the book relates the ways in which the members of Mr.
Taulbert's family rose above prejudice by nurturing their love for one another.
"He has evoked such loving memories of Glen Allan and its residents that readers will come away . . . at least a little sorry that they didn't grow up there too," Rosemary L. Bray said in the Book Review in 1990.
A sequel, THE LAST TRAIN NORTH (Penguin, $8.95), chronicles Mr.
Taulbert's move to St.
Louis after his high school graduation in 1963 and the life he found there.
"So much gives pleasure here," one reviewer commented in 1992.
PROFANE FRIENDSHIP By Harold Brodkey.
Mercury House, $14.
This novel examines the relationship between two boys -- one Italian, one American -- growing up in Venice in the 1930's.
It is narrated by the American, now a writer in his 60's, who uses his memories to explore the nature of love.
Last year our reviewer, Michael Wood, said, "I was caught up in Mr. Brodkey's project, compelled by . . . its intelligence and its rhythm."  THE RACE TO FASHODA: Colonialism and African Resistance By David Levering Lewis.
Owl/Holt, $13.95.
The battle for Africa drew in many European powers.
The focus of this history is a fort on the Nile called Fashoda, the site of a memorable showdown between a British commander and a French one in 1898.
Writing in these pages in 1988, William Boyd called the book "elegantly written and thoroughly researched." The same publisher has also restored to print Mr.
Lewis's PRISONERS OF HONOR: The Dreyfus Affair ($12), which details the famous military case that became a study in anti-Semitism.
It is "readable and well-researched popular history," Nicholas Wahl said here in 1973.
WITHOUT A HERO: Stories By T. Coraghessan Boyle.
Penguin, $10.95.
In these tales satire illuminates all the crowded corners of contemporary culture.
Not surprisingly, there are few heroes among the odd aspirants and adventurers.
"The literary performances here retain Mr. Boyle's astonishing and characteristic verve, his unaverted gaze," Lorrie Moore said in the Book Review last year.
NOAH'S GARDEN: Restoring the Ecology of Our Own Back Yards By Sara Stein.
Houghton Mifflin, $10.95.
The author demonstrates what affronts to nature are the standard gardens of suburbia: their manicured lawns and exotic flowers have driven out native flora and fauna to an alarming degree.
Her suggestions for remedy are "persuasive, succinct and entertainingly written," our reviewer, Ian L. McHarg, said in 1993.
Civilization versus the wild is also at issue in THE CITY AND TOWN GARDENER: A Handbook for Planting Small Spaces and Containers, by Linda Yang (Random House, $18).
In this volume, originally published as "The City Gardener's Handbook," Ms.
Yang, who writes a gardening column for The Home Section of The New York Times, explains how to create patches of nature in the most unlikely urban places.
Ann Lovejoy, writing in the Book Review in 1990, said the author "knows her audience's needs inside out."  THE BIRTHDAY BOYS By Beryl Bainbridge.
Carroll &amp; Graf, $9.95.
The men who died on Capt.
Robert Scott's expedition to the South Pole in 1912 were long presumed to have given their lives for King and country.
This novel indicates that the five may have sacrificed themselves through mismanagement and for less lofty ends.
Monologues for each doomed explorer "contain some of the most convincing and slyly revealing first-person narrative I've ever read," Gary Krist said here last year.
"K" IS FOR KILLER By Sue Grafton.
Fawcett Crest, $6.99.
Kinsey Millhone takes a walk on the dark side.
Investigating the death of a young call girl, this private eye is drawn into an examination of both night life and shadowy impulses.
In 1994 our reviewer, Marilyn Stasio, called the book "intriguingly offbeat."  TRY By Dennis Cooper.
Grove, $11.
Two teen-age boys, Ziggy and Calhoun, muddled by drugs and various sorts of deprivation, try to eke out an existence in a bleak world dominated by pornography and abuse.
Their tale is "a love story, all the more poignant because it is so brutally crushed," Catherine Texier said in these pages last year.
LAUREL GRAEBER


INSIDE
MAKING IT WORK 3 The mad dash to stage the complete works of Shakespeare.
NEW YORKERS &amp; CO. 4  The cart pushers of the Garment District dodge traffic and thieves.
MOVIE CLOCK 10  PLAYING IN THE NEIGHBORHOOD 17 A citywide Bird-a-Thon; dinosaur puppets in Flatbush.
GOOD EATING 18 A tour of the West 60's and 70's; the romantic Cafe Des Artistes; the open and airy Chaz &amp; Wilson; the dramatic Shun Lee; the trendy Jerry's Uptown; the inexpensive Taco Madre.
SOAPBOX 19 Being a shopping bag lady for a day (a voyage of discovery); how to talk to the new, more silent breed of New York cabbie.
Plus, letters and Photographer's Journal.


Abstract Nature: A Spectacle in 2 Parts
THE SPECTACLE at the Trans Hudson Gallery here comes in two parts: an overture in the form of six acrylics on paper by Alison Weld and a large display of images on stretched linen and sculptures by Telma Zunz.
Although the first is sprightly and the second an exercise in "gravitas," both shows consist of abstractions that allude to nature -- in Ms.
Weld's case, landscape; in Ms.
Zunz's, skins human and animal.
Ms.
Weld is known for the shows she has had or participated in on both sides of the Hudson, as well as for those by other artists.
She has produced them as assistant curator of fine art at the State Museum and, previously, as director of the Robeson Gallery at Rutgers in Newark.
As a painter, Ms.
Weld has departed from abstract emblems suggesting cages or screens composed of criss-crossing bars; she now produces images with shapes suggesting notes about land, sky and trees.


POSTINGS: Panel to Discuss Large-Scale Retailing; Are Superstores Really Super?
The potential effects of superstore zoning on traditional retail areas and the manufacturing sector are to be discussed Tuesday by planners, real-estate developers, merchants and representatives of communities that have been targeted for such development.
The conference comes in the wake of Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani's recent proposal to allow superstores and other large retailers into areas zoned for light and medium industrial use throughout New York City.


Sloshed and Sudsed The Turkish Way
"YOU'LL feel cleaner than you've ever felt in your life." That's how the Turkish bath (hamam) has been described to me.
So I am now eagerly waiting for Aysun, whom I have just met through my husband's business contacts, to pick me up at my hotel and take me to the Galatasaray Hamami.
She has assured me that it is one of the oldest and best Turkish baths in Istanbul.
My head is filled with notions of what a Turkish bath might be.
I seem to remember conversations from my childhood I wasn't meant to overhear about Turkish baths curing something adult and risque called a hangover.
I have pictures in my head from the same years that feature brilliantly patterned carpets, burnished bronze lamps shaped like candleholders, and men wearing turbans, long robes and slippers with turned-up toes, all encountered in my children's version of the "Arabian Nights." My image of Turkey and Turkish baths owes much to the illustrations in that book.


Some Rightist Shows Pulled, and Debate Erupts
Some radio broadcasters with far-right political views were pulled from the air last week in the aftermath of the Oklahoma City bombing, a development that spawned debate about free expression, censorship and responsible conduct.
On Friday, a shortwave station in Nashville silenced Mark Koernke, the Michigan paramilitary leader who had suggested earlier in the week that the authorities were setting up the jailed bombing suspect, Timothy J. McVeigh, for assassination by parading him in a highly visible orange prison jumpsuit.


6 Years After the Tiananmen Massacre, Survivors Clash Anew on Tactics
Six years after tanks and machine guns silenced their democracy movement, Chinese student leaders who rallied a nation during six weeks of protest at Tiananmen Square in 1989 are at odds with one another over the history of the event.
The production of two new documentary films, both based on extensive reconstructions of the days leading up to the military assault on central Beijing on June 3-4, has resurrected the debate over whether the students should have surrendered the 99-acre square before the crackdown and thus avoided the bloodshed that claimed hundreds of lives.


Jacqueline Payson, Marc Tarasow
Jacqueline Heather Payson, a daughter of Martin and Rhoda Payson of Scarsdale, N.Y., was married last evening to Dr.
Marc Simon Tarasow, the son of Helene Tarasow of Plainview, L.I., and the late Rabbi Morris Tarasow.
Rabbi David Lincoln performed the ceremony at the Park Avenue Synagogue in New York.
Mrs.
Tarasow, 28, is a senior production associate for "Primetime Live," the ABC News program, in New York.
She graduated from George Washington University.
Her father is a senior partner in the New York law firm of Jackson, Lewis, Schnitzler &amp; Krupman.
Her mother is a partner in the Pine Hill Studio, an art consignment and sales company in Scarsdale.


Fulton Market Building: Less Is More and Super Is Better
Shortly after the Fulton Market Building opened at the South Street Seaport in 1983, more than 30 retail shops and restaurants filled the 56,000 square foot building.
Today, only six operations remain, and at least one -- the cavernous Roebling's Bar &amp; Grill -- is expected to leave before Labor Day.
The situation comes a decade after the opening of Pier 17, the retail pavilion just across South Street, which has drawn shoppers from the once-bustling mall at Fulton and Front Streets.


A Market Scores a Success in Newark
As he selected four yellow pears in the Pathmark on Bergen Street in Newark's Central Ward, Henry Heyward, 54, recalled how he had watched the neighborhood wither after the riots and fires of 1967.
He now lives in a different part of town, but often comes here to shop: the selection is as good as in any suburb.
"I usually can find everything I need right here," he said.
"The fish here is really good."


POSTINGS: Another Pharmaceutical Firm Chooses Morris County, N.J.; In Morris Township, a Headquarters for Bayer
The Pittsburgh-based Bayer Corporation, the American arm of Bayer AG in Germany, maker of such products as Alka-Seltzer and Bayer Aspirin, is joining the many pharmaceutical companies that have ventured into Morris County, N.J., in the last decade.
Bayer is creating a 150,000-square-foot American headquarters and research complex in Morris Township, N.J., for its Consumer Care Division.
The project, expected to bring with it at least 250 jobs, is to rise by year's end on 15 acres at the corner of Columbia Turnpike and Whippany Road.


Brook M. Stone, Douglas Wallace
Brook Myra Stone, a daughter of June and Dr.
Leonard Stone of New York, was married yesterday to Douglas Ian Wallace, a son of Barbara and Dr.
David Wallace of Newport Beach, Calif.
Dr.
Charles Elias, a minister in the Universal Life Church, officiated at the Bernard Osher Jewish Community Center in San Rafael, Calif.
Ms.
Stone is keeping her name.
She is a medical social worker at the Kaiser Permanente Medical Center in San Francisco.
She graduated cum laude from Brandeis University and received a master's degree in social work from Smith College.
Her father is an associate clinical professor of medicine at Mount Sinai School of Medicine.
He also has an internal-medicine practice in New York, at which the bride's mother is the office manager.


Expert Review in Singapore Hanging Case Verified Autopsy
To the Editor:
Re William Safire's "Hanging of Flor" (column, April 24):


Rikki Kohn, James Altman
Rikki Kohn, the daughter of Allen and Merle Kohn of Rye Brook, N.Y., was married last evening to James David Altman, a son of Hanna and Dr.
R.
Peter Altman of New York.
Rabbi Aaron Panken officiated at the Westbury Hotel in New York.
The bride and the bridegroom, both 27, graduated from Syracuse University.


And When the Prince Awoke . . . Boy, What a Mess
While You Were Sleeping  Sandra Bullock, Bill Pullman Directed by Jon Turteltaub PG 100 minutes


Seven European Nations Try to Erase Borders
Flying from Munich to Paris?
Or Madrid to Amsterdam?
Then, in theory, you no longer need to go through immigration controls.
Technically, you don't even need your passport for most of the journey.
Since March 26, 7 of the 15 European Union countries have been participating in an exercise in integration, allowing travelers between any of those countries to cross borders on land without stopping to show passports and to use special lines at airports without showing identification, as if they were on domestic flights.


Doors and Seats for Every Taste
FLEXIBILITY has been the mini-van's overriding appeal since Chrysler created the vehicle for the 1984 model year.
Each new generation of mini-van has come with improved ways to carry passengers and cargo, thanks mainly to innovations that allow seats to be easily moved, folded or removed, and door configurations that make entry and exit easier.
All mini-vans have two conventional hinged doors, for the driver and front-seat passenger, and a cargo door at the rear that lifts open.
But it is the side rear doors, offering access to the second and third rows of seats, that make the difference.
Most mini-vans have a single rear door on the right side while a few offer a door on either side.


Symphony of 625


Strip Search of Third Graders Prompts Prosecutor's Inquiry
A strip search of third-grade pupils at a Plainfield, N.J., elementary school after money disappeared from their classroom has prompted an investigation by the Union County Prosecutor's Office, officials said yesterday.
The search, which took place about two weeks ago, came to light this week after parents found out that their children had been talking among themselves about the body searches.
The revelation caused an uproar at Jefferson Elementary School and led to the suspension of the principal, officials said.


The Nation; The Conspiracy That Never Ends
Within days, the bombing had been tightly woven into the sprawling conspiracy theories that have obsessed some Americans since the beginning of the Republic.
The historian Richard Hofstadter coined the phrase "the paranoid style in American politics" to describe this pathological world view in which history is a Manichean struggle between the forces of light and of darkness.
The conspiratorial fantasies are not simply an expression of inchoate fear.
There is a shape, an architecture, to the paranoia.


Reverse Commuting Is Making Some Gains
WHILE the number of commuters from Long Island to New York City has essentially stopped growing, the daily flow of workers to the Island continues to increase.
Economists and planners say the growth of so-called reverse commuting reflects more than the usual cycles of economic activity.
The trend indicates a growing interdependence between the city, where many people seek entry-level jobs, and the suburbs, where such jobs often go begging.


It's Not Quite a Contest for the America's Cup, but . . .
WITH all the zeal of America's Cup contenders, members of Long Island's Model Yacht Clubs race their three- and four-foot crafts by the same rules the International Yacht Racing Association sets for the big boats.
"Since the yachts sail on the same principles of wind power as full-sized boats, it helps to have sailing experience, as many members do, but it isn't required," said Jack Patton, Commodore of the Heckscher Model Yacht Club and past president of the American Model Yachting Association.


One Governor Taps Another To Lead Panel on Vouchers
Former Gov.
Thomas H. Kean, president of Drew University in Madison, has been named chairman of Governor Whitman's advisory committee on school vouchers.
The Governor created the 15-member panel in January after realizing she could not get enough legislative support to pass her voucher program this year.
It is to study the issue for a year and help propose legislation in time for a voucher program to be started in the fall of 1996.


Overseas, Oklahoma City Bombing Is Seen Through Prism of Experience
While the Oklahoma City bombing has thrown the United States into a clamorous debate over what steps will be needed to control domestic terrorism, many in the Old World have been looking on with an experienced and somewhat paternalistic eye, as if to say, "Welcome to the club."
In many Western European countries, domestic terrorism has been a fact of life for decades, whether from the Red Army Faction in Germany, the Irish Republican Army in Britain, Basque separatists in Spain, the Mafia in Italy, Algerians in France or one of the many other groups seeking violent publicity for their causes and grievances.
Cities like Beirut and Belfast have become synonyms for political violence, and many nations, like Israel, have learned to live under constant threat.


Parents Starting School for the Autistic
IT is a scene that would not normally be remarkable.
Brett Schaffran, who will celebrate his sixth birthday next week, sits at a small white wooden table in his room, surrounded by dozens of stuffed animals and toys, and carries on a conversation.
"What's your name?" he is asked.


Is This Bliss, or What?


Road and Tunnels: 8 Trouble Spots to Avoid
A look at trouble spots you may encounter in the next week -- or month, or months.
1. ROUTE 4 Fort Lee. One eastbound lane closed over Interstate 95 until June.


Books From The Times
Every Friday -- almost -- for seven years, David Margolick's column, At the Bar, gave nonlawyers who read The New York Times a continuing education in the law as nonlawyers ought to understand it, recording the culture, esthetics and ethics of that ancient profession and the heroism, depravity, eccentricity and chutzpah of particular lawyers.
AT THE BAR: The Passions and Peccadilloes of American Lawyers (Touchstone/Simon &amp; Schuster, paper, $13) revives 120 of those columns, rich with anecdote and personality.
In it appear lawyers who claim to have been disabled by picking up their briefcases; a lawyer who billed for 50-hour workdays; a judge who persecutes his auditors with outrageous puns and sesquipedalian locutions; a 63-year-old who was named New York's outstanding young lawyer for 1992; and several lawyers of a decency that would be uncommon in any profession who specialize in doing what Mr.
Margolick (himself a lawyer, and now the chief of The Times's San Francisco bureau) calls "God's work." People like these, and stories about them, never go out of date; they are as deathless as the law itself.


An ESOP's Success
To the Editor:
Regarding "Betting the Farm on Company Stock" (April 16), the Reflexite Corporation is one of those employee-owned companies that "analysts worry about, experts fear and professors of labor-management relations ponder."


WHY SPORTS DON'T MATTER ANYMORE
It was 1958, and as a sports cartoonist for The St.
Louis Globe-Democrat, I had just gotten into the Baseball Writers' Association of America ("The Emasculation of Sports," by Robert Lipsyte, April 2).
I could now go into the clubhouse, sit in the dugout and walk onto the field.
Joe Garagiola, who was then a commentator working with Harry Caray, said he would meet me at the old Busch Stadium (Sportsman's Park) and show me around.
The Milwaukee Braves (who'd won the 1957 World Series) were in town to play the Cardinals.


Journal; Connect the Dots
When the full history of home-grown American terrorism in the 1990's is written, the chapter before Oklahoma City will tell of a little-noticed press conference last August in New York.
It was called by Planned Parenthood to showcase a videotape of a meeting held by the Wisconsin branch of the far-right U.S.
Taxpayers Party.
The meeting's speakers included two of the country's most militant anti-abortion leaders, Randall Terry of Operation Rescue and Matthew Trewhella of Missionaries to the Preborn.
But they weren't talking about abortion.
Mr.
Trewhella spoke of training his young child to use guns.
The meeting's attendees were offered a manual titled "Principles Justifying the Arming and Organizing of a Militia" in which the Bible was invoked to justify the formation of "assault teams" to protect the unborn.


STRANGE BUT TRUE: How to Succeed in Golf
The American golf world has finally discovered Moe Norman.
This eccentric, snaggle-toothed Canadian has awed the likes of Lee Trevino and Ben Hogan with an uncanny ability to hit straight, accurate shots.
He's won more than 50 tournaments, set 33 course records and made 18 career holes-in-one, 7 on the fly.
Trevino says Moe could have won any of golf's four major tournaments.
A golf heretic, the 65-year-old Norman holds his club like a sledgehammer, places it a full foot behind the ball and spreads his legs wide enough to straddle a horse.
Ridiculed for his unorthodox swing, Norman was so painfully shy during his Canadian pro career that in Calgary he once hid near a river rather than accept his champion's trophy in public.
No wonder he flopped on the stress-heavy P.G.A.
Tour.


Funds Need Oversight
To the Editor:
Representative Jack Fields asserts that sometimes Congress must "act to stimulate business by removing unnecessary regulations and eliminating barriers to competition" ("Deregulator Has Mutuals in His Sights," Funds Watch, April 16).
Mr.
Fields was not discussing some depressed industry suffering from the ravages of unfair foreign competition, but the mutual fund industry, one of the most booming segments of our economy.
Millions of people are investing in the stock and bond markets through mutual funds for the first time in their lives; this is not the time to loosen the rules on fund advertising of disclosure requirements.


A Good Story
Books on tape, which I borrow from the library, have saved my sanity many a time!
I love mysteries, especially British.


Hems and Haws
IF YOU'VE EVER THROWN OUT A RACK OF skirts because they suddenly looked too short or a collection of ties because they suddenly seemed too wide, you have been, depending on your attitude about shopping, either a beneficiary or victim of fashion.
If you have wondered about the source of those periodic changes of taste, you also qualify as a student of fashion.
Responding to these urges, hundreds of journals and newspapers deem it their duty to instruct you in the vagaries of dress and the musings of designers; indeed, some exist mainly to harvest the advertisements that flourish in such manuals.
But they rarely teach you what is really going on.
The best of the fashion magazines, like Vogue and Harper's Bazaar, satisfy a lust for fantasy, the imaginary try-on of clothes you couldn't afford, fit into or dare to wear.
The better newspapers report colorfully on the semiannual runway romps in Paris, Milan and New York.
That is where the most famous designers advertise themselves by draping unnaturally thin, beautiful women in outrageous or sumptuous ways and exhort the public with novelties of style that might stimulate the sale of mass-produced imitations.


OUR PARENTS' KEEPERS
It is not surprising that you received a lot of letters about Mary Gordon's memoir of her mother's aging (Letters, April 9).
The ones you published were not from those of us in our 80's who know what may lie ahead and whose children are beginning to have old-age symptoms.
We just feel we must keep going.
There is no other answer.
MARY ALICE HOVEY Riverhead, L.I.


IN SHORT: FICTION
SELECTED POETRY, 1937-1990 By Joao Cabral de Melo Neto.
Wesleyan University/University Press of New England, $25.


Rebels Step Up Conflict in Sri Lanka
The shooting down of two planes carrying troops in less than 24 hours by Tamil rebels appeared today to have presented the Sri Lankan Government with its gravest crisis since it took office eight months ago on a pledge to seek peace in the country's long-running civil war.
More than 80 soldiers died in the two crashes, which involved military aircraft approaching the Palali air base on the Jaffna Peninsula, the rebels' northern stronghold.


Cuban Refugees Looking for Doors to U.S.
In the Cuban refugee camps on this United States naval base, a $35 million construction project is expected to transform living conditions by summer.
That, American military commanders believe, is when the likelihood of disturbances here will be greatest, because of rising temperatures and a dwindling population of women and children, an exodus that will leave the camps occupied mostly by single men.
Already, chain-link fences have replaced barbed wire around some of the camps, which the troops now refer to as "villages." Plans call for electricity inside the tents, recreation centers with cable television, a store where the refugees will be able to buy personal items, and permanent indoor latrines that will replace the camps' portable toilets.


A World of Options if Shareholders Get Pesky
SAY you're a utility that has slashed its dividend and watched its stock meander, but still keeps raising its chief executive's pay.
What better way to hold shareholders at bay than to ask the legislature to limit their voice on executive pay and other touchy issues?


Sherrie E. Brown, Paul Jay Feiner
Sherrie Elaine Brown, a principal in the law office of Lowey Dannenbert Bemporad &amp; Selinger in New York, was married yesterday to Paul Jay Feiner, the Supervisor of the Town of Greenburgh, N.Y.
Rabbi Amy Ehrlich performed the ceremony at the Tarrytown House in Tarrytown, N.Y.
Ms.
Brown is keeping her name.
She graduated summa cum laude from the State University at Buffalo and received her law degree from the University of Pennsylvania.
She and her husband were elected to Phi Beta Kappa.
She is the daughter of Millie and Philip Brown of Boynton Beach, Fla.


The Dark Defile
EDMUND WILSON A Biography.
By Jeffrey Meyers.
Illustrated. 554 pp.
Boston: A Peter Davison Book/Houghton Mifflin Company. $35.


Donations to Help the Bombing Victims
The following organizations are accepting donations for victims of the Oklahoma City bombing:
The B'nai B'rith Disaster Relief Fund, 1640 Rhode Island Ave.
N.W., Washington, D.C. 20036.
Specify for Oklahoma City Bombing. (202) 857-6600.


For Just a Dollar at Shea, Met Fans Get Lots of Relief
Dallas Green is a little worried about his bullpen.
Not about the runs the relievers have yielded, even though there have been more than a few and many have been costly.
Green is worried about the quantity of the innings.
"We've been in a couple extra innings and four barn burners," said Green.
"We've been stretched out like crazy."


Doing Battle, Once Again, Against Base Closings
FOR months, groups from two Connecticut coastal communities, with help from state agencies and the state's Congressional delegation, have been mapping strategies to save thousands of military contract jobs threatened by the 1995 base closure process.
This week, those strategies will be put to the test.
At a Defense Base Closure and Realignment Commission hearing on Friday aboard the aircraft carrier Intrepid in New York City, officials from New London and Stratford will argue against the Pentagon's recommendations for military installations in those towns.


Agents in Kansas Hunt for Bomb Factory As Sense of Frustration Begins to Build
Federal investigators are combing central Kansas, hunting for a secret bomb factory, the place where they believe the Oklahoma City bombers mixed, assembled and loaded an estimated 20 barrels of "ANFO" explosives into the 24-foot, bright yellow Ryder rental truck used in the blast.
Finding the place where the bomb was built would yield fresh clues about who built it and when, and possibly about how many people were involved.
So far, the search has proved fruitless.
But as one law-enforcement agent said today, "They had to build it someplace, and somebody had to see a big yellow truck."


April 23-29; E-Mail
The Week in Review's electronic mail address is review@nytimes.com.


Walking the Byways of Segovia
OF all the hotels in the old hill city of Segovia, the Hotel Victoria is most rife with atmosphere.
It is situated under the shadow of the cathedral on the little Plaza Mayor, the main square, occupying some mysterious part of the old Town Hall, a fine ramshackle building with a working clock that was built -- I was astonished to learn -- in 1615.
There are thriving bars beneath its colonnades, with tables on the pavement; and beyond the wrought-iron bandstand across the square lies the mouth of the Calle Real, Segovia's main street, where Segovians come to stroll in the cool of the evening.
The fact is the Hotel Victoria is up for sale.
Its gate is padlocked and its curtains drawn, and it is only nostalgia that steps out from under the curling tin sign above the doorway, suggesting the barouche at the door, the grandees upstairs and Carlist radicals in the restaurant.
The local real estate agency would be delighted to sell it to you, with all its ghostly good will, for about $1.5 million.
It is cheap.


Along Times Sq., Signs of New Life Abound
FUSED together in legend and on the map, Times Square and 42d Street are still a world apart economically.
Along the bow tie-shaped intersection of Broadway and Seventh Avenue, indications abound of fresh vitality: new leases, new construction, new supersigns.
There is evidence, too, in the demolition and construction that are actually under way, that the renascence of 42d Street between Seventh and Eighth Avenues may be at hand.


Wedded Hiss


PHOTOGRAPHER'S JOURNAL


A Women's Clinic, Minus Obstetrics
Next month, Maimonides Medical Center will open a satellite clinic in Bay Ridge exclusively to handle women's health issues.
But in contrast to traditional definitions of women's health, the clinic will not offer any obstetrical services, instead focusing on general wellness.
The clinic, Brooklyn Women's Services, at 9201 Fourth Avenue, will be staffed by seven full-time doctors and is intended to handle all outpatient services.
"This is important because of the way it brings total women's health care under one roof," said Richard Grazzi, the clinic's medical director.
"It's going to be one-stop shopping where women will be able to have other health care needs taken care of."


Historical Society's Cost of Living
It has come to this: the New-York Historical Society, so starved for cash that its future is in question, has begun renting out its landmark neo-classical building on Central Park West at 77th Street for weddings, at $5,000 a pop.
The society has also started selling posters at West Side street fairs, pulling in a few hundred dollars a year.
And in a move that sparked some criticism, it sold its collection of European Masters, its paperweights and duplicates of some American paintings at auction, garnering $16 million.


Tamar Yoseloff, Andrew Lindesay
Tamar Rachel Yoseloff, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas Yoseloff of Colts Neck, N.J., was married yesterday to Andrew Hamilton Lindesay, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Edward Lindesay of Dalbeattie, Kirkcudbrightshire, Scotland.
The Rev.
Peter Elvy, a minister of the Church of England, performed the ceremony at Chelsea Old Church in Cheyne Walk, London.
Mrs.
Lindesay, 29, is the managing director of Golden Cockerel Press in London and a poet.
She graduated from Sarah Lawrence College.
Her father is the chairman of Associated University Presses, a trade association in Cranberry, N.J.
Her mother, Lauretta Yoseloff, retired as a book designer in New York.


Like Byron's Manfred, A Master Gazes Back From Lonely Heights
ROBERT SCHUMANN IS NOT a name to set the pulse of the average violin soloist racing.
Schumann left three violin sonatas and two movements of another; a Fantasy for Violin and Orchestra, and a late Violin Concerto that his musical executors, including Clara Schumann and Johannes Brahms, tried to suppress as unworthy.
Brahms: now there's a name to warm a fiddler's heart.
Gidon Kremer, on the other hand, is not the average violin soloist.
A pre-eminent virtuoso, he plays the predictable Brahms, Tchaikovsky and Sibelius.
But he is first and foremost a thoughtful musician, and he devotes most of his energy to lesser-known repertory, past and present.
That friendless Schumann concerto, for instance: last summer, Mr.
Kremer recorded it for the second time in 12 years.
And sitting in the dining room of a borrowed, secluded house here, on his most recent pass through the United States, he discussed it avidly.


Letting There Be Light
"These things weigh a ton!" groaned Steve Accatino, struggling to position a new lamppost gently on the sidewalk as a crane lifted it from the truck bed.
Like many nights and weekends over the past year, Mr.
Accatino and his crew of electricians were there, on overtime, to install the new Bishop's-crook lights that replace the old cobra-head lamps.


A New York Story: The Mugging That Wasn't
THE mugger struck at 10:30 in the morning.
Ilana Reich, who recounted this story, first in a letter, then in person, is a psychotherapist specializing in the treatment of post-traumatic stress, particularly in the victims of accidents and crimes.
On a Friday two months ago, a day off, Ms.
Reich was walking briskly along West 15th Street from Sixth toward Fifth Avenue, a gym bag in one hand, a shopping bag filled with heavy photographic equipment in the other.
Her pocketbook strap was looped over her shoulder, her elbow securing its bulk to her side.
She remembers hearing thumping footsteps behind her, half-turning, then dismissing as no threat the man behind her.
After all, it was 10:30 in the morning.


Brook M. Stone, Douglas Wallace
Brook Myra Stone, a daughter of June and Dr.
Leonard Stone of New York, was married yesterday to Douglas Ian Wallace, a son of Barbara and Dr.
David Wallace of Newport Beach, Calif.
Dr.
Charles Elias, a minister in the Universal Life Church, officiated at the Bernard Osher Jewish Community Center in San Rafael, Calif.
Ms.
Stone is keeping her name.
She is a medical social worker at the Kaiser Permanente Medical Center in San Francisco.
She graduated cum laude from Brandeis University and received a master's degree in social work from Smith College.
Her father is an associate clinical professor of medicine at Mount Sinai School of Medicine.
He also has an internal-medicine practice in New York, at which the bride's mother is the office manager.


Allison Robbins, James J. Jennewein
Allison Robbins, a daughter of Norman Robbins of Woodbridge, N.J., and the late Sylvia Robbins, is to be married today in New York to James Joseph Jennewein, a son of Thelma and James Jennewein Sr. of St.
Louis.
Rabbi Marcia Rappaport is to perform the ceremony at the Mark Hotel.
The bride, who is keeping her name, is the executive story editor of the television series "Melrose Place," in Los Angeles.
She graduated from Fairleigh Dickinson University and from Rutgers University.
Her father is a lawyer in Woodbridge.


District of Columbia Special Election Will Test Influence of Marion Barry
When Marion S. Barry Jr. was elected Mayor of the District of Columbia last November, vacating a seat on the City Council, he won more than 91 percent of the votes in the ward he represented.
But that level of confidence faces a stern test in a special election on Tuesday when voters in the ward choose a successor to complete Mr.
Barry's four-term council term from among 21 candidates.
The Mayor is a strong supporter of one of the candidates, Eydie D. Whittington.


Corrections
An article on April 16 about bias crimes misspelled the name of the chairman of the Suffolk County Human Rights Commission, who said complaints to his office had dramatically increased.
He is Rabbi Steven Moss, not Stephen Morse.


Increasingly, Extremism Is Heavily Armed
The explosion evoked images of Beirut, not Oklahoma, but people who have spent years monitoring extremism in the United States say that what happened in Oklahoma City on April 19 differs only in magnitude, not in kind, from a steady, nationwide drumbeat of right-wing violence that has been building for more than a decade.
Indeed, if few experts expected quite so cataclysmic an event, many people who follow groups on the far right say the Oklahoma City bombing had so many antecedents as to appear, in retrospect, almost inevitable.


Don't Credit Gorbachev For Poland's Liberation
To the Editor:
The April 23 Coping column, "From Polish Vets to Punk," states: "in 1989, Gorbachev freed Poland."
Gorbachev did not free Poland.
It regained its freedom thanks to the efforts of the 10 million members of the trade union movement Solidarity.
STEVE KRAUS  Manhattan


MARKET TIMING
Monday  Most U.S. auto makers report sales of cars and light trucks for April.
The Commerce Department reports personal income and spending for March.
The House of Representatives returns from a three-week recess.
Brooklyn Union Gas, Reliance Group, Tyson Foods and Wendy's report quarterly earnings.
Tuesday  First day of a White House Conference on Aging.
Figures are released on new-home sales for March.
Earnings reports due from Burlington Industries, Cigna, Pepsico and Value Health.
Wednesday  Ford releases its U.S. car and truck sales for April.
Hambrecht &amp; Quist Technology Conference in San Francisco.
House hearings on the proposed privatization of government-sponsored enterprises like the Student Loan Marketing Association.
March leading economic indicators and factory orders released in Washington.
House hearing on legislation that would merge the S.E.C. and the Commodity Futures Trading Commission.
Energy Department issues its weekly report on U.S. petroleum stocks.
Centocor, CNA Financial, Duff &amp; Phelps, and Ply-Gem report earnings.
Thursday  A House Banking subcommittee holds a hearing on proposals to create a dollar coin.
The Labor Department reports on weekly unemployment insurance claims.
Earnings due out form Browning Ferris and United Healthcare.
Friday  Report on the nation's employment picture in April.
The Federal Reserve reports consumer credit figures for March.


Social Calendar, A Sign of Spring, Is All Abloom
Wildlife, the city's parks, social service groups and scholars from around the world were among the beneficiaries of galas around the city last week.


BEST SELLERS: April 30, 1995
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
1
THE RAINMAKER, by John Grisham. (Doubleday, $25.95.) A young man barely out of law school tries to expose a corporation's multibillion-dollar scam.
2
1
61
THE CELESTINE PROPHECY, by James Redfield. (Warner, $17.95.) An ancient manuscript, found in Peru, provides insights into achieving a fulfilling life.
3
2
45
POLITICALLY CORRECT BEDTIME STORIES, by James Finn Garner. (Macmillan, $8.95.) Classic tales respun to avoid offending current sensibilities.
4
3
10
BORDER MUSIC, by Robert James Waller. (Warner, $17.95.) A Texas rancher, trying to erase his Vietnam trauma, takes to the road with an exotic dancer.
5
1
LADDER OF YEARS, by Anne Tyler. (Knopf, $24.) At 40, a woman leaves her physician-husband and children to start a new life in a strange town.
6
1
CHILDREN OF THE JEDI, by Barbara Hambly. (Spectra/Bantam, $21.95.) The "Star Wars" New Republic sends a mission to find long-lost people in a distant, frozen world.
7
5
4
A DOG'S LIFE, by Peter Mayle. (Knopf, $20.) The memoirs of Boy, a shaggy canine in Provence; with drawings by Edward Koren.
8
6
4
MOO, by Jane Smiley. (Knopf, $24.) Intrigues and machinations on the campus of a Midwestern state university.
9
4
7
OUR GAME, by John le Carre. (Knopf, $24.) Espionage, larceny and murder in Eastern and Western Europe in the post-cold-war era.
10
8
142
THE BRIDGES OF MADISON COUNTY, by Robert James Waller. (Warner, $16.95.) A photographer and a farmer's lonely wife in Iowa.
11
7
8
THE GLASS LAKE, by Maeve Binchy. (Delacorte, $23.95.) The unspoken ties that bind a woman and her mother in a small Irish town.
12
13
6
PHENOMENAL WOMAN, by Maya Angelou. (Random House, $10.) Four poems celebrating women.
13
1
THE COMMODORE, by Patrick O'Brian. (Norton, $22.50.) The fortunes of a British captain and his ship's doctor, at sea and at home, in the Napoleonic Wars.
14*
11
28
MUTANT MESSAGE DOWN UNDER, by Marlo Morgan. (HarperCollins, $18.) In Australia's outback, an American woman learns about aboriginal philosophy.
15*
12
11
DAISY-HEAD MAYZIE, by Dr.
Seuss. (Random House, $15.) In words and pictures, the story of a girl whose head unexpectedly sprouts a daisy.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Nonfiction
1
1
IN RETROSPECT, by Robert S. McNamara with Brian VanDeMark. (Times Books/Random House, $27.50.) The Secretary of Defense under Kennedy and Johnson ruefully recalls his role in the Vietnam War.
2
1
29
THE HOT ZONE, by Richard Preston. (Random House, $23.) The discovery of a lethal virus.
3
6
2
QUIVERS, by Robin Quivers. (Regan Books/HarperCollins, $22.) The memoirs of Howard Stern's sidekick.
4
2
11
THE DEATH OF COMMON SENSE, by Philip K. Howard. (Random House, $18.) How governmental rules and regulations are fettering the lives of all Americans.
5
3
7
BREAKING THE SURFACE, by Greg Louganis with Eric Marcus. (Random House, $23.) The memoirs of the former Olympic diving champion.
6
4
18
SISTERS, by Carol Saline.
Photographs by Sharon J. Wohlmuth. (Running Press, $27.50.) The relationships of 36 sets of sisters, reported in words and pictures.
7
5
60
MIDNIGHT IN THE GARDEN OF GOOD AND EVIL, by John Berendt. (Random House, $23.) The mysterious death of a young man in Savannah, Ga.
8
7
5
THE DIARY OF A YOUNG GIRL, by Anne Frank.
Edited by Otto H. Frank and Mirjam Pressler. (Doubleday, $25.) The "definitive edition."
9
8
34
COUPLEHOOD, by Paul Reiser. (Bantam, $19.95.) Essays on the ups and downs of marriage.
10
12
2
FROM BEGINNING TO END, by Robert Fulghum. (Villard, $20.) The rituals we practice and the spiritual journeys we take, from childhood to old age.
11
9
7
AN ANTHROPOLOGIST ON MARS, by Oliver Sacks. (Knopf, $24.) Seven tales about people with neurological afflictions.
12
11
71
THE BOOK OF VIRTUES, by William J. Bennett. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $30.) Moral stories adapted from the Greeks, the Bible, folklore and elsewhere.
13
1
LIZ, by C. David Heymann. (Birch Lane/Carol, $24.95.) A biography of Elizabeth Taylor.
14
1
MODEL, by Michael Gross. (Morrow, $25.) The growth of modeling from a small business to a huge industry.
15*
10
10
THE DISCIPLINE OF MARKET LEADERS, by Michael Treacy and Fred Wiersema. (Addison-Wesley, $25.) A discussion of competitive business strategies.
16*
13
7
BEING DIGITAL, by Nicholas Negroponte. (Knopf, $23.) How computers will alter our lives in the future.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous
1
2
3
MARS AND VENUS IN THE BEDROOM, by John Gray. (HarperCollins, $22.) Ways to maintain a long-term, passionate monogamous relationship.
2
1
101
MEN ARE FROM MARS, WOMEN ARE FROM VENUS, by John Gray. (HarperCollins, $23.) Communicating.
3
3
11
THE BEARDSTOWN LADIES' COMMON-SENSE INVESTMENT GUIDE. (Godin/Hyperion, $19.95.) Tips.
4
4
6
THE SEVEN SPIRITUAL LAWS OF SUCCESS, by Deepak Chopra. (Amber-Allen/New World Library, $12.95.) How to "generate wealth in all its forms."
Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending April 15, at 3,050 bookstores plus wholesalers serving 28,000 other retailers (gift shops, department stores, newsstands, supermarkets), statistically weighted to represent sales in all such outlets nationwide.
An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
EXCELLENT CADAVERS: The Mafia and the Death of the First Italian Republic, by Alexander Stille. (Pantheon, $27.50.) This fascinating and horrifying examination, based on immense piles of documents, shows how in the last 25 years the Mafia has terrorized Sicilian society and perverted Italian politics.
GENIUS IN DISGUISE: Harold Ross of The New Yorker, by Thomas Kunkel. (Random House, $25.) This first full-scale biography of the creator of The New Yorker tries to account for the formidable editorial instincts, integrity and self-knowledge that underlay his success.
THE INFORMATION, by Martin Amis. (Harmony, $24.) Mr.
Amis's cool and brilliant novel is sustained throughout by the corroding, corrupting envy of an unsuccessful novelist for a successful novelist who is also his best friend.
KATHARINE HEPBURN, by Barbara Leaming. (Crown, $27.50.) An experienced film biographer's penetrating look behind the career into the family and social forces that formed one of the most charismatic of actresses.
THE LOVES OF FAUSTYNA, by Nina FitzPatrick. (Penguin, paper, $9.95.) At a sign from heaven, the Polish heroine of this frolicky picaresque novel abandons her virginity; when martial law arrives in 1981, she opens serious negotiations with the powers of political darkness.
MEMOIR FROM ANTPROOF CASE, by Mark Helprin. (Harcourt Brace, $24.) The slowly unfolding self-revelation of Oscar Progresso, the thoughtful, aged eccentric who narrates this novel while planning a fantastical crime.
A MOMENT ON THE EARTH: The Coming Age of Environmental Optimism, by Gregg Easterbrook. (Viking, $27.95.) Essays on the most complex of modern subjects, treating our considerable environmental accomplishments and our puzzling neglect of threats (diseases, for instance) in other people's backyards.
NANO.
The Emerging Science of Nanotechnology: Remaking the World -- Molecule by Molecule, by Ed Regis. (Little, Brown, $23.95.) Crisp science journalism about a possible world of endless bounty, produced by incredibly tiny machines.
NOAH'S CHOICE: The Future of Endangered Species, by Charles C. Mann and Mark L. Plummer. (Knopf, $24.) The authors persuasively contend that humans will decide, by default or by intention, who goes extinct, and at present have not a clue how to do so wisely.
THE TRIAL OF ELIZABETH CREE: A Novel of the Limehouse Murders, by Peter Ackroyd. (Nan A. Talese/Doubleday, $22.) A claustrophobic, agitated novel of London in 1880; everyone (including a clutch of famous contemporary reformers) is connected to everyone else.
A VOID, by Georges Perec. (Harvill/HarperCollins, $24.) The letter E never occurs in this 1969 French novel or in its translation by Gilbert Adair; what does occur is a wild feast of puzzles, mind games and broken rules.


TEEN-AGE INFIDELS HANGING OUT
In a boxy brick house in north Teheran, Yousef Sayed wakes to the sound of his father's morning prayers: "Praise be to God, lord of the creation, the compassionate, the merciful. . . ." Yousef rolls out of bed and groans.
In the pale dawn light, a stern face glares down from the bedroom wall.
It's a poster of Axl Rose.
Yousef turned 16 this year, and so did Iran's Islamic revolution.
Dressing for school, Yousef picks out blue jeans and a pair of his father's baggy trousers.
His high school bans blue jeans as too Western.
Yousef wears them anyway, underneath his father's slacks.
That way, he can strip down to jeans for the walk home and look cool when he passes the girls' high school.


Classically Neat
After decades of fashion high jinks, classic style has moved back onto center stage.
The wearers have the look of security and neatness that is a signature of traditional sportswear.
Staples are twin sweater sets, which were famous in the 50's (left and above), and tailored tweed jackets with matching caps (above left).
A cashmere sweater can be tied around the shoulders of a sleek beige pants suit (above) or over the shoulders of a spring duster coat (large photo at left).


In the Region/Connecticut; Swiss Bank Beefs Up the Stamford Office Outlook
LAST year, 1.3 million square feet of office space was leased in this business hub of Connecticut, bringing the vacancy rate under 20 percent for the first time in this decade.
And now the city anticpates the construction of Swiss Bank's huge North American headquarters in a prime downtown location.
Nevertheless, the first quarter of 1995 saw more space vacated than rented and jobs have been lost because of corporate consolidations.


Same Land, Same Geography, New Look
HOW easy it is to relax and plant the garden the same way it was done last year: In the two window boxes out front are red geraniums, draped with white sweet alyssum and some ivy to trail.
By the driveway is a wide border of marigolds.
In between the house and walk is a border of hostas and the tomato plants are set in a sunny patch along with the herbs by the kitchen door.
Fine.
This kind of arrangement is always a success and demands little effort, imaginative or otherwise.
The spring trip to the garden center is also easy -- just the same things brought home last year.


Karen Tenenbaum, Daniel Chilewich
Karen Jill Tenenbaum, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Stephen Tenenbaum of Beverly Hills, Calif., was married last evening to Daniel Seth Chilewich, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Melvin Chilewich of Edison, N.J.
Rabbi Melvin N. Sirner performed the ceremony at the Rye Town Hilton Hotel in Rye Brook, N.Y.
Mrs.
Chilewich, 26, graduated from George Washington University.
She is an associate buyer in the network department of Ammirati &amp; Puris/Lintas, an advertising agency in New York.
Her father is a partner in Morra, Brezner, Steinberg &amp; Tenenbaum, an entertainment management firm in Los Angeles.


Sarah E. Kurtin, Jason R. Levy
Sarah Ellen Kurtin, the daughter of Sondra Kurtin Robinson and Dr.
Stephen Brill Kurtin, both of New York, was married last evening to Jason Redfield Levy, a son of Janice and S. Dean Levy of New York.
Cantor Richard Botton performed the ceremony at the Essex House in New York.
The bride, 25, is keeping her name.
She graduated from Washington University in St.
Louis, as did the bridegroom.
She is an account executive at Lowe &amp; Partners/SMS, an advertising agency in New York.
Her father is a dermatologist in New York and an assistant clinical professor of dermatology at Mount Sinai Medical Center.


Police Officer Is Investigated In Death of Man in Hospital
Police officials said yesterday that they were investigating whether an officer acted properly when he held a dying man at gunpoint in the emergency room at Harlem Hospital Center.
"Right now, we're just looking into whether he followed procedures," said Officer Jackie Jacknow, a Police Department spokeswoman.
She said the officer, John Callanan of the Street Crime Unit, had not been suspended or put on desk duty.


Developing Nations Softening Stand on Nuclear Treaty
Halfway into a monthlong conference called to review a treaty barring the spread of nuclear weapons, leading developing nations have failed to agree on a common strategy for seeking faster disarmament and other concessions by the nuclear powers.
The 111-member Nonaligned Movement, made up mostly of developing nations, had been expected to press here for a secret ballot on the future of the 25-year-old Treaty on the Nonproliferation of Nuclear Weapons, something that the industrial nations strongly oppose.


Rhubarb and Savory Partners
ROSY stalks of fresh rhubarb arrive in the market to coincide with the peak of the season for California strawberries.
They remain on hand when the locally grown strawberry crop is ready.
The popular strawberry-rhubarb pie is the inevitable result.
But forgetting strawberries, there are a number of other partners for rhubarb -- pineapple, for example -- to say nothing of other uses besides pie.


Elizabeth Levin, Bruce E. Wolfe
Elizabeth Ann Levin, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Robert Levin of Fairfield, Conn., was married last evening to Bruce Elliot Wolfe, a son of Betty Wolfe of Needham, Mass., and Milton Wolfe of Fort Lauderdale, Fla.
Rabbi Arnold I. Sher officiated at the Birchwood Country Club in Westport, Conn.
Ms.
Levin, 35, is keeping her name.
She is a director of recruitment and placement at Sony Music Entertainment Inc. in New York.
She graduated from Bowdoin College and received a master's degree in education from Columbia University.


Italian Family Style in a Quiet Setting
THE stream of family-style Italian restaurants that flooded the Island a few years ago is now a mere trickle.
Diners attracted by large portions, low prices and a friendly atmosphere often found mediocre food indifferently served in frenetic surroundings.
Veranda II in Massapequa Park is one of a handful of welcome exceptions.
The newly opened restaurant is the kid brother of the upscale, elegant Veranda in Glen Cove.
Its lineage shows.
Some waiters worked at the North Shore spot.
The servers have been taught not to plunk dishes on the table and run.
Instead, they majestically portion offerings at tableside.
The only service glitch was caused by an inexperienced busboy who needed a nudge when water glasses were empty.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
BLOWN SIDEWAYS THROUGH LIFE By Claudia Shear. Dial, $15.95.


Face to Face With a Life of Creation
EVEN FOR THE SHORT FLIGHT TO Stockholm from his home on the island of Faro, Ingmar Bergman confesses to swallowing tranquilizers.
So it is hardly surprising that he will not be in New York for the four-month Bergman Festival that opens on Friday and celebrates his extraordinary life's work as a movie, television and stage director and as a writer.
"I hate to travel," he said.
"I don't go anywhere."
Of course, as might be expected of the enigmatic Swedish artist, it is not quite that simple.
Traveling also disturbs the ordered and introspective life he now leads.
Even the "demons" he tried to exorcise in many of his films seem under control.
"They know they can reach me in the early morning and, if I stay in bed, they invade me from all sides," he said with a laugh.
"But I cheat them because I get up. And they hate fresh air. I walk quickly in all sorts of weather -- and they hate that."


Nancy Assuncao, Michael Sanchez
Nancy Amaro Assuncao, the owner of a New York public relations agency, was married yesterday to Michael Andrew Sanchez, the chairman and chief executive of Sanchez Computer Associates, banking software designers and manufacturers in Malvern, Pa.
Justice Albert Tomei of State Supreme Court in Brooklyn officiated at the Royalton Hotel in Manhattan.
The bride, 39, graduated from the University of Miami.
She is a daughter of Manuel and Maria Assuncao of Colonia, N.J.
The bride's father, now retired, owned Assuncao Brothers Inc., a former concrete construction firm in Colonia.


Again, Fresh Air
When Alanah Wade, 8, returned to the Bronx from two weeks in rural Pennsylvania, she was bubbling with smiles and stories.
She can't wait to go back.
The fund's annual campaign to help children like Alanah begins today.
Article, page 41.


Avoiding 'Animal House'
THERE are squirrels in the attic, ants on the floor, and a raccoon climbing up the downspout.
Aahhh, yes . . . it must be spring.


Twyla Tharp at Midlife Is Already Looking Beyond It
IT SEEMED PREMATURE FOR TWYLA Tharp, a young-looking 53-year-old radiating moppetlike chic and boundless vitality, to be talking about what she called "the beginning of the last chapter" in her choreographic career.
Yet in midlife she has significantly shifted her thinking about dance.
For the past three decades, most of her works have been about dance itself; now these formal essays are veering toward metaphysics about life and death, even life after death.
And to explore these new, startling metaphors for cosmic harmony, she is trying, more than ever before, to fuse disparate styles of dance.


Sports of The Times: Baseball; Sub Umps: Unknown And Unacceptable
IT'S the baseball umpires' first commandment: If you don't know who they are, they must be doing a good job.
But baseball is breaking that commandment now.
Just because nobody knows who these replacement umpires are, that doesn't mean they're doing a good job.


Campus Season Winding Down
CAMPUS concerts are almost over for the spring semester, but several attractions are still available.
Today at 3, the pianist Gary Steigerwalt closes out the Faculty Recital Series at the Hartt School with a free recital in Millard Auditorium in West Hartford; an hour later, the Camerata Ensemble ends its season on the Kingswood-Oxford campus in West Hartford, the program listing trios of Mozart and Persichetti, plus the A major Piano Quintet of Dvorak.
Tomorrow evening at 7:30, Harkness Chapel is the site for "A Festival of Psalms," with Paul Althouse conducting the College Chamber Choir.
The program lists two major works -- Stravinsky's "Symphony of Psalms" and Bernstein's "Chichester Psalms" -- along with shorter pieces by Monteverdi, Schutz and Randall Thompson.
The choral concert is free; the master class has an admission charge of $25; for details, call 439-2720.


In a Rifle's Flash, a Lasting Icon of a Nation's Pain
A STUDENT NAMED JEFFREY Miller lies dead on the ground, but the picture is about a girl screaming, and the sight of that silent cry still makes something inside clench up like a fist.
Photographs are the swiftest keys to memory; they unlock events and eras and feelings in the blink of an eye.
The Vietnam War is tied up in a handful of corrosive pictures: Malcolm Browne's photograph of a Buddhist monk calmly immolating himself to protest his Government's policies, Eddie Adams's picture of the South Vietnamese chief of national police blowing out the brains of a Vietcong suspect on a Saigon street, Ron Haeberle's pictures of the My Lai massacre, Nick Ut's image of a little girl so badly burned by napalm she has ripped off all her clothes and is running straight toward us.
In John Filo's photograph of a girl screaming about death on an Ohio campus, taken 25 years ago on May 4, the war came home.


UNCLE BOB
Ruth Shalit's article "Uncle Bob" (March 5), on Senator Robert Dole, referred to "Newt Gingrich's Progress and Freedom Foundation." Although the foundation is proud of its association with Gingrich, he is not and never has been a board member, officer or employee.
The Progress and Freedom Foundation is Gingrich's in the same way that Harvard University is Alan Dershowitz's -- he teaches there, but does not own or control it.
GEORGE A. KEYWORTH Chairman The Progress and Freedom Foundation Washington


Susan Villanueva, C. B. Hayward
Asuncion Marissa Villanueva and Christopher Bryan Hayward, vice presidents of Bankers Trust Company in New York, were married yesterday at the Corolla Chapel in Corolla, N.C.
The Rev.
Alfredo Balinong performed the Roman Catholic ceremony.
The bride, 31, is known as Susan.
She graduated from the University of the Philippines in Quezon City, and she and her husband received M.B.A.'s from the University of Chicago.
She is a daughter of Regina and Victoriano Villanueva of Quezon City.
Her father owns and manages coffee plantations in Cavite, the Philippines.
Her mother owns and manages real estate in Manila.


The World; In the Dock: Balkan Nationalism
IN September 1992, near the eastern Bosnian town of Gorazde, I came upon the corpses of five Serbian civilians who had been killed in an ambush by Muslim-led Bosnian Government forces.
The bodies had been sprawled on the road long enough to fill the late-summer air with an overwhelming putrescence.


Santa Fe Celebrates The Performing Arts
Santa Fe Stages, a new international festival celebrating theater and dance, will open in June at the College of Santa Fe.
The festival's inaugural season, from June 2 to July 30, will offer 10 productions.
The schedule will include Peter Brook's "La Tragedie de Carmen" (July 2 to July 30) with the mezzo-soprano Suzanna Guzman, in repertory with "The Illusion," a comic play adapted from Corneille by Tony Kushner.
The premiere, on June 2, will be "Promised Land," an imagistic collaboration between Montreal's Les deux mondes and Turin's Teatro dell'Angolo that will run through June 4.


England's Gladdest Hand
REMEMBERING MY GOOD FRIENDS An Autobiography.
By George Weidenfeld.
Illustrated. 483 pp.
New York:  HarperCollins Publishers. $30.


A 4-Day Hike Around the Coast Of Cornwall
IN a country as long-inhabited as Britain there are still many places where a visitor can sustain an idea of wilderness.
The coast of Cornwall is one.
In spring, before schools have let out and before the tourists have emerged, one may walk along great stretches of the Cornish coast and meet nobody else at all.
Elbowing the Atlantic from England's southwest, Cornwall is an ancient, isolated place of weathered granite cliffs plunging straight into the sea, of green headland and hard-scrabble farms, and of a stubbornly Celtic culture.
Bronze Age fortifications, standing stones and burial mounds abound, particularly in the far western peninsular called Penwith.
In Cornish penwyth translates roughly as outermost headland.


Perez Wins To Keep Yankees Unbeaten
For the Yankees to have the kind of success they're looking for this season not only must their premier starters, Jimmy Key and Jack McDowell, perform well, but good outings will be needed from the other members of their rotation as well.
It was Melido Perez's turn to take the mound today, and his dependability was uncertain.
In his most recent outing -- in the Yankees' final spring game at Atlanta on April 24 -- he gave up three home runs and eight earned runs in four and one-third innings.


A Saint and Her City
THE city of Avila and St.
Teresa -- the two are inseparable.
Many pilgrims crisscross Avila, systematically retracing Teresa's path from her birth and baptism in 1515, but we were as much drawn to the city that shaped her as to the individual shrines.
Once oriented, we wandered the narrow cobblestone streets of the medieval town at all hours, eyes lighting on a carving or the cornice along one of the innumerable churches or surveying the Ambles valley from the ramparts by moonlight.
Raffish nests adorn many of the city's grandest towers, homes to the winter colony of storks we admired clattering above Avila.
Madrilenos, living only 70 miles to the east-southeast, often make weekend excursions to St.
Teresa's city to enjoy a leisurely lunch and paseo.
But during the week the city resumes its provincial tranquillity, as we discovered on a visit last February.


April 23-29; Even Beaujolais Nouveau Gets Old
WALK into a wine shop these days and somewhere in a dark corner, behind this week's trendy chardonnay, the latest pinot noir from Oregon and that sauvignon blanc from New Zealand that is to die for, you will find a few forlorn bottles of Beaujolais nouveau.
An enterprising Greenwich Village wine merchant actually put some in his window last week.
Three bottles, 10 bucks -- slashed from the original price of $7 per bottle last November.


TEACHING JOHNNY TO BE GOOD
TWENTY-TWO WHEATIES-BOX SIXTH GRADERS SIT IN a circle in the Lansing Middle School in Lansing, a white-bread town of 10,000 in the center of New York State.
Its sights are silos, old barns, cow-crossing signs, paint-peeling houses with collapsing porches and neat, new frame houses, mostly one story, strung out on the black roads that run among the hills.
A 20-minute commute from Ithaca, Lansing is home to professors' kids as well as those of merchants and farmers.
The 11-year-olds look scrubbed and alert on this recent Monday morning.
All wear jeans and the elaborate sneakers of the times.
All are intent on the teacher, Phyllis Smith-Hansen, who is 46 years old, has a broad Scandinavian face, wheat-blond hair and blue slits for eyes and whose chair in the circle is closest to the blackboard.
She has posted a quotation of H. Jackson Brown Jr., the inspirational-book author, "Let people know what you stand for -- and what you won't stand for," along with a slightly amended quotation from Edmund Burke, "The only thing necessary for the triumph of evil is for good men (and women) to do nothing."
Smith-Hansen is about to teach a class in character education, a subject unheard of a generation ago, but today taught to millions of American children in the nation's public schools.
She is a devoted student, if not a disciple, of Thomas Lickona, a developmental psychologist and a professor of education at the State University of New York at nearby Cortland.
Lickona is an acknowledged leader of the burgeoning character education movement.
He has recently established the Center for the 4th and 5th R's (Respect and Responsibility) at SUNY-Cortland, which is becoming something of a national center for the study and development of character education curricula.


At the Casinos
What's happening on stage at all the Atlantic City casinos this week.
Tickets are available through Ticketmaster, (800) 736-1420.
Bally's Park Place  Boardwalk and Park Place. (800) 225-5977.
PARK CABARET "Legends in Concert," featuring impersonations of Tom Jones, Whitney Houston, Elvis Presley and others.
Sunday through Thursday at 7:30 and 10 P.M.; Saturday at 8 and 10:30 P.M.
Tickets: $20.
MAIN BALLROOM The Temptations.
Friday at 10 P.M., Saturday at 9 P.M. and next Sunday at 8 P.M.
Tickets: $35 and $30.
COMING UP Sheena Easton, July 6-9.
Caesars Atlantic City  2100 Pacific Avenue. (800) 677-7469.
CIRCUS MAXIMUS SHOWROOM Jimmy Roselli.
Today at 8 P.M.
Tickets: $45.
Richard Nader's "Let the Good Times Roll." Friday at 10 P.M., Saturday at 9 P.M. and next Sunday at 8 P.M.
Tickets: $20.
COMING UP Jay Leno, May 27 and 28.
Claridge Hotel  Boardwalk and Park Place. (800) 257-8585.
PALACE THEATER "Shaboom," a musical revue depicting the memorable days of the 50's.
Starting tomorrow; through June 25.
Saturday through Thursday at 8 and 10:30 P.M.
Tickets: $12.50 plus a one-drink minimum.
The Grand  Boston at Pacific Avenue.  (609) 340-7200.
CAMBRIDGE BALLROOM "The Superstar Series." Bill Cosby.
Friday at 10 P.M. and Saturday at 8 and 11 P.M.
Tickets: $35 and $50.
COMING UP Frankie Valli and the Four Seasons, May 26-28.
Harrah's Hotel Casino  Harrah's Boulevard and Huron Avenue. (800) 242-7724.
BROADWAY-BY-THE-BAY "The Will Rogers Follies," starting Friday; through July 4.
Friday at 7 P.M., Saturday and next Sunday at 7 and 10 P.M.
Tickets: $20.
Merv Griffin's Resorts Casino Hotel  1133 Boardwalk. (609) 340-6830.
SUPERSTAR THEATER "Hot Cha Cha," a musical revue.
Monday, Thursday and Friday at 7:30 P.M., Wednesday at 3 and 7:30 P.M. and Saturday at 8 P.M.
Special guest appearance by Sergio Mendes May 11, 12 and 13.
Tickets: $15; for matinees, $10.
COMING UP Italian Show, May 20 and 21; Rosie O'Donnell, May 26-29.
Sands Hotel and Casino  Indiana Avenue and Brighton Park. (800) 257-8580.
COPA ROOM "Escapade, A Musical Adventure Around The World," featuring Sharon Shackleford, singer, and Walter Freeman, tap dancer.
Sunday through Thursday at 3:30 and 7:30 P.M. and Saturday at 7 and 10 P.M.
Through June 10.
Tickets: $15.
Showboat Hotel Casino  Delaware and Pacific. (609) 343-4000.
MARDI GRAS SHOWROOM "The Basin Street Follies," a revue with music, humor and acrobatics.
Featuring Bob Merit and Annette Moreau, singers; Michael Roloff and Company, an acrobatic and balancing act, and Lou Marks and Dave Michaels, comedians.
Monday through Saturday at 8 and 10:30 P.M.
Tickets: $10.
Tropworld  Boardwalk and Brighton Avenue. (800) 257-6227.
TROPWORLD SHOWROOM Johnny Mathis, May 18-21.
Trump's Castle Casino Resort  Huron Avenue and Brigantine Boulevard. (800) 777-8477.
CRYSTAL BALLROOM Nancy Sinatra.
Saturday at 8 and 11 P.M.
Tickets: $20 plus a one-drink minimum.
COMING UP The Four Tops, May 26-28.
Jackie Mason, June 9 and 10.
KING'S COURT SHOWROOM "Unforgettables," a tribute to the late and great stars with vocal impressions, original music, comedy and dance with Holly Farris, Cliff Lawrence and Randy Allen.
Through June 4.
Monday through Thursday at 3 and 7:30 P.M., Saturday at 7:30 and 10:30 P.M. and Sunday at 8:30 P.M.
Tickets: $12.50, weekdays; $15, Saturdays and holidays.
One-drink minimum required.
Trump Plaza  Boardwalk at  Mississippi Avenue. (800) 759-8786.
PLAZA SHOWROOM Penn and Teller.
Today at 8 P.M.
Tickets: $25 and $30.
Trump Taj Mahal  1000 Boardwalk at Virginia Avenue. (609) 449-1000.
CASBAH "Dare to Dream," a family musical with Tim Noah.
Monday through Thursday, 7 P.M.
Tickets: $10 and $7.50.
Shecky Green and the Fifth Dimension.
Friday at 9 P.M., Saturday at 8 P.M. and next Sunday at 7 P.M.
Tickets: $25.


Savor the Spirit
Though you should be out planting, take time to savor the glories of the cherry trees and tulips.
Wander over to the bulb garden at the Cathedral of St.
John the Divine, 112th Street and Amsterdam Avenue, where Dwight Dunham has planted 30,000 daffodils, tulips, grape hyacinths and others.
He planted the first 10,000 in 1987, in honor of his wife, Kathryn Speicher-Dunham, who died of cancer.


A Century of Postcards
Wish you were here: That's the message the Smithsonian's National Postal Museum is sending out with an exhibit that runs May 12 to Feb. 23, 1996.
"Are We There Yet? Vacationing in America" features postcards from some of the strangest and most popular tourist destinations in the United States.
The exhibit, in the museum's Art of Cards and Letters Gallery, comprises 50 picture postcards from as far back as the early 1900's.
One depicts Mount Rushmore with only Washington's face; another shows Walt Disney with a map of a Disneyland that had yet to open.


Same Land, Same Geography, New Look
HOW easy it is to relax and plant the garden the same way it was done last year: In the two window boxes out front are red geraniums, draped with white sweet alyssum and some ivy to trail.
By the driveway is a wide border of marigolds.
In between the house and walk is a border of hostas and the tomato plants are set in a sunny patch along with the herbs by the kitchen door.
Fine.
This kind of arrangement is always a success and demands little effort, imaginative or otherwise.
The spring trip to the garden center is also easy -- just the same things brought home last year.


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
TWAIN HAPPENINGS
"Mark Twain as Journalist" will be the subject of a talk by Dan Rather, the CBS anchor and correspondent, on Tuesday at 12:30 P.M. at the Hartford Club, 46 Prospect Street, in Hartford.
Mr.
Rather joins a select group of speakers invited once a year by the Mark Twain House's Clemens Lecture Series to carry on the legacy of outspokenness exemplified by Twain.
Tickets are $45, including lunch, and may be obtained by calling 247-0998.


An ESOP's Success
To the Editor:
The message of your article seems to be that American employees are dumb not to worship at the altar of financial diversification, as recommended by the money churners in society, who live off handling other people's money as often as possible.


What Can't You Get in Cape May? Higher Education, Residents Say
Residents of the only county in New Jersey without a community college are pleading with state officials to establish one.
"Have other counties had to beg for this basic American right, equal access to education?" asked Eileen Fausey of Cape May Court House at a hearing last week before a panel from the State Commission on Higher Education.
The committee is considering a request from the county freeholders to establish a college, using existing buildings for classrooms to limit start-up costs.


Dispute Over Umpiring Steals Pirates' Thunder
Pirates 3, Phillies 2
Philadelphia Phillies Manager Jim Fregosi and center fielder Lenny Dykstra criticized the replacement umpires last night after a disputed play left them with a 3-2 loss to the visiting Pittsburgh Pirates.
Trailing by a run in the eighth inning, the Phillies had Dykstra on third and Gregg Jefferies on first with one out when Dave Hollins hit a hard ground ball to first baseman Orlando Merced.
Merced touched the bag, then threw to shortstop Jay Bell, who tagged Jefferies for the third out.
Fregosi questioned the play, saying Dykstra crossed the plate before Jefferies was tagged.


Another Manager Solos
MORE managers are branching out from big companies to start funds, often with their own names on the marquee.
Three years ago, Donald Yacktman left the Kemper Corporation and the manager's office at Selected American Shares to begin the Yacktman fund.
More recently, Elizabeth Bramwell left Gabelli Growth to start the Bramwell Growth fund and Art Bonnel left MIM Stock Appreciation, founding the Bonnel fund.
The latest in the entrepreneurial line is Carlene Murphy Ziegler, former co-manager of the successful Strong Common Stock and Opportunity funds.


WHY SPORTS DON'T MATTER ANYMORE
Greg Louganis's 10th dive in the 1988 Olympics was no act of "pure courage." Fear that he would be barred from completing his next dive kept him from telling Olympic officials that he was H.I.V.-positive, after he bled into the pool.
In placing the desire for a gold medal above the safety of his fellow divers, Louganis committed an act of pure selfishness.
The truly courageous act would have been for him to sacrifice his own glory for the safety of others.
JORDAN POLANSKY Chicago


The Reluctant Prophet
CHILDREN AND FOOLS By Erich Fried.
Translated by Martin Chalmers. 168 pp.
New York: Serpent's Tail.
Paper, $14.99.


U.N. Should Think Again on Afghanistan
To the Editor:
While Barnett R. Rubin's "Salvaging Afghanistan" (Op-Ed, April 22) strongly endorses the United Nations peace mission to Afghanistan, it fails to take some important political, historical and social realities into consideration.


In This Suburban Lawn, Not Just Onions but Tears
To the Editor:
Charles Strum's column about wild onions ("What Dangers Lurk in Suburban Lawns?," April 23) sounded to me as if it had been written by a kindred spirit.
Dangers, however, are a matter of perspective.
For someone who has spent a major share of her life outside, my lawn has become a daily sorrow.
Because I have been treated three times for Lyme disease and we have picked deer ticks off of my grandchildren, we now spend most of our outdoor hours on the deck looking out over the lawn instead of romping, climbing or just lying in the grass.


